<doc id="849181" wikidata="Q352090" url="?curid=849181" title="CPU cache">
<text>A CPU cache is a hardware cache used by the central processing unit (CPU) of a computer to reduce the average cost (time or energy) to access data from the main memory. A cache is a smaller, faster memory, located closer to a processor core, which stores copies of the data from frequently used main memory locations. Most CPUs have a hierarchy of multiple cache levels (L1, L2, often L3, and rarely even L4), with different instruction-specific and data-specific caches at level 1. The cache memory is typically implemented with static random-access memory (SRAM), in modern CPUs by far the largest part of them by chip area, but SRAM is not always used for all levels (of I- or D-cache), or even any level, sometimes some latter or all levels are implemented with eDRAM.

Other types of caches exist (that are not counted towards the &quot;cache size&quot; of the most important caches mentioned above), such as the translation lookaside buffer (TLB) which is part of the memory management unit (MMU) which most CPUs have.

==Overview==
When trying to read from or write to a location in the main memory, the processor checks whether the data from that location is already in the cache. If so, the processor will read from or write to the cache instead of the much slower main memory.

Many modern desktop, server, and industrial CPUs have at least three independent levels of caches (L1, L2 and L3) and different types of caches:

; Translation lookaside buffer (TLB): Used to speed virtual-to-physical address translation for both executable instructions and data. A single TLB can be provided for access to both instructions and data, or a separate Instruction TLB (ITLB) and data TLB (DTLB) can be provided. However, the TLB cache is part of the memory management unit (MMU) and not directly related to the CPU caches.

;Instruction cache:
:; MicroOp-cache:
:; Branch target buffer:
:; Instruction cache (I-cache): Used to speed executable instruction fetch

;Data cache:
:; Data cache (D-cache): Used to speed data fetch and store; the data cache is usually organized as a hierarchy of more cache levels (L1, L2, etc.; see also multi-level caches below).

==History==

Early examples of CPU caches include the Atlas 2 and the IBM System/360 Model 85 in the 1960s. The first CPUs that used a cache had only one level of cache; unlike later level 1 cache, it was not split into L1d (for data) and L1i (for instructions). Split L1 cache started in 1976 with the IBM 801 CPU, became mainstream in the late 1980s, and in 1997 entered the embedded CPU market with the ARMv5TE. In 2015, even sub-dollar SoCs split the L1 cache. They also have L2 caches and, for larger processors, L3 caches as well. The L2 cache is usually not split, and acts as a common repository for the already split L1 cache. Every core of a multi-core processor has a dedicated L1 cache and is usually not shared between the cores. The L2 cache, and higher-level caches, may be shared between the cores. L4 cache is currently uncommon, and is generally dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) on a separate die or chip, rather than static random-access memory (SRAM). An exception to this is when eDRAM is used for all levels of cache, down to L1. Historically L1 was also on a separate die, however bigger die sizes have allowed integration of it as well as other cache levels, with the possible exception of the last level. Each extra level of cache tends to be bigger and optimized differently.

Caches (like for RAM historically) have generally been sized in powers of: 2, 4, 8, 16 etc. KiB; when up to MiB sizes (i.e. for larger non-L1), very early on the pattern broke down, to allow for larger caches without being forced into the doubling-in-size paradigm, with e.g. Intel Core 2 Duo with 3 MiB L2 cache in April 2008. This happened much later for L1 caches, as their size is generally still a small number of KiB. The IBM zEC12 from 2012 is an exception however, to gain unusually large 96 KiB L1 data cache for its time, and e.g. the IBM z13 having a 96 KiB L1 instruction cache (and 128 KiB L1 data cache), and Intel Ice Lake-based processors from 2018, having 48 KiB L1 data cache and 48 KiB L1 instruction cache. In 2020, some Intel Atom CPUs (with up to 24 cores) have (multiple of) 4.5 MiB and 15 MiB cache sizes.

==Operation==
===Cache entries===
Data is transferred between memory and cache in blocks of fixed size, called &quot;cache lines&quot; or &quot;cache blocks&quot;. When a cache line is copied from memory into the cache, a cache entry is created. The cache entry will include the copied data as well as the requested memory location (called a tag).

When the processor needs to read or write a location in memory, it first checks for a corresponding entry in the cache. The cache checks for the contents of the requested memory location in any cache lines that might contain that address. If the processor finds that the memory location is in the cache, a cache hit has occurred. However, if the processor does not find the memory location in the cache, a cache miss has occurred. In the case of a cache hit, the processor immediately reads or writes the data in the cache line. For a cache miss, the cache allocates a new entry and copies data from main memory, then the request is fulfilled from the contents of the cache.

===Policies===

====Replacement policies====
To make room for the new entry on a cache miss, the cache may have to evict one of the existing entries. The heuristic it uses to choose the entry to evict is called the replacement policy. The fundamental problem with any replacement policy is that it must predict which existing cache entry is least likely to be used in the future. Predicting the future is difficult, so there is no perfect method to choose among the variety of replacement policies available. One popular replacement policy, least-recently used (LRU), replaces the least recently accessed entry.

Marking some memory ranges as non-cacheable can improve performance, by avoiding caching of memory regions that are rarely re-accessed. This avoids the overhead of loading something into the cache without having any reuse. Cache entries may also be disabled or locked depending on the context.

====Write policies====
If data are written to the cache, at some point they must also be written to main memory; the timing of this write is known as the write policy. In a write-through cache, every write to the cache causes a write to main memory. Alternatively, in a write-back or copy-back cache, writes are not immediately mirrored to the main memory, and the cache instead tracks which locations have been written over, marking them as dirty. The data in these locations are written back to the main memory only when those data are evicted from the cache. For this reason, a read miss in a write-back cache may sometimes require two memory accesses to service: one to first write the dirty location to main memory, and then another to read the new location from memory. Also, a write to a main memory location that is not yet mapped in a write-back cache may evict an already dirty location, thereby freeing that cache space for the new memory location.

There are intermediate policies as well. The cache may be write-through, but the writes may be held in a store data queue temporarily, usually so multiple stores can be processed together (which can reduce bus turnarounds and improve bus utilization).

Cached data from the main memory may be changed by other entities (e.g., peripherals using direct memory access (DMA) or another core in a multi-core processor), in which case the copy in the cache may become out-of-date or stale. Alternatively, when a CPU in a multiprocessor system updates data in the cache, copies of data in caches associated with other CPUs become stale. Communication protocols between the cache managers that keep the data consistent are known as cache coherence protocols.

===Cache performance===
Cache performance measurement has become important in recent times where the speed gap between the memory performance and the processor performance is increasing exponentially. The cache was introduced to reduce this speed gap. Thus knowing how well the cache is able to bridge the gap in the speed of processor and memory becomes important, especially in high-performance systems. The cache hit rate and the cache miss rate play an important role in determining this performance. To improve the cache performance, reducing the miss rate becomes one of the necessary steps among other steps. Decreasing the access time to the cache also gives a boost to its performance and helps with optimization.

====CPU stalls====
The time taken to fetch one cache line from memory (read latency due to a cache miss) matters because the CPU will run out of work while waiting for the cache line. When a CPU reaches this state, it is called a stall. As CPUs become faster compared to main memory, stalls due to cache misses displace more potential computation; modern CPUs can execute hundreds of instructions in the time taken to fetch a single cache line from main memory.

Various techniques have been employed to keep the CPU busy during this time, including out-of-order execution in which the CPU attempts to execute independent instructions after the instruction that is waiting for the cache miss data. Another technology, used by many processors, is simultaneous multithreading (SMT), which allows an alternate thread to use the CPU core while the first thread waits for required CPU resources to become available.

==Associativity==
The placement policy decides where in the cache a copy of a particular entry of main memory will go. If the placement policy is free to choose any entry in the cache to hold the copy, the cache is called &quot;fully associative&quot;. At the other extreme, if each entry in the main memory can go in just one place in the cache, the cache is &quot;direct-mapped&quot;. Many caches implement a compromise in which each entry in the main memory can go to any one of N places in the cache, and are described as N-way set associative. For example, the level-1 data cache in an AMD Athlon is two-way set associative, which means that any particular location in main memory can be cached in either of two locations in the level-1 data cache.

Choosing the right value of associativity involves a trade-off. If there are ten places to which the placement policy could have mapped a memory location, then to check if that location is in the cache, ten cache entries must be searched. Checking more places takes more power and chip area, and potentially more time. On the other hand, caches with more associativity suffer fewer misses (see conflict misses), so that the CPU wastes less time reading from the slow main memory. The general guideline is that doubling the associativity, from direct mapped to two-way, or from two-way to four-way, has about the same effect on raising the hit rate as doubling the cache size. However, increasing associativity more than four does not improve hit rate as much, and are generally done for other reasons (see virtual aliasing). Some CPUs can dynamically reduce the associativity of their caches in low-power states, which acts as a power-saving measure.
In order of worse but simple to better but complex:

* Direct mapped cachegood best-case time, but unpredictable in the worst case
* Two-way set associative cache
* Two-way skewed associative cache
* Four-way set-associative cache
* Eight-way set-associative cache, a common choice for later implementations
* 12-way set associative cache, similar to eight-way
* Fully associative cachethe best miss rates, but practical only for a small number of entries

===Direct-mapped cache===
In this cache organization, each location in the main memory can go in only one entry in the cache. Therefore, a direct-mapped cache can also be called a &quot;one-way set associative&quot; cache. It does not have a placement policy as such, since there is no choice of which cache entry&#x27;s contents to evict. This means that if two locations map to the same entry, they may continually knock each other out. Although simpler, a direct-mapped cache needs to be much larger than an associative one to give comparable performance, and it is more unpredictable. Let be block number in cache, be block number of memory, and be number of blocks in cache, then mapping is done with the help of the equation .

===Two-way set associative cache===
If each location in the main memory can be cached in either of two locations in the cache, one logical question is: &quot;which one of the two?&quot; The simplest and most commonly used scheme, shown in the right-hand diagram above, is to use the least significant bits of the memory location&#x27;s index as the index for the cache memory, and to have two entries for each index. One benefit of this scheme is that the tags stored in the cache do not have to include that part of the main memory address which is implied by the cache memory&#x27;s index. Since the cache tags have fewer bits, they require fewer transistors, take less space on the processor circuit board or on the microprocessor chip, and can be read and compared faster. Also LRU algorithm is especially simple since only one bit needs to be stored for each pair.

===Speculative execution===
One of the advantages of a direct-mapped cache is that it allows simple and fast speculation. Once the address has been computed, the one cache index which might have a copy of that location in memory is known. That cache entry can be read, and the processor can continue to work with that data before it finishes checking that the tag actually matches the requested address.

The idea of having the processor use the cached data before the tag match completes can be applied to associative caches as well. A subset of the tag, called a &quot;hint&quot;, can be used to pick just one of the possible cache entries mapping to the requested address. The entry selected by the hint can then be used in parallel with checking the full tag. The hint technique works best when used in the context of address translation, as explained below.

===Two-way skewed associative cache===
Other schemes have been suggested, such as the &quot;skewed cache&quot;, where the index for way 0 is direct, as above, but the index for way 1 is formed with a hash function. A good hash function has the property that addresses which conflict with the direct mapping tend not to conflict when mapped with the hash function, and so it is less likely that a program will suffer from an unexpectedly large number of conflict misses due to a pathological access pattern. The downside is extra latency from computing the hash function. Additionally, when it comes time to load a new line and evict an old line, it may be difficult to determine which existing line was least recently used, because the new line conflicts with data at different indexes in each way; LRU tracking for non-skewed caches is usually done on a per-set basis. Nevertheless, skewed-associative caches have major advantages over conventional set-associative ones.

===Pseudo-associative cache===
A true set-associative cache tests all the possible ways simultaneously, using something like a content-addressable memory. A pseudo-associative cache tests each possible way one at a time. A hash-rehash cache and a column-associative cache are examples of a pseudo-associative cache.

In the common case of finding a hit in the first way tested, a pseudo-associative cache is as fast as a direct-mapped cache, but it has a much lower conflict miss rate than a direct-mapped cache, closer to the miss rate of a fully associative cache.

===Multicolumn cache===
Comparing with a direct-mapped cache, a set associative cache has a reduced number of bits for its cache set index that maps to a cache set, where multiple ways or blocks stays, such as 2 blocks for a 2-way set associative cache and 4 blocks for a 4-way set associative cache. Comparing with a direct mapped cache, the unused cache index bits become a part of the tag bits. For example, a 2-way set associative cache contributes 1 bit to the tag and a 4-way set associative cache contributes 2 bits to the tag. The basic idea of the multicolumn cache is to use the set index to map to a cache set as a conventional set associative cache does, and to use the added tag bits to index a way in the set. For example, in a 4-way set associative cache, the two bits are used to index way 00, way 01, way 10, and way 11, respectively. This double cache indexing is called a &quot;major location mapping&quot;, and its latency is equivalent to a direct-mapped access. Extensive experiments in multicolumn cache design shows that the hit ratio to major locations is as high as 90%. If cache mapping conflicts with a cache block in the major location, the existing cache block will be moved to another cache way in the same set, which is called &quot;selected location&quot;. Because the newly indexed cache block is a most recently used (MRU) block, it is placed in the major location in multicolumn cache with a consideration of temporal locality. Since multicolumn cache is designed for a cache with a high associativity, the number of ways in each set is high; thus, it is easy find a selected location in the set. A selected location index by an additional hardware is maintained for the major location in a cache block.

Multicolumn cache remains a high hit ratio due to its high associativity, and has a comparable low latency to a direct-mapped cache due to its high percentage of hits in major locations. The concepts of major locations and selected locations in multicolumn cache have been used in several cache designs in ARM Cortex R chip, Intel&#x27;s way-predicting cache memory, IBM&#x27;s reconfigurable multi-way associative cache memory and Oracle&#x27;s dynamic cache replacement way selection based on address tab bits.

==Cache entry structure==
Cache row entries usually have the following structure:

The &quot;data block&quot; (cache line) contains the actual data fetched from the main memory. The &quot;tag&quot; contains (part of) the address of the actual data fetched from the main memory. The flag bits are discussed below.

The &quot;size&quot; of the cache is the amount of main memory data it can hold. This size can be calculated as the number of bytes stored in each data block times the number of blocks stored in the cache. (The tag, flag and error correction code bits are not included in the size, although they do affect the physical area of a cache.)

An effective memory address which goes along with the cache line (memory block) is split (MSB to LSB) into the tag, the index and the block offset.

The index describes which cache set that the data has been put in. The index length is formula_1 bits for cache sets.

The block offset specifies the desired data within the stored data block within the cache row. Typically the effective address is in bytes, so the block offset length is formula_2 bits, where is the number of bytes per data block.
The tag contains the most significant bits of the address, which are checked against all rows in the current set (the set has been retrieved by index) to see if this set contains the requested address. If it does, a cache hit occurs. The tag length in bits is as follows:

::codice_1

Some authors refer to the block offset as simply the &quot;offset&quot; or the &quot;displacement&quot;.

===Example===
The original Pentium 4 processor had a four-way set associative L1 data cache of 8 KiB in size, with 64-byte cache blocks. Hence, there are 8 KiB / 64 = 128 cache blocks. The number of sets is equal to the number of cache blocks divided by the number of ways of associativity, what leads to 128 / 4 = 32 sets, and hence 25 = 32 different indices. There are 26 = 64 possible offsets. Since the CPU address is 32 bits wide, this implies 32 − 5 − 6 = 21 bits for the tag field.

The original Pentium 4 processor also had an eight-way set associative L2 integrated cache 256 KiB in size, with 128-byte cache blocks. This implies 32 − 8 − 7 = 17 bits for the tag field.

=== Flag bits===
An instruction cache requires only one flag bit per cache row entry: a valid bit. The valid bit indicates whether or not a cache block has been loaded with valid data.

On power-up, the hardware sets all the valid bits in all the caches to &quot;invalid&quot;. Some systems also set a valid bit to &quot;invalid&quot; at other times, such as when multi-master bus snooping hardware in the cache of one processor hears an address broadcast from some other processor, and realizes that certain data blocks in the local cache are now stale and should be marked invalid.

A data cache typically requires two flag bits per cache linea valid bit and a dirty bit. Having a dirty bit set indicates that the associated cache line has been changed since it was read from main memory (&quot;dirty&quot;), meaning that the processor has written data to that line and the new value has not propagated all the way to main memory.

==Cache miss==
A cache miss is a failed attempt to read or write a piece of data in the cache, which results in a main memory access with much longer latency. There are three kinds of cache misses: instruction read miss, data read miss, and data write miss.

&quot;Cache read misses&quot; from an &quot;instruction&quot; cache generally cause the largest delay, because the processor, or at least the thread of execution, has to wait (stall) until the instruction is fetched from main memory. &quot;Cache read misses&quot; from a &quot;data&quot; cache usually cause a smaller delay, because instructions not dependent on the cache read can be issued and continue execution until the data are returned from main memory, and the dependent instructions can resume execution. &quot;Cache write misses&quot; to a &quot;data&quot; cache generally cause the shortest delay, because the write can be queued and there are few limitations on the execution of subsequent instructions; the processor can continue until the queue is full. For a detailed introduction to the types of misses, see cache performance measurement and metric.

==Address translation==
Most general purpose CPUs implement some form of virtual memory. To summarize, either each program running on the machine sees its own simplified address space, which contains code and data for that program only, or all programs run in a common virtual address space. A program executes by calculating, comparing, reading and writing to addresses of its virtual address space, rather than addresses of physical address space, making programs simpler and thus easier to write.

Virtual memory requires the processor to translate virtual addresses generated by the program into physical addresses in main memory. The portion of the processor that does this translation is known as the memory management unit (MMU). The fast path through the MMU can perform those translations stored in the translation lookaside buffer (TLB), which is a cache of mappings from the operating system&#x27;s page table, segment table, or both.

For the purposes of the present discussion, there are three important features of address translation:

* &quot;Latency:&quot; The physical address is available from the MMU some time, perhaps a few cycles, after the virtual address is available from the address generator.
* &quot;Aliasing:&quot; Multiple virtual addresses can map to a single physical address. Most processors guarantee that all updates to that single physical address will happen in program order. To deliver on that guarantee, the processor must ensure that only one copy of a physical address resides in the cache at any given time.
* &quot;Granularity:&quot; The virtual address space is broken up into pages. For instance, a 4 GiB virtual address space might be cut up into 1,048,576 pages of 4 KiB size, each of which can be independently mapped. There may be multiple page sizes supported; see virtual memory for elaboration.

One early virtual memory system, the IBM M44/44X, required an access to a mapping table held in core memory before every programmed access to main memory. With no caches, and with the mapping table memory running at the same speed as main memory this effectively cut the speed of memory access in half. Two early machines that used a page table in main memory for mapping, the IBM System/360 Model 67 and the GE 645, both had a small associative memory as a cache for accesses to the in-memory page table. Both machines predated the first machine with a cache for main memory, the IBM System/360 Model 85, so the first hardware cache used in a computer system was not a data or instruction cache, but rather a TLB.

Caches can be divided into four types, based on whether the index or tag correspond to physical or virtual addresses:

* &quot;Physically indexed, physically tagged&quot; (PIPT) caches use the physical address for both the index and the tag. While this is simple and avoids problems with aliasing, it is also slow, as the physical address must be looked up (which could involve a TLB miss and access to main memory) before that address can be looked up in the cache.
* &quot;Virtually indexed, virtually tagged&quot; (VIVT) caches use the virtual address for both the index and the tag. This caching scheme can result in much faster lookups, since the MMU does not need to be consulted first to determine the physical address for a given virtual address. However, VIVT suffers from aliasing problems, where several different virtual addresses may refer to the same physical address. The result is that such addresses would be cached separately despite referring to the same memory, causing coherency problems. Although solutions to this problem exist they do not work for standard coherence protocols. Another problem is homonyms, where the same virtual address maps to several different physical addresses. It is not possible to distinguish these mappings merely by looking at the virtual index itself, though potential solutions include: flushing the cache after a context switch, forcing address spaces to be non-overlapping, tagging the virtual address with an address space ID (ASID). Additionally, there is a problem that virtual-to-physical mappings can change, which would require flushing cache lines, as the VAs would no longer be valid. All these issues are absent if tags use physical addresses (VIPT).
* &quot;Virtually indexed, physically tagged&quot; (VIPT) caches use the virtual address for the index and the physical address in the tag. The advantage over PIPT is lower latency, as the cache line can be looked up in parallel with the TLB translation, however the tag cannot be compared until the physical address is available. The advantage over VIVT is that since the tag has the physical address, the cache can detect homonyms. Theoretically, VIPT requires more tags bits because some of the index bits could differ between the virtual and physical addresses (for example bit 12 and above for 4 KiB pages) and would have to be included both in the virtual index and in the physical tag. In practice this is not an issue because, in order to avoid coherency problems, VIPT caches are designed to have no such index bits (e.g., by limiting the total number of bits for the index and the block offset to 12 for 4 KiB pages); this limits the size of VIPT caches to the page size times the associativity of the cache.
* &quot;Physically indexed, virtually tagged&quot; (PIVT) caches are often claimed in literature to be useless and non-existing. However, the MIPS R6000 uses this cache type as the sole known implementation. The R6000 is implemented in emitter-coupled logic, which is an extremely fast technology not suitable for large memories such as a TLB. The R6000 solves the issue by putting the TLB memory into a reserved part of the second-level cache having a tiny, high-speed TLB &quot;slice&quot; on chip. The cache is indexed by the physical address obtained from the TLB slice. However, since the TLB slice only translates those virtual address bits that are necessary to index the cache and does not use any tags, false cache hits may occur, which is solved by tagging with the virtual address.

The speed of this recurrence (the &quot;load latency&quot;) is crucial to CPU performance, and so most modern level-1 caches are virtually indexed, which at least allows the MMU&#x27;s TLB lookup to proceed in parallel with fetching the data from the cache RAM.

But virtual indexing is not the best choice for all cache levels. The cost of dealing with virtual aliases grows with cache size, and as a result most level-2 and larger caches are physically indexed.

Caches have historically used both virtual and physical addresses for the cache tags, although virtual tagging is now uncommon. If the TLB lookup can finish before the cache RAM lookup, then the physical address is available in time for tag compare, and there is no need for virtual tagging. Large caches, then, tend to be physically tagged, and only small, very low latency caches are virtually tagged. In recent general-purpose CPUs, virtual tagging has been superseded by vhints, as described below.

===Homonym and synonym problems===
A cache that relies on virtual indexing and tagging becomes inconsistent after the same virtual address is mapped into different physical addresses (homonym), which can be solved by using physical address for tagging, or by storing the address space identifier in the cache line. However, the latter approach does not help against the synonym problem, in which several cache lines end up storing data for the same physical address. Writing to such locations may update only one location in the cache, leaving the others with inconsistent data. This issue may be solved by using non-overlapping memory layouts for different address spaces, or otherwise the cache (or a part of it) must be flushed when the mapping changes.

===Virtual tags and vhints===
The great advantage of virtual tags is that, for associative caches, they allow the tag match to proceed before the virtual to physical translation is done. However, coherence probes and evictions present a physical address for action. The hardware must have some means of converting the physical addresses into a cache index, generally by storing physical tags as well as virtual tags. For comparison, a physically tagged cache does not need to keep virtual tags, which is simpler. When a virtual to physical mapping is deleted from the TLB, cache entries with those virtual addresses will have to be flushed somehow. Alternatively, if cache entries are allowed on pages not mapped by the TLB, then those entries will have to be flushed when the access rights on those pages are changed in the page table.

It is also possible for the operating system to ensure that no virtual aliases are simultaneously resident in the cache. The operating system makes this guarantee by enforcing page coloring, which is described below. Some early RISC processors (SPARC, RS/6000) took this approach. It has not been used recently, as the hardware cost of detecting and evicting virtual aliases has fallen and the software complexity and performance penalty of perfect page coloring has risen.

It can be useful to distinguish the two functions of tags in an associative cache: they are used to determine which way of the entry set to select, and they are used to determine if the cache hit or missed. The second function must always be correct, but it is permissible for the first function to guess, and get the wrong answer occasionally.

Some processors (e.g. early SPARCs) have caches with both virtual and physical tags. The virtual tags are used for way selection, and the physical tags are used for determining hit or miss. This kind of cache enjoys the latency advantage of a virtually tagged cache, and the simple software interface of a physically tagged cache. It bears the added cost of duplicated tags, however. Also, during miss processing, the alternate ways of the cache line indexed have to be probed for virtual aliases and any matches evicted.

The extra area (and some latency) can be mitigated by keeping &quot;virtual hints&quot; with each cache entry instead of virtual tags. These hints are a subset or hash of the virtual tag, and are used for selecting the way of the cache from which to get data and a physical tag. Like a virtually tagged cache, there may be a virtual hint match but physical tag mismatch, in which case the cache entry with the matching hint must be evicted so that cache accesses after the cache fill at this address will have just one hint match. Since virtual hints have fewer bits than virtual tags distinguishing them from one another, a virtually hinted cache suffers more conflict misses than a virtually tagged cache.

Perhaps the ultimate reduction of virtual hints can be found in the Pentium 4 (Willamette and Northwood cores). In these processors the virtual hint is effectively two bits, and the cache is four-way set associative. Effectively, the hardware maintains a simple permutation from virtual address to cache index, so that no content-addressable memory (CAM) is necessary to select the right one of the four ways fetched.

===Page coloring===
Large physically indexed caches (usually secondary caches) run into a problem: the operating system rather than the application controls which pages collide with one another in the cache. Differences in page allocation from one program run to the next lead to differences in the cache collision patterns, which can lead to very large differences in program performance. These differences can make it very difficult to get a consistent and repeatable timing for a benchmark run.

To understand the problem, consider a CPU with a 1 MiB physically indexed direct-mapped level-2 cache and 4 KiB virtual memory pages. Sequential physical pages map to sequential locations in the cache until after 256 pages the pattern wraps around. We can label each physical page with a color of 0–255 to denote where in the cache it can go. Locations within physical pages with different colors cannot conflict in the cache.

Programmers attempting to make maximum use of the cache may arrange their programs&#x27; access patterns so that only 1 MiB of data need be cached at any given time, thus avoiding capacity misses. But they should also ensure that the access patterns do not have conflict misses. One way to think about this problem is to divide up the virtual pages the program uses and assign them virtual colors in the same way as physical colors were assigned to physical pages before. Programmers can then arrange the access patterns of their code so that no two pages with the same virtual color are in use at the same time. There is a wide literature on such optimizations (e.g. loop nest optimization), largely coming from the High Performance Computing (HPC) community.

The snag is that while all the pages in use at any given moment may have different virtual colors, some may have the same physical colors. In fact, if the operating system assigns physical pages to virtual pages randomly and uniformly, it is extremely likely that some pages will have the same physical color, and then locations from those pages will collide in the cache (this is the birthday paradox).

The solution is to have the operating system attempt to assign different physical color pages to different virtual colors, a technique called &quot;page coloring&quot;. Although the actual mapping from virtual to physical color is irrelevant to system performance, odd mappings are difficult to keep track of and have little benefit, so most approaches to page coloring simply try to keep physical and virtual page colors the same.

If the operating system can guarantee that each physical page maps to only one virtual color, then there are no virtual aliases, and the processor can use virtually indexed caches with no need for extra virtual alias probes during miss handling. Alternatively, the OS can flush a page from the cache whenever it changes from one virtual color to another. As mentioned above, this approach was used for some early SPARC and RS/6000 designs.

The software page coloring technique has been used to effectively partition the shared Last level Cache (LLC) in multicore processors. This operating system-based LLC management in multicore processors has been adopted by Intel.

==Cache hierarchy in a modern processor==
Modern processors have multiple interacting on-chip caches. The operation of a particular cache can be completely specified by the cache size, the cache block size, the number of blocks in a set, the cache set replacement policy, and the cache write policy (write-through or write-back).

While all of the cache blocks in a particular cache are the same size and have the same associativity, typically the &quot;lower-level&quot; caches (called Level 1 cache) have a smaller number of blocks, smaller block size, and fewer blocks in a set, but have very short access times. &quot;Higher-level&quot; caches (i.e. Level 2 and above) have progressively larger numbers of blocks, larger block size, more blocks in a set, and relatively longer access times, but are still much faster than main memory.

Cache entry replacement policy is determined by a cache algorithm selected to be implemented by the processor designers. In some cases, multiple algorithms are provided for different kinds of work loads.

===Specialized caches===
Pipelined CPUs access memory from multiple points in the pipeline: instruction fetch, virtual-to-physical address translation, and data fetch (see classic RISC pipeline). The natural design is to use different physical caches for each of these points, so that no one physical resource has to be scheduled to service two points in the pipeline. Thus the pipeline naturally ends up with at least three separate caches (instruction, TLB, and data), each specialized to its particular role.

====Victim cache====

A victim cache is a cache used to hold blocks evicted from a CPU cache upon replacement. The victim cache lies between the main cache and its refill path, and holds only those blocks of data that were evicted from the main cache. The victim cache is usually fully associative, and is intended to reduce the number of conflict misses. Many commonly used programs do not require an associative mapping for all the accesses. In fact, only a small fraction of the memory accesses of the program require high associativity. The victim cache exploits this property by providing high associativity to only these accesses. It was introduced by Norman Jouppi from DEC in 1990.

Intel&#x27;s &quot;Crystalwell&quot; variant of its Haswell processors introduced an on-package 128 MiB eDRAM Level 4 cache which serves as a victim cache to the processors&#x27; Level 3 cache. In the Skylake microarchitecture the Level 4 cache no longer works as a victim cache.

====Trace cache====
One of the more extreme examples of cache specialization is the trace cache (also known as &quot;execution trace cache&quot;) found in the Intel Pentium 4 microprocessors. A trace cache is a mechanism for increasing the instruction fetch bandwidth and decreasing power consumption (in the case of the Pentium 4) by storing traces of instructions that have already been fetched and decoded.

A trace cache stores instructions either after they have been decoded, or as they are retired. Generally, instructions are added to trace caches in groups representing either individual basic blocks or dynamic instruction traces. The Pentium 4&#x27;s trace cache stores micro-operations resulting from decoding x86 instructions, providing also the functionality of a micro-operation cache. Having this, the next time an instruction is needed, it does not have to be decoded into micro-ops again.

====Write Coalescing Cache (WCC)====
Write Coalescing Cache is a special cache that is part of L2 cache in AMD&#x27;s Bulldozer microarchitecture. Stores from both L1D caches in the module go through the WCC, where they are buffered and coalesced.
The WCC&#x27;s task is reducing number of writes to the L2 cache.

====Micro-operation (μop or uop) cache====
A micro-operation cache (μop cache, uop cache or UC) is a specialized cache that stores micro-operations of decoded instructions, as received directly from the instruction decoders or from the instruction cache. When an instruction needs to be decoded, the μop cache is checked for its decoded form which is re-used if cached; if it is not available, the instruction is decoded and then cached.

One of the early works describing μop cache as an alternative frontend for the Intel P6 processor family is the 2001 paper &quot;Micro-Operation Cache: A Power Aware Frontend for Variable Instruction Length ISA&quot;. Later, Intel included μop caches in its Sandy Bridge processors and in successive microarchitectures like Ivy Bridge and Haswell. AMD implemented a μop cache in their Zen microarchitecture.

Fetching complete pre-decoded instructions eliminates the need to repeatedly decode variable length complex instructions into simpler fixed-length micro-operations, and simplifies the process of predicting, fetching, rotating and aligning fetched instructions. A μop cache effectively offloads the fetch and decode hardware, thus decreasing power consumption and improving the frontend supply of decoded micro-operations. The μop cache also increases performance by more consistently delivering decoded micro-operations to the backend and eliminating various bottlenecks in the CPU&#x27;s fetch and decode logic.

A μop cache has many similarities with a trace cache, although a μop cache is much simpler thus providing better power efficiency; this makes it better suited for implementations on battery-powered devices. The main disadvantage of the trace cache, leading to its power inefficiency, is the hardware complexity required for its heuristic deciding on caching and reusing dynamically created instruction traces.

====Branch target instruction cache====
A branch target cache or branch target instruction cache, the name used on ARM microprocessors, is a specialized cache which holds the first few instructions at the destination of a taken branch. This is used by low-powered processors which do not need a normal instruction cache because the memory system is capable of delivering instructions fast enough to satisfy the CPU without one. However, this only applies to consecutive instructions in sequence; it still takes several cycles of latency to restart instruction fetch at a new address, causing a few cycles of pipeline bubble after a control transfer. A branch target cache provides instructions for those few cycles avoiding a delay after most taken branches.

This allows full-speed operation with a much smaller cache than a traditional full-time instruction cache.

====Smart cache====
Smart cache is a level 2 or level 3 caching method for multiple execution cores, developed by Intel.

Smart Cache shares the actual cache memory between the cores of a multi-core processor. In comparison to a dedicated per-core cache, the overall cache miss rate decreases when cores do not require equal parts of the cache space. Consequently, a single core can use the full level 2 or level 3 cache while the other cores are inactive. Furthermore, the shared cache makes it faster to share memory among different execution cores.

===Multi-level caches===

Another issue is the fundamental tradeoff between cache latency and hit rate. Larger caches have better hit rates but longer latency. To address this tradeoff, many computers use multiple levels of cache, with small fast caches backed up by larger, slower caches. Multi-level caches generally operate by checking the fastest cache, &quot;level 1&quot; (L1), first; if it hits, the processor proceeds at high speed. If that smaller cache misses, the next fastest cache, &quot;level 2&quot; (L2), is checked, and so on, before accessing external memory.

As the latency difference between main memory and the fastest cache has become larger, some processors have begun to utilize as many as three levels of on-chip cache. Price-sensitive designs used this to pull the entire cache hierarchy on-chip, but by the 2010s some of the highest-performance designs returned to having large off-chip caches, which is often implemented in eDRAM and mounted on a multi-chip module, as a fourth cache level. In rare cases, such as in the mainframe CPU IBM z15 (2019), all levels down to L1 are implemented by eDRAM, replacing SRAM entirely (for cache, SRAM is still used for registers). The ARM-based Apple M1 has a 192 KiB L1 cache for each of the four high-performance cores, an unusually large amount; however the four high-efficiency cores only have 128 KiB.

The benefits of L3 and L4 caches depend on the application&#x27;s access patterns. Examples of products incorporating L3 and L4 caches include the following:

* Alpha 21164 (1995) had 1 to 64 MiB off-chip L3 cache.
* AMD K6-III (1999) had motherboard-based L3 cache.
* IBM POWER4 (2001) had off-chip L3 caches of 32 MiB per processor, shared among several processors.
* Itanium 2 (2003) had a 6 MiB unified level 3 (L3) cache on-die; the Itanium 2 (2003) MX 2 module incorporated two Itanium 2 processors along with a shared 64 MiB L4 cache on a multi-chip module that was pin compatible with a Madison processor.
* Intel&#x27;s Xeon MP product codenamed &quot;Tulsa&quot; (2006) features 16 MiB of on-die L3 cache shared between two processor cores.
* AMD Phenom (2007) with 2 MiB of L3 cache.
* AMD Phenom II (2008) has up to 6 MiB on-die unified L3 cache.
* Intel Core i7 (2008) has an 8 MiB on-die unified L3 cache that is inclusive, shared by all cores.
* Intel Haswell CPUs with integrated Intel Iris Pro Graphics have 128 MiB of eDRAM acting essentially as an L4 cache.

Finally, at the other end of the memory hierarchy, the CPU register file itself can be considered the smallest, fastest cache in the system, with the special characteristic that it is scheduled in software—typically by a compiler, as it allocates registers to hold values retrieved from main memory for, as an example, loop nest optimization. However, with register renaming most compiler register assignments are reallocated dynamically by hardware at runtime into a register bank, allowing the CPU to break false data dependencies and thus easing pipeline hazards.

Register files sometimes also have hierarchy: The Cray-1 (circa 1976) had eight address &quot;A&quot; and eight scalar data &quot;S&quot; registers that were generally usable. There was also a set of 64 address &quot;B&quot; and 64 scalar data &quot;T&quot; registers that took longer to access, but were faster than main memory. The &quot;B&quot; and &quot;T&quot; registers were provided because the Cray-1 did not have a data cache. (The Cray-1 did, however, have an instruction cache.)

====Multi-core chips====
When considering a chip with multiple cores, there is a question of whether the caches should be shared or local to each core. Implementing shared cache inevitably introduces more wiring and complexity. But then, having one cache per &quot;chip&quot;, rather than &quot;core&quot;, greatly reduces the amount of space needed, and thus one can include a larger cache.

Typically, sharing the L1 cache is undesirable because the resulting increase in latency would make each core run considerably slower than a single-core chip. However, for the highest-level cache, the last one called before accessing memory, having a global cache is desirable for several reasons, such as allowing a single core to use the whole cache, reducing data redundancy by making it possible for different processes or threads to share cached data, and reducing the complexity of utilized cache coherency protocols. For example, an eight-core chip with three levels may include an L1 cache for each core, one intermediate L2 cache for each pair of cores, and one L3 cache shared between all cores.

A shared highest-level cache, which is called before accessing memory, is usually referred to as a &quot;last level cache&quot; (LLC). Additional techniques are used for increasing the level of parallelism when LLC is shared between multiple cores, including slicing it into multiple pieces which are addressing certain ranges of memory addresses, and can be accessed independently.

====Separate versus unified====
In a separate cache structure, instructions and data are cached separately, meaning that a cache line is used to cache either instructions or data, but not both; various benefits have been demonstrated with separate data and instruction translation lookaside buffers. In a unified structure, this constraint is not present, and cache lines can be used to cache both instructions and data.

====Exclusive versus inclusive====
Multi-level caches introduce new design decisions. For instance, in some processors, all data in the L1 cache must also be somewhere in the L2 cache. These caches are called &quot;strictly inclusive&quot;. Other processors (like the AMD Athlon) have &quot;exclusive&quot; caches: data are guaranteed to be in at most one of the L1 and L2 caches, never in both. Still other processors (like the Intel Pentium II, III, and 4) do not require that data in the L1 cache also reside in the L2 cache, although it may often do so. There is no universally accepted name for this intermediate policy; two common names are &quot;non-exclusive&quot; and &quot;partially-inclusive&quot;.

The advantage of exclusive caches is that they store more data. This advantage is larger when the exclusive L1 cache is comparable to the L2 cache, and diminishes if the L2 cache is many times larger than the L1 cache. When the L1 misses and the L2 hits on an access, the hitting cache line in the L2 is exchanged with a line in the L1. This exchange is quite a bit more work than just copying a line from L2 to L1, which is what an inclusive cache does.

One advantage of strictly inclusive caches is that when external devices or other processors in a multiprocessor system wish to remove a cache line from the processor, they need only have the processor check the L2 cache. In cache hierarchies which do not enforce inclusion, the L1 cache must be checked as well. As a drawback, there is a correlation between the associativities of L1 and L2 caches: if the L2 cache does not have at least as many ways as all L1 caches together, the effective associativity of the L1 caches is restricted. Another disadvantage of inclusive cache is that whenever there is an eviction in L2 cache, the (possibly) corresponding lines in L1 also have to get evicted in order to maintain inclusiveness. This is quite a bit of work, and would result in a higher L1 miss rate.

Another advantage of inclusive caches is that the larger cache can use larger cache lines, which reduces the size of the secondary cache tags. (Exclusive caches require both caches to have the same size cache lines, so that cache lines can be swapped on a L1 miss, L2 hit.) If the secondary cache is an order of magnitude larger than the primary, and the cache data are an order of magnitude larger than the cache tags, this tag area saved can be comparable to the incremental area needed to store the L1 cache data in the L2.

===Scratchpad memory===
Scratchpad memory (SPM), also known as scratchpad, scratchpad RAM or local store in computer terminology, is a high-speed internal memory used for temporary storage of calculations, data, and other work in progress.

===Example: the K8===
To illustrate both specialization and multi-level caching, here is the cache hierarchy of the K8 core in the AMD Athlon 64 CPU.

The K8 has four specialized caches: an instruction cache, an instruction TLB, a data TLB, and a data cache. Each of these caches is specialized:

* The instruction cache keeps copies of 64-byte lines of memory, and fetches 16 bytes each cycle. Each byte in this cache is stored in ten bits rather than eight, with the extra bits marking the boundaries of instructions (this is an example of predecoding). The cache has only parity protection rather than ECC, because parity is smaller and any damaged data can be replaced by fresh data fetched from memory (which always has an up-to-date copy of instructions).
* The instruction TLB keeps copies of page table entries (PTEs). Each cycle&#x27;s instruction fetch has its virtual address translated through this TLB into a physical address. Each entry is either four or eight bytes in memory. Because the K8 has a variable page size, each of the TLBs is split into two sections, one to keep PTEs that map 4 KiB pages, and one to keep PTEs that map 4 MiB or 2 MiB pages. The split allows the fully associative match circuitry in each section to be simpler. The operating system maps different sections of the virtual address space with different size PTEs.
* The data TLB has two copies which keep identical entries. The two copies allow two data accesses per cycle to translate virtual addresses to physical addresses. Like the instruction TLB, this TLB is split into two kinds of entries.
* The data cache keeps copies of 64-byte lines of memory. It is split into 8 banks (each storing 8 KiB of data), and can fetch two 8-byte data each cycle so long as those data are in different banks. There are two copies of the tags, because each 64-byte line is spread among all eight banks. Each tag copy handles one of the two accesses per cycle.

The K8 also has multiple-level caches. There are second-level instruction and data TLBs, which store only PTEs mapping 4 KiB. Both instruction and data caches, and the various TLBs, can fill from the large unified L2 cache. This cache is exclusive to both the L1 instruction and data caches, which means that any 8-byte line can only be in one of the L1 instruction cache, the L1 data cache, or the L2 cache. It is, however, possible for a line in the data cache to have a PTE which is also in one of the TLBs—the operating system is responsible for keeping the TLBs coherent by flushing portions of them when the page tables in memory are updated.

The K8 also caches information that is never stored in memory—prediction information. These caches are not shown in the above diagram. As is usual for this class of CPU, the K8 has fairly complex
branch prediction, with tables that help predict whether branches are taken and other tables which predict the targets of branches and jumps. Some of this information is associated with instructions, in both the level 1 instruction cache and the unified secondary cache.

The K8 uses an interesting trick to store prediction information with instructions in the secondary cache. Lines in the secondary cache are protected from accidental data corruption (e.g. by an alpha particle strike) by either ECC or parity, depending on whether those lines were evicted from the data or instruction primary caches. Since the parity code takes fewer bits than the ECC code, lines from the instruction cache have a few spare bits. These bits are used to cache branch prediction information associated with those instructions. The net result is that the branch predictor has a larger effective history table, and so has better accuracy.

===More hierarchies===

Other processors have other kinds of predictors (e.g., the store-to-load bypass predictor in the DEC Alpha 21264), and various specialized predictors are likely to flourish in future processors.

These predictors are caches in that they store information that is costly to compute. Some of the terminology used when discussing predictors is the same as that for caches (one speaks of a hit in a branch predictor), but predictors are not generally thought of as part of the cache hierarchy.

The K8 keeps the instruction and data caches coherent in hardware, which means that a store into an instruction closely following the store instruction will change that following instruction. Other processors, like those in the Alpha and MIPS family, have relied on software to keep the instruction cache coherent. Stores are not guaranteed to show up in the instruction stream until a program calls an operating system facility to ensure coherency.

===Tag RAM===
In computer engineering, a &quot;tag RAM&quot; is used to specify which of the possible memory locations is currently stored in a CPU cache. For a simple, direct-mapped design fast SRAM can be used. Higher associative caches usually employ content-addressable memory.

==Implementation==
Cache reads are the most common CPU operation that takes more than a single cycle. Program execution time tends to be very sensitive to the latency of a level-1 data cache hit. A great deal of design effort, and often power and silicon area are expended making the caches as fast as possible.

The simplest cache is a virtually indexed direct-mapped cache. The virtual address is calculated with an adder, the relevant portion of the address extracted and used to index an SRAM, which returns the loaded data. The data are byte aligned in a byte shifter, and from there are bypassed to the next operation. There is no need for any tag checking in the inner loopin fact, the tags need not even be read. Later in the pipeline, but before the load instruction is retired, the tag for the loaded data must be read, and checked against the virtual address to make sure there was a cache hit. On a miss, the cache is updated with the requested cache line and the pipeline is restarted.

An associative cache is more complicated, because some form of tag must be read to determine which entry of the cache to select. An N-way set-associative level-1 cache usually reads all N possible tags and N data in parallel, and then chooses the data associated with the matching tag. Level-2 caches sometimes save power by reading the tags first, so that only one data element is read from the data SRAM.

The adjacent diagram is intended to clarify the manner in which the various fields of the address are used. Address bit 31 is most significant, bit 0 is least significant. The diagram shows the SRAMs, indexing, and multiplexing for a 4 KiB, 2-way set-associative, virtually indexed and virtually tagged cache with 64 byte (B) lines, a 32-bit read width and 32-bit virtual address.

Because the cache is 4 KiB and has 64 B lines, there are just 64 lines in the cache, and we read two at a time from a Tag SRAM which has 32 rows, each with a pair of 21 bit tags. Although any function of virtual address bits 31 through 6 could be used to index the tag and data SRAMs, it is simplest to use the least significant bits.

Similarly, because the cache is 4 KiB and has a 4 B read path, and reads two ways for each access, the Data SRAM is 512 rows by 8 bytes wide.

A more modern cache might be 16 KiB, 4-way set-associative, virtually indexed, virtually hinted, and physically tagged, with 32 B lines, 32-bit read width and 36-bit physical addresses. The read path recurrence for such a cache looks very similar to the path above. Instead of tags, vhints are read, and matched against a subset of the virtual address. Later on in the pipeline, the virtual address is translated into a physical address by the TLB, and the physical tag is read (just one, as the vhint supplies which way of the cache to read). Finally the physical address is compared to the physical tag to determine if a hit has occurred.

Some SPARC designs have improved the speed of their L1 caches by a few gate delays by collapsing the virtual address adder into the SRAM decoders. See sum-addressed decoder.

===History===
The early history of cache technology is closely tied to the invention and use of virtual memory. Because of scarcity and cost of semi-conductor memories, early mainframe computers in the 1960s used a complex hierarchy of physical memory, mapped onto a flat virtual memory space used by programs. The memory technologies would span semi-conductor, magnetic core, drum and disc. Virtual memory seen and used by programs would be flat and caching would be used to fetch data and instructions into the fastest memory ahead of processor access. Extensive studies were done to optimize the cache sizes. Optimal values were found to depend greatly on the programming language used with Algol needing the smallest and Fortran and Cobol needing the largest cache sizes.

In the early days of microcomputer technology, memory access was only slightly slower than register access. But since the 1980s the performance gap between processor and memory has been growing. Microprocessors have advanced much faster than memory, especially in terms of their operating frequency, so memory became a performance bottleneck. While it was technically possible to have all the main memory as fast as the CPU, a more economically viable path has been taken: use plenty of low-speed memory, but also introduce a small high-speed cache memory to alleviate the performance gap. This provided an order of magnitude more capacity—for the same price—with only a slightly reduced combined performance.

====First TLB implementations====
The first documented uses of a TLB were on the GE 645 and the IBM 360/67, both of which used an associative memory as a TLB.

====First instruction cache====
The first documented use of an instruction cache was on the CDC 6600.

====First data cache====
The first documented use of a data cache was on the IBM System/360 Model 85.

====In 68k microprocessors====
The 68010, released in 1982, has a &quot;loop mode&quot; which can be considered a tiny and special-case instruction cache that accelerates loops that consist of only two instructions. The 68020, released in 1984, replaced that with a typical instruction cache of 256 bytes, being the first 68k series processor to feature true on-chip cache memory.

The 68030, released in 1987, is basically a 68020 core with an additional 256-byte data cache, an on-chip memory management unit (MMU), a process shrink, and added burst mode for the caches.

The 68040, released in 1990, has split instruction and data caches of four kilobytes each.

The 68060, released in 1994, has the following: 8 KiB data cache (four-way associative), 8 KiB instruction cache (four-way associative), 96-byte FIFO instruction buffer, 256-entry branch cache, and 64-entry address translation cache MMU buffer (four-way associative).

====In x86 microprocessors====

As the x86 microprocessors reached clock rates of 20 MHz and above in the 386, small amounts of fast cache memory began to be featured in systems to improve performance. This was because the DRAM used for main memory had significant latency, up to 120 ns, as well as refresh cycles. The cache was constructed from more expensive, but significantly faster, SRAM memory cells, which at the time had latencies around 10–25 ns. The early caches were external to the processor and typically located on the motherboard in the form of eight or nine DIP devices placed in sockets to enable the cache as an optional extra or upgrade feature.

Some versions of the Intel 386 processor could support 16 to 256 KiB of external cache.

With the 486 processor, an 8 KiB cache was integrated directly into the CPU die. This cache was termed Level 1 or L1 cache to differentiate it from the slower on-motherboard, or Level 2 (L2) cache. These on-motherboard caches were much larger, with the most common size being 256 KiB. There were some system boards that contained sockets for the Intel 485Turbocache daughtercard which had either 64 or 128 Kbyte of cache memory. The popularity of on-motherboard cache continued through the Pentium MMX era but was made obsolete by the introduction of SDRAM and the growing disparity between bus clock rates and CPU clock rates, which caused on-motherboard cache to be only slightly faster than main memory.

The next development in cache implementation in the x86 microprocessors began with the Pentium Pro, which brought the secondary cache onto the same package as the microprocessor, clocked at the same frequency as the microprocessor.

On-motherboard caches enjoyed prolonged popularity thanks to the AMD K6-2 and AMD K6-III processors that still used Socket 7, which was previously used by Intel with on-motherboard caches. K6-III included 256 KiB on-die L2 cache and took advantage of the on-board cache as a third level cache, named L3 (motherboards with up to 2 MiB of on-board cache were produced). After the Socket 7 became obsolete, on-motherboard cache disappeared from the x86 systems.

The three-level caches were used again first with the introduction of multiple processor cores, where the L3 cache was added to the CPU die. It became common for the total cache sizes to be increasingly larger in newer processor generations, and recently (as of 2011) it is not uncommon to find Level 3 cache sizes of tens of megabytes.

Intel introduced a Level 4 on-package cache with the Haswell microarchitecture. &quot;Crystalwell&quot; Haswell CPUs, equipped with the GT3e variant of Intel&#x27;s integrated Iris Pro graphics, effectively feature 128 MiB of embedded DRAM (eDRAM) on the same package. This L4 cache is shared dynamically between the on-die GPU and CPU, and serves as a victim cache to the CPU&#x27;s L3 cache.

====In ARM microprocessors====
Apple M1 CPU has 128 or 192 KiB instruction L1 cache for each core (important for latency/single-thread performance), depending on core type. This is an unusually large L1 cache for any CPU type (not just for a laptop); the total cache memory size is not unusually large (the total is more important for throughput) for a laptop, and much larger total (e.g. L3 or L4) sizes are available in IBM&#x27;s mainframes.

====Current research====
Early cache designs focused entirely on the direct cost of cache and RAM and average execution speed.
More recent cache designs also consider energy efficiency, fault tolerance, and other goals.

There are several tools available to computer architects to help explore tradeoffs between the cache cycle time, energy, and area; the CACTI cache simulator and the SimpleScalar instruction set simulator are two open-source options.

===Multi-ported cache===
A multi-ported cache is a cache which can serve more than one request at a time. When accessing a traditional cache we normally use a single memory address, whereas in a multi-ported cache we may request N addresses at a timewhere N is the number of ports that connected through the processor and the cache. The benefit of this is that a pipelined processor may access memory from different phases in its pipeline. Another benefit is that it allows the concept of super-scalar processors through different cache levels.

==See also==

* Branch predictor
* Cache (computing)
* Cache algorithms
* Cache coherence
* Cache control instructions
* Cache hierarchy
* Cache placement policies
* Cache prefetching
* Dinero (cache simulator by University of Wisconsin System)
* Instruction unit
* Locality of reference
* Memoization
* Memory hierarchy
* Micro-operation
* No-write allocation
* Scratchpad RAM
* Sum-addressed decoder
* Write buffer
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Memory part 2: CPU cachesan article on lwn.net by Ulrich Drepper describing CPU caches in detail
* Evaluating Associativity in CPU Caches – Hill and Smith (1989) – introduces capacity, conflict, and compulsory classification
* Cache Performance for SPEC CPU2000 Benchmarks – Hill and Cantin (2003) – This reference paper has been updated several times. It has thorough and lucidly presented simulation results for a reasonably wide set of benchmarks and cache organizations.
* Memory Hierarchy in Cache-Based Systems – by Ruud van der Pas, 2002, Sun Microsystems – introductory article to CPU memory caching
* A Cache Primer – by Paul Genua, P.E., 2004, Freescale Semiconductor, another introductory article
* An 8-way set-associative cachewritten in VHDL
* Understanding CPU caching and performancean article on Ars Technica by Jon Stokes
* IBM POWER4 processor reviewan article on ixbtlabs by Pavel Danilov
*What is Cache Memory and its Types!
* Memory Cachinga Princeton University lecture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="2" end="11" title="CPU cache" label="CPU cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="17" end="31" title="hardware cache" label="hardware cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="44" end="67" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="79" end="87" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q494756" start="142" end="146" title="data (computer science)" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="156" end="167" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="226" end="240" title="processor core" label="processor core"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="300" end="315" title="memory location" label="memory location"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="363" end="369" title="#MULTILEVEL" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="530" end="557" title="static random-access memory" label="static random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q286144" start="766" end="771" title="eDRAM" label="eDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="918" end="946" title="translation lookaside buffer" label="translation lookaside buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="974" end="996" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="1300" end="1307" title="desktop computer" label="desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="1309" end="1315" title="server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="1436" end="1464" title="Translation lookaside buffer" label="Translation lookaside buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="1752" end="1774" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089782" start="1849" end="1862" title="Micro-operation" label="MicroOp-cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089439" start="1867" end="1887" title="Branch target buffer" label="Branch target buffer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2135" end="2153" title="#Multi-level caches" label="multi-level caches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529476" start="2217" end="2224" title="Titan (1963 computer)" label="Atlas 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319195" start="2233" end="2256" title="IBM System/360 Model 85" label="IBM System/360 Model 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q748131" start="2466" end="2473" title="IBM 801" label="IBM 801"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="2603" end="2607" title="System on a chip" label="SoCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="2815" end="2835" title="multi-core processor" label="multi-core processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="3027" end="3055" title="dynamic random-access memory" label="dynamic random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="3102" end="3129" title="static random-access memory" label="static random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q286144" start="3167" end="3172" title="eDRAM" label="eDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="3561" end="3564" title="Kibibyte" label="KiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="3577" end="3580" title="Mebibyte" label="MiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="3745" end="3761" title="Intel Core 2 Duo" label="Intel Core 2 Duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969193" start="3897" end="3906" title="IBM zEC12 (microprocessor)" label="IBM zEC12"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845299" start="4014" end="4021" title="IBM z13 (microprocessor)" label="IBM z13"/>
<link wikidata="Q31888920" start="4098" end="4106" title="Ice Lake (microprocessor)" label="Ice Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q324536" start="4210" end="4220" title="Intel Atom" label="Intel Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13404475" start="5866" end="5885" title="least-recently used" label="least-recently used"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="6406" end="6419" title="write-through" label="write-through"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="6503" end="6513" title="write-back" label="write-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151177" start="6675" end="6680" title="Dirty bit" label="dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="7538" end="7558" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="7586" end="7606" title="multi-core processor" label="multi-core processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="7709" end="7723" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025017" start="7918" end="7933" title="cache coherence" label="cache coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456000" start="7970" end="7999" title="Cache performance measurement and metric" label="Cache performance measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="8746" end="8753" title="Latency (engineering)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153762" start="9220" end="9242" title="out-of-order execution" label="out-of-order execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q82178" start="9416" end="9443" title="simultaneous multithreading" label="simultaneous multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455984" start="9604" end="9620" title="Cache placement policies" label="placement policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390562" start="10173" end="10183" title="AMD Athlon" label="AMD Athlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q638123" start="10390" end="10399" title="trade-off" label="trade-off"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10731" end="10746" title="Cache performance measurement and metric#Conflict misses" label="conflict misses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11143" end="11159" title="#Virtual aliasing" label="virtual aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13404475" start="13261" end="13264" title="Cache algorithms" label="LRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164465" start="13459" end="13470" title="speculative execution" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="14414" end="14427" title="hash function" label="hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q13404475" start="15013" end="15016" title="Cache algorithms" label="LRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q745101" start="15314" end="15340" title="content-addressable memory" label="content-addressable memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18306" end="18321" title="#Flag_bits" label="discussed below"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18549" end="18570" title="ECC memory#Cache" label="error correction code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885225" start="18752" end="18755" title="Most significant bit" label="MSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885225" start="18759" end="18762" title="Least significant bit" label="LSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="19579" end="19588" title="Pentium 4" label="Pentium 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="19649" end="19652" title="Kibibyte" label="KiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017228" start="20609" end="20621" title="bus snooping" label="bus snooping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151177" start="20895" end="20904" title="dirty bit" label="dirty bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q82178" start="21567" end="21586" title="Simultaneous multithreading" label="thread of execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456000" start="22249" end="22289" title="cache performance measurement and metric" label="cache performance measurement and metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="22365" end="22379" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="22462" end="22475" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="22999" end="23021" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="23104" end="23132" title="translation lookaside buffer" label="translation lookaside buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195972" start="23202" end="23212" title="page table" label="page table"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="23940" end="23943" title="Gibibyte" label="GiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="24109" end="24123" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968883" start="24179" end="24190" title="IBM M44/44X" label="IBM M44/44X"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="24238" end="24249" title="core memory" label="core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195972" start="24476" end="24486" title="page table" label="page table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="24519" end="24542" title="IBM System/360 Model 67" label="IBM System/360 Model 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="24551" end="24557" title="GE 645" label="GE 645"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319195" start="24723" end="24746" title="IBM System/360 Model 85" label="IBM System/360 Model 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="26225" end="26239" title="context switch" label="context switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="27734" end="27738" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274828" start="27739" end="27744" title="R6000" label="R6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q173552" start="27828" end="27849" title="emitter-coupled logic" label="emitter-coupled logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="27931" end="27934" title="Translation lookaside buffer" label="TLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q160843" start="29539" end="29546" title="homonym" label="homonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="29725" end="29732" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q745101" start="33326" end="33352" title="content-addressable memory" label="content-addressable memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675847" start="35018" end="35040" title="loop nest optimization" label="loop nest optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190465" start="35067" end="35099" title="High Performance Computing" label="High Performance Computing (HPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q339000" start="35497" end="35513" title="birthday paradox" label="birthday paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q13404475" start="37511" end="37526" title="cache algorithm" label="cache algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="37748" end="37756" title="Instruction pipeline" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="37777" end="37796" title="virtual memory" label="virtual-to-physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163118" start="37838" end="37859" title="classic RISC pipeline" label="classic RISC pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="38121" end="38124" title="translation lookaside buffer" label="TLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q21033718" start="38837" end="38850" title="Norman Jouppi" label="Norman Jouppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="38889" end="38900" title="Crystalwell" label="Crystalwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="38922" end="38929" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q286144" start="38974" end="38979" title="eDRAM" label="eDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058943" start="39071" end="39078" title="Skylake (microarchitecture)" label="Skylake"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="39310" end="39315" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39316" end="39325" title="Pentium 4" label="Pentium 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="39504" end="39515" title="instruction (computer science)" label="instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564041" start="39748" end="39759" title="basic block" label="basic block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089782" start="39832" end="39848" title="micro-operations" label="micro-operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="40166" end="40169" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q294924" start="40177" end="40204" title="Bulldozer (microarchitecture)" label="Bulldozer microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089782" start="40505" end="40520" title="micro-operation" label="micro-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="40577" end="40596" title="instruction decoder" label="instruction decoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364041" start="40898" end="40917" title="P6 (microarchitecture)" label="P6 processor family"/>
<link wikidata="Q278624" start="41071" end="41083" title="Sandy Bridge" label="Sandy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="41137" end="41147" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="41152" end="41159" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96416011" start="41198" end="41219" title="Zen (microarchitecture)" label="Zen microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q29954" start="41563" end="41580" title="power consumption" label="power consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="42164" end="42173" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560350" start="42362" end="42381" title="ARM microprocessors" label="ARM microprocessors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43152" end="43159" title="#MULTILEVEL" label="level 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43163" end="43170" title="#MULTILEVEL" label="level 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="43229" end="43234" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="43303" end="43323" title="multi-core processor" label="multi-core processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="43382" end="43392" title="cache miss" label="cache miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q286144" start="44621" end="44626" title="eDRAM" label="eDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466268" start="44644" end="44661" title="multi-chip module" label="multi-chip module"/>
<link wikidata="Q80360899" start="44732" end="44739" title="IBM z15 (microprocessor)" label="IBM z15"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="44806" end="44810" title="static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="44871" end="44880" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q101439988" start="44881" end="44889" title="Apple M1" label="Apple M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277607" start="45205" end="45216" title="Alpha 21164" label="Alpha 21164"/>
<link wikidata="Q295014" start="45261" end="45271" title="AMD K6-III" label="AMD K6-III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468681" start="45317" end="45323" title="POWER4" label="POWER4"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="45414" end="45423" title="Itanium 2" label="Itanium 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45443" end="45450" title="unified cache" label="unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="45482" end="45491" title="Itanium 2" label="Itanium 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466268" start="45590" end="45607" title="multi-chip module" label="multi-chip module"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="45673" end="45677" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q295064" start="45797" end="45807" title="AMD Phenom" label="AMD Phenom"/>
<link wikidata="Q295057" start="45845" end="45854" title="Phenom II" label="Phenom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574285" start="45905" end="45918" title="List of Intel Core i7 processors" label="Intel Core i7"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="46011" end="46018" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="46040" end="46063" title="Intel Iris Pro Graphics" label="Intel Iris Pro Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="46181" end="46194" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675847" start="46441" end="46463" title="loop nest optimization" label="loop nest optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754803" start="46479" end="46496" title="register renaming" label="register renaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093705" start="46740" end="46746" title="Cray-1" label="Cray-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="47235" end="47249" title="Multi-core processor" label="multiple cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="48934" end="48962" title="translation lookaside buffer" label="translation lookaside buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q390562" start="49355" end="49365" title="AMD Athlon" label="AMD Athlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221257" start="49522" end="49532" title="Pentium II" label="Pentium II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83382" start="49534" end="49537" title="Pentium III" label="III"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="49543" end="49544" title="Pentium 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928159" start="51611" end="51628" title="Scratchpad memory" label="Scratchpad memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="51963" end="51972" title="Athlon 64" label="Athlon 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="52052" end="52055" title="translation lookaside buffer" label="TLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="52403" end="52409" title="parity bit" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="52433" end="52436" title="Error-correcting code" label="ECC"/>
<link wikidata="Q679552" start="54614" end="54631" title="branch prediction" label="branch prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="55080" end="55094" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="55113" end="55116" title="Error-correcting code" label="ECC"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="55120" end="55126" title="parity (telecommunication)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="55660" end="55663" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271881" start="55664" end="55675" title="Alpha 21264" label="Alpha 21264"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025017" start="56099" end="56107" title="cache coherency" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="56700" end="56704" title="static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56725" end="56743" title="#Associativity" label="associative caches"/>
<link wikidata="Q745101" start="56759" end="56785" title="content-addressable memory" label="content-addressable memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="58411" end="58423" title="multiplexing" label="multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636884" start="59850" end="59871" title="sum-addressed decoder" label="sum-addressed decoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="60742" end="60750" title="processor register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="60940" end="60949" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60982" end="60992" title="Von Neumann architecture#Von Neumann bottleneck" label="bottleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="61443" end="61449" title="GE 645" label="GE 645"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="61458" end="61461" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="61462" end="61468" title="IBM System/360 Model 67" label="360/67"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="61614" end="61622" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="61702" end="61705" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024934" start="61763" end="61768" title="68010" label="68010"/>
<link wikidata="Q916240" start="61948" end="61953" title="68020" label="68020"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="62114" end="62119" title="68030" label="68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="62216" end="62238" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="62306" end="62311" title="Motorola 68040" label="68040"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268094" start="62398" end="62403" title="68060" label="68060"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="62702" end="62705" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="62769" end="62772" title="Intel 80386" label="386"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="62886" end="62890" title="DRAM" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="63051" end="63055" title="static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343761" start="63056" end="63068" title="Memory cell (computing)" label="memory cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141665" start="63237" end="63240" title="Dual in-line package" label="DIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="63427" end="63430" title="Intel 80486" label="486"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63784" end="63796" title="Expansion_card#Daughterboard" label="daughtercard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="63908" end="63919" title="Intel P5" label="Pentium MMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q746478" start="63969" end="63974" title="SDRAM" label="SDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q628189" start="64213" end="64224" title="Pentium Pro" label="Pentium Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q295003" start="64424" end="64432" title="AMD K6-2" label="AMD K6-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q295014" start="64437" end="64447" title="AMD K6-III" label="AMD K6-III"/>
<link wikidata="Q732345" start="64475" end="64483" title="Socket 7" label="Socket 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="65157" end="65162" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="65210" end="65217" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259864" start="65218" end="65235" title="microarchitecture" label="microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="65243" end="65254" title="Crystalwell" label="Crystalwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="65293" end="65297" title="GT3e" label="GT3e"/>
<link wikidata="Q286144" start="65398" end="65403" title="eDRAM" label="eDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456192" start="65510" end="65522" title="victim cache" label="victim cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q101439988" start="65583" end="65591" title="Apple M1" label="Apple M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="66092" end="66095" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692774" start="66165" end="66182" title="low-power electronics" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q679552" start="67015" end="67031" title="Branch predictor" label="Branch predictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="67034" end="67051" title="Cache (computing)" label="Cache (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13404475" start="67054" end="67070" title="Cache algorithms" label="Cache algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025017" start="67073" end="67088" title="Cache coherence" label="Cache coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q24898796" start="67091" end="67116" title="Cache control instruction" label="Cache control instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404172" start="67120" end="67135" title="Cache hierarchy" label="Cache hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455984" start="67138" end="67162" title="Cache placement policies" label="Cache placement policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455645" start="67165" end="67182" title="Cache prefetching" label="Cache prefetching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278054" start="67185" end="67191" title="Dinero (cache simulator)" label="Dinero"/>
<link wikidata="Q10814056" start="67212" end="67242" title="University of Wisconsin System" label="University of Wisconsin System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041767" start="67246" end="67262" title="Instruction unit" label="Instruction unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868547" start="67265" end="67286" title="Locality of reference" label="Locality of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376168" start="67289" end="67300" title="Memoization" label="Memoization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589327" start="67303" end="67319" title="Memory hierarchy" label="Memory hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089782" start="67322" end="67337" title="Micro-operation" label="Micro-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="67340" end="67359" title="No-write allocation" label="No-write allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928159" start="67362" end="67376" title="Scratchpad RAM" label="Scratchpad RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636884" start="67379" end="67400" title="Sum-addressed decoder" label="Sum-addressed decoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038418" start="67403" end="67415" title="Write buffer" label="Write buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209455" start="68214" end="68218" title="VHDL" label="VHDL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849183" wikidata="Q4944152" url="?curid=849183" title="Bop Cassettes">
<text>Bop Cassettes is a defunct, Manchester-based, independent record label. It released records (and cassettes) for many Manchester bands in the late 1980s, including the Man From Delmonte, Toss the Feathers, Suns of Arqa, Space Heads, Mr Spin.

Bop Cassettes was based on New Mount Street, Manchester within the same building as Mike Shaft&#x27;s Sunset Radio station.

Bop Cassettes released Mr Spin Droppin&#x27; it &#x27;Best ov Hip Hop 1988 Mix&#x27; in August 1989, UK release.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4944152" start="0" end="13" title="Bop Cassettes" label="Bop Cassettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="28" end="38" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="46" end="70" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746334" start="167" end="184" title="Man From Delmonte" label="Man From Delmonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q969164" start="186" end="203" title="Toss the Feathers" label="Toss the Feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14254027" start="205" end="217" title="Suns of Arqa" label="Suns of Arqa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="219" end="230" title="Space Heads" label="Space Heads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="239" title="Mr Spin" label="Mr Spin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849185" wikidata="Q2587022" url="?curid=849185" title="Wizard (card game)">
<text>Wizard is a trick-taking card game for three to six players designed by Ken Fisher of Toronto, Ontario in 1984. The game was first printed commercially in June 1986. The game is based on oh hell.

A Wizard deck consists of 60 cards: a regular set of 52 playing cards (replaced with custom symbols and colours in some editions), 4 Wizards and 4 Jesters. The Jesters have the lowest value, then the two up to thirteen, then Aces and lastly Wizards as highest in value.
==Gameplay==

The objective of the game is to bid correctly on the number of tricks that a player will take in the subsequent round of play. Points are awarded for a correct bid and subtracted for an incorrect bid. The player with most points after all rounds have been played is the winner. The game is played in a number of rounds from 10 to 20, depending on the number of players, and each round consists of three stages: Dealing, Bidding, and Playing.

In the first round every player gets one card. In the subsequent rounds the number of cards is increased by one until all cards are distributed. That means that three players play 20 rounds, four players 15 rounds, five players 12 rounds and six players 10 rounds. The top card of the remaining cards is turned over to determine the trump suit. If there are no cards left or a jester is turned, there is no trump suit, and only the wizards are trump. If a wizard is turned, the dealer picks a trump suit.

After looking at their cards, starting with the player to the dealer&#x27;s left, each player states how many tricks he believes he will take, from zero to the number of cards dealt. This is recorded on a score pad.

The player to the left of the dealer plays a card, and then the others follow clockwise. If a card other than a wizard or jester is played, the players have to follow suit, but it is possible to play a jester or wizard although the player has the desired suit. The Wizard beats all other cards but the first one in a trick beats all others. The jester is beaten by all others, but if all cards in a trick are jesters the first one beats the others. If a jester is played as the first card the first suit card decides which suit has to be followed. If a wizard is played as the first card every player is free to play what they want regardless of the others. If the first card is a Jester and the second a Wizard, then the Wizard rule takes precedence and players are not required to follow suit.

At the end of each round, each player is given a score based on their performance. For predicting the number of tricks taken correctly, a player receives 20 points plus 10 points for each trick taken. For predicting the number of tricks taken incorrectly, a player loses 10 points for each trick over or under.

==Variant card sets==

The German version of Wizard is published by Amigo-Spiele. Granted a license for manufacture and distribution in Germany in 1996, the cards were redesigned and illustrated with a fantasy-themed character on each card. Each character has a title such as &quot;der Krieger&quot; (the warrior) or &quot;die Priesterin&quot; (the priestess) printed at the top of the card. There are 2 male and 2 female versions of each character. The German decks contain four non-standard suits with values from 1 to 13, four Z cards labelled either &quot;der Zauberer&quot; (the sorcerer) or &quot;die Zauberin&quot; (the sorceress), and four N cards labelled &quot;der Narr&quot; or &quot;die Närrin&quot; (the fool). The German deck is distributed in the United States as &quot;Fantasy Wizard&quot;, with an English box and rules. The cards are identical to the German ones, including the German abbreviations for &quot;Zauberer&quot;/&quot;Zauberin&quot; and &quot;Narr&quot;/&quot;Närrin&quot;.

The Medieval deck of cards has a themed character on each card. The characters are: (2) Hermit, (3) Peasant, (4) Farmer, (5) Archer, (6) Blacksmith, (7) Merchant, (8) Bard, (9) Scholar, (10) Bishop, Knight, Queen, King, (Ace) Dragon. The cards are also color-coded: Hearts (Red), Spades (Black), Clubs (Green), Diamonds (Purple), Jesters (Brown), Wizards (Blue).

The Wizard Camelot edition replaces the 4 deuces with Holy Grail, Excalibur, Merlin and Morgan le Fay cards.

The Wizard Omnibus edition enables 3 levels of play: Classic, Camelot and Magic.

==Tournament play==

Regular tournaments are held online. World Championships began in 2010. Each nation is invited to send a maximum of two representatives to the annual event.
==First hand probabilities==
Since there are no options for which card to play when a player is only holding one card, there is a statistically correct bid for any given card. This only truly applies if a player has the lead, and thus no information from other bids. Since a correct bid of 1 yields 30 points, and a correct bid of 0 only yields 20, a bid of 1 over time yields more points as long as the player has at least a 42.86% chance of winning the trick.

The known cards are only a player&#x27;s own card and the turn up, so with 58 unknowns, the odds that a hand will win in a three player game are calculated by the odds that both of the other hands lose to that player. That is, (x/58)*((x-1)/57), x=# of cards the player can beat. The calculation is similar for more players. Solving for x to yield 0.4286 or greater gives the minimum number of cards a player needs to be ahead of to justify a bid of 1.

With the lead:
*In a 3-person game, x=39, bid 1 with an offsuit Jack or stronger.
*In a 4-person game, x=44, bid 1 with the 3 of trump or stronger, (4 of trump if the turn up is the 2 or 3).
*In a 5-person game, x=49, bid 1 with the 9 of trump or better, (the 8 will do if the turn up is higher than the 8)
*In a 6-person game, x=50, bid 1 with the 10 of trump or better (9 if turn-up is 10 or higher)
*In the special case that a jester turns up and there is therefore no trump, and the player has the lead: always bid 1 in a 3 player game, With 4 - bid 1 on 3 or higher, with 5 - bid 1 with any 9 or higher, and with 6 players a 10 or higher.

==Reviews==
*&quot;Games&quot; #110
*1992 Games 100 in &quot;Games&quot; #112
*&quot;Games&quot; September 2010
*&quot;ToysBulletin.com&quot;
*&quot;Meople&#x27;s Magazine&quot;
*&quot;There Will Be Games&quot;
*&quot;The Villages Daily Sun&quot;

==See also==
*Oh hell

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2587022" start="0" end="6" title="Wizard (card game)" label="Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191150" start="12" end="24" title="trick-taking game" label="trick-taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="25" end="34" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="86" end="102" title="Toronto" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812901" start="106" end="110" title="1984 in games" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q973596" start="187" end="194" title="oh hell" label="oh hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q471190" start="2824" end="2836" title="Amigo Spiele" label="Amigo-Spiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="2958" end="2965" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="6076" end="6081" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="6118" end="6123" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="6142" end="6147" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q48861344" start="6275" end="6297" title="The Villages Daily Sun" label="The Villages Daily Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q973596" start="6319" end="6326" title="Oh hell" label="Oh hell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849186" wikidata="Q700754" url="?curid=849186" title="Inner German border">
<text>The inner German border ( or &quot;deutsch–deutsche Grenze&quot;; initially also &quot;Zonengrenze&quot;) was the frontier between the German Democratic Republic (GDR, East Germany) and the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG, West Germany) from 1949 to 1990. &quot;De jure&quot; not including the similar but physically separate Berlin Wall, the border was long and ran from the Baltic Sea to Czechoslovakia.

It was formally established by the Potsdam Agreement on 1 August 1945 as the boundary between the Western and Soviet occupation zones of Germany. On the Eastern side, it was made one of the world&#x27;s most heavily fortified frontiers, defined by a continuous line of high metal fences and walls, barbed wire, alarms, anti-vehicle ditches, watchtowers, automatic booby traps and minefields. It was patrolled by 50,000 armed GDR border guards who faced tens of thousands of West German, British and US guards and soldiers. In the hinterlands behind the border, more than a million NATO and Warsaw Pact troops awaited the possible outbreak of war.

The border was a physical manifestation of Winston Churchill&#x27;s metaphorical Iron Curtain that separated the Soviet and Western blocs during the Cold War. Built by the East German government in phases from 1952 to the late 1980s, the fortifications were constructed to stop &quot;Republikflucht&quot;, the large-scale emigration of East German citizens to the West, about 1,000 of whom are said to have died trying to cross it during its 45-year existence. It caused widespread economic and social disruption on both sides; East Germans living nearby suffered especially draconian restrictions.

The better-known Berlin Wall was a physically separate, less elaborate, and much shorter border barrier surrounding West Berlin, more than to the east of the inner German border. On 9 November 1989, the East German government announced the opening of the Berlin Wall and the inner German border. Over the following days, millions of East Germans poured into the West to visit. Hundreds of thousands moved permanently to the West in the following months as more crossings were opened, and ties between long-divided communities were re-established as border controls became little more than a cursory formality. The inner German border was not completely abandoned until 1 July 1990, exactly 45 years to the day since its establishment, and only three months before German reunification formally ended Germany&#x27;s division.

Little remains of the inner German border&#x27;s fortifications. Its route has been declared part of a European Green Belt linking national parks and nature reserves along the course of the old Iron Curtain from the Arctic Circle to the Black Sea. Museums and memorials along the old border commemorate the division and reunification of Germany and, in some places, preserve elements of the fortifications.

==Development of the inner German border==
===Origins===
The inner German border originated from the Second World War Allies&#x27; plans to divide a defeated Germany into occupation zones. The boundaries between these zones were drawn along the territorial boundaries of 19th-century German states and provinces that had largely disappeared with the unification of Germany in 1871. Three zones were agreed on, each covering roughly a third of Germany&#x27;s territories: a British zone in the north-west, an American zone in the south and a Soviet zone in the east. France was later given a zone in the far west of Germany, carved out of the British and American zones.

The division of Germany was official on 1 August 1945. Because of the unexpectedly rapid Allied advances through central Germany in the final weeks of the war, British and American troops occupied large areas of territory that had been assigned to the Soviet zone of occupation. The redeployment of Western troops prompted many Germans to flee west to escape the Russians&#x27; takeover of the remainder of the Soviet zone.

The wartime Allies initially worked together under the auspices of the Allied Control Council (ACC) for Germany. Cooperation between the Western Allies and the Soviets ultimately broke down because of disagreements over Germany&#x27;s political and economic future. In May 1949, the three western occupation zones were merged to form the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), a capitalist state with free and fair elections. The Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic (GDR), a communist state where voters were restricted to electing communist candidates.

From the outset, West Germany and the western Allies rejected East Germany&#x27;s legitimacy. The creation of East Germany was deemed a communist &quot;fait accompli&quot;, without a freely or fairly elected government. West Germany regarded German citizenship and rights as applying equally to East and West German citizens. An East German who escaped or was released to the West was automatically granted West German rights, including residence and the right to work; West German laws were deemed to be applicable in the East. East Germans thus had a powerful incentive to move to the West, where they would enjoy greater freedom and economic prospects.
The East German government sought to define the country as a legitimate state in its own right and portrayed West Germany as enemy territory (&quot;feindliches Ausland&quot;) – a capitalist, semi-fascist state that exploited its citizens, sought to regain the lost territories of the Third Reich, and stood opposed to the peaceful socialism of the GDR.

===1945–52: the &quot;Green Border&quot;===
In the early days of the occupation, the Allies controlled traffic between the zones to manage the flow of refugees and prevent the escape of former Nazi officials and intelligence officers. These controls were gradually lifted in the Western zones, but were tightened between Western and Soviet zones in 1946 to stem a flow of economic and political refugees from the Soviet zone. Between October 1945 and June 1946, 1.6 million Germans left the Soviet zone for the west.

The east–west interzonal border became steadily more tense as the relationship between the Western Allies and the Soviets deteriorated. From September 1947, an increasingly strict regime was imposed on the eastern Soviet zone boundary. The number of Soviet soldiers on the boundary was increased and supplemented with border guards from the newly established East German &quot;Volkspolizei&quot; (&quot;People&#x27;s Police&quot;). Many unofficial crossing points were blocked with ditches and barricades. The West Germans also stepped up security with the establishment in 1952 of the Federal Border Protection force of 20,000 men; – the &quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot;, or BGS – however, Allied troops (the British in the north, the Americans in the south) retained responsibility for the military security of the border.

The boundary line was nonetheless still fairly easy to cross. Local inhabitants were able to maintain fields on the other side, or even to live on one side and work on the other. Refugees were able to sneak across or bribe the guards, and the smuggling of goods in both directions was rife. The flow of emigrants remained large despite the increase in East German security measures: 675,000 people fled to West Germany between 1949 and 1952.
===1952–67: the &quot;Special Regime&quot;===
The relative openness of the border ended abruptly on 26 May 1952 when the GDR implemented a &quot;special regime on the demarcation line&quot;, justified as a measure to keep out &quot;spies, diversionists, terrorists and smugglers&quot;. The East German move was taken to limit the continuing exodus of its citizens, which threatened the viability of the GDR&#x27;s economy.

A ploughed strip 10 m (32.8 ft) wide was created along the entire length of the inner German border. An adjoining &quot;protective strip&quot; (&quot;Schutzstreifen&quot;) 500 m (1,640 ft) wide was placed under tight control. A &quot;restricted zone&quot; (&quot;Sperrzone&quot;) a further 5 km (3.1 mile) wide was created in which only those holding a special permit could live or work. Trees and brush were cut down along the border to clear lines of sight for the guards and to eliminate cover for would-be crossers. Houses adjoining the border were torn down, bridges were closed and barbed-wire fencing was put up in many places. Farmers were permitted to work their fields along the border only in daylight hours and under the watch of armed guards, who were authorised to use weapons if their orders were not obeyed.

Border communities on both sides suffered acute disruption. Farms, coal mines and even houses were split in two by the sudden closure of the border. More than 8,300 East German civilians living along the border were forcibly resettled in a programme codenamed &quot;Operation Vermin&quot; (&quot;Aktion Ungeziefer&quot;). Another 3,000 residents, realising they were about to be expelled from their homes, fled to the West. The seal around the country was expanded in July 1962 when the GDR declared its entire Baltic coast a border zone subject to closures and restrictions.

The border between East and West Berlin was also significantly tightened, although not fully closed; East Germans were still able to cross into West Berlin, which then became the main route by which East Germans migrated to the West. Between 1949 and the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961, an estimated 3.5 million East Germans – a sixth of the entire population – emigrated to the West, most via Berlin.

===1967–89: the &quot;Modern Frontier&quot;===

The GDR decided to upgrade the fortifications in the late 1960s to establish a &quot;modern frontier&quot; that would be far more difficult to cross. Barbed-wire fences were replaced with harder-to-climb expanded metal barriers; directional anti-personnel mines and anti-vehicle ditches blocked the movement of people and vehicles; tripwires and electric signals helped guards to detect escapees; all-weather patrol roads enabled rapid access to any point along the border; and wooden guard towers were replaced with prefabricated concrete towers and observation bunkers.

Construction of the new border system started in September 1967. Nearly of new fencing was built, usually further back from the geographical line than the old barbed-wire fences. The upgrade programme continued well into the 1980s. The new system immediately reduced the number of successful escapes from around 1,000 people a year in the mid-1960s to only about 120 per year a decade later.

The introduction of West German Chancellor Willy Brandt&#x27;s &quot;Ostpolitik&quot; (&quot;Eastern Policy&quot;) at the end of the 1960s reduced tensions between the two German states. It led to a series of treaties and agreements in the early 1970s, most significantly a treaty in which East and West Germany recognised each other&#x27;s sovereignty and supported each other&#x27;s applications for UN membership, although neither state changed its view on the citizenship issue.  Reunification remained a theoretical objective for West Germany, but in practice that objective was put aside by the West and abandoned entirely by the East. New crossing points were established and East German crossing regulations were slightly relaxed, although the fortifications were as rigorously maintained as ever.

In 1988, the GDR leadership considered proposals to replace the expensive and intrusive fortifications with a high-technology system codenamed &quot;Grenze 2000&quot;. Drawing on technology used by the Soviet army during the Soviet–Afghan War, it would have replaced the fences with sensors and detectors. However, the plan was never implemented.

==Economic and social impact==
The closure of the border had a substantial economic and social impact on both countries. Cross-border transport links were largely severed; 10 main railway lines, 24 secondary lines, 23 autobahns or national roads, 140 regional roads and thousands of smaller roads, paths and waterways were blocked or otherwise interrupted. The tightest level of closure came in 1966, by which time only six railway lines, three autobahns, one regional road and two waterways were left open. When relations between the two states eased in the 1970s, the GDR agreed to open more crossing points in exchange for economic assistance. Telephone and mail communications operated throughout the Cold War, although packages and letters were routinely opened and telephone calls were monitored by the East German secret police.

The economic impact of the border was harsh. Many towns and villages were severed from their markets and economic hinterlands, which caused areas close to the border to go into an economic and demographic decline. The two German states responded to the problem in different ways. West Germany gave substantial subsidies to communities under the &quot;Aid to border regions&quot; programme, an initiative begun in 1971 to save them from total decline. Infrastructure and businesses along the border benefited from substantial state investment. East Germany&#x27;s communities had a much harder time because the country was poorer and their government imposed severe restrictions on them. The border region was progressively depopulated through the clearance of numerous villages and the forced relocation of their inhabitants. Border towns suffered draconian building restrictions: inhabitants were forbidden from building new houses and even repairing existing buildings, causing infrastructure to fall into severe decay. The state did little but to provide a 15% income supplement to those living in the &quot;Sperrzone&quot; and &quot;Schutzstreifen&quot;; but this did not halt the shrinkage of the border population as younger people moved elsewhere to find employment and better living conditions.

The GDR bore a huge economic cost for its creation of the border zone and the building and maintenance of its fortifications. The zone consumed around more than six per cent of the East&#x27;s territory, within which economic activity was severely curtailed or ceased entirely. The actual cost of the border system was a closely guarded secret, and even today it is uncertain exactly how much it cost to build and maintain. The BT-9 watchtowers each cost around 65,000 East German marks to build and the expanded metal fences cost around 151,800 marks per kilometre. The implementation of the &quot;modern frontier&quot; in the 1970s led to a major increase in personnel costs. Total annual expenditure on GDR border troops rose from 600 million marks per annum in 1970 to nearly 1 billion by 1983. In early 1989, East German economists calculated that each arrest cost the equivalent of 2.1 million marks, three times the average &quot;value&quot; to the state of each working person.

==Views of the border==

The two German governments promoted very different views of the border. The GDR saw it as the international frontier of a sovereign statea defensive rampart against Western aggression. In &quot;Grenzer&quot; (&quot;Border Guard&quot;), a 1981 East German Army propaganda film, NATO and West German troops and tanks were depicted as ruthless militarists advancing towards East Germany. Border troops interviewed in the film described what they saw as the rightfulness of their cause and the threat of Western agents, spies and provocateurs. Their colleagues killed on the border were hailed as heroes and schoolchildren in East Berlin were depicted saluting their memorial. However, West German propaganda leaflets referred to the border as merely &quot;the demarcation line of the Soviet occupation zone&quot;, and emphasised the cruelty and injustice of the division of Germany. Signs along the Western side of the frontier declared &quot;Hier ist Deutschland nicht zu EndeAuch drüben ist Vaterland!&quot; (&quot;Germany does not end here: the Fatherland is over there too!&quot;)

Whereas the GDR kept its civilians well away from the border, the West Germans actively encouraged tourism, and locations where the border was especially intrusive became tourist attractions. One example was the divided village of Mödlareuth in Bavaria. The Associated Press reported in 1976 that &quot;Western tourists by the busload come out to have their pictures taken against the backdrop of the latest Communist walled city [and] the concrete blockhouse and the bunker-slits protruding from the green hillock where a collective&#x27;s cows were grazing.&quot; At Zimmerau in Bavaria, a observation tower (the &quot;Bayernturm&quot;) was constructed in 1966 to give visitors a view across the hills into East Germany. The inhabitants of the East German village of Kella found themselves becoming a tourist attraction for Westerners in the 1970s and 1980s. A viewing point, the &quot;Window on Kella&quot;, was established on a nearby hilltop from which tourists could peer across the border with binoculars and telescopes. To the amusement of many, a nudist beach was opened on the Western side in 1975 immediately adjoining the border&#x27;s terminus near the Baltic Sea port of Travemünde. Visitors often sought to have a nude photograph taken below a looming East German watchtower; the West Germans noted &quot;a lot more movement on that watchtower since the nudist beach opened.&quot;

==Fortifications of the inner German border==

The East German side of the inner German border was dominated by a complex system of fortifications and security zones, over 1,300 kilometres (810 mi) long and several kilometres deep. The fortifications were established in 1952 and reached a peak of complexity and lethality at the start of the 1980s. The border guards referred to the side of the border zone facing the GDR as the &quot;freundwärts&quot; (literally &quot;friendward&quot;) side and that facing the FRG as the &quot;feindwärts&quot; (&quot;enemyward&quot;) side.

===Restricted zone===
A person attempting to make an illegal crossing of the inner German border around 1980, travelling from east to west, would first come to the &quot;restricted zone&quot; (&quot;Sperrzone&quot;). This was a wide area running parallel to the border to which access was heavily restricted. Its inhabitants could only enter and leave using special permits, were not permitted to travel to other villages within the zone, and were subjected to nighttime curfews. It was not fenced off but access roads were blocked by checkpoints.

On the far side of the &quot;Sperrzone&quot; was the signal fence (&quot;Signalzaun&quot;), a continuous expanded metal fence long and high. The fence was lined with low-voltage electrified strands of barbed wire. When the wire was touched or cut, an alarm was activated to alert nearby guards.

===Protective strip===

On the other side of the signal fence lay the heavily guarded &quot;protective strip&quot; (&quot;Schutzstreifen&quot;), wide, which adjoined the border itself. It was monitored by guards stationed in concrete, steel and wooden watchtowers constructed at regular intervals along the entire length of the border. Nearly 700 such watchtowers had been built by 1989; the larger ones were equipped with a powerful 1,000-watt rotating searchlight (&quot;Suchscheinwerfer&quot;) and firing ports to enable the guards to open fire without having to go outside. Their entrances were always positioned facing towards the East German side, so that observers in the West could not see guards going in or out. Around 1,000 two-man observation bunkers also stood along the length of the border.

Guard dogs were used to provide an additional deterrent to escapees. Dog runs (&quot;Kettenlaufanlagen&quot;), consisting of a suspended wire up to long to which a large dog was chained, were installed on high-risk sectors of the border. The dogs were occasionally turned loose in temporary pens adjoining gates or damaged sections of the fence.
The guards used an all-weather patrol road (&quot;Kolonnenweg&quot;, literally &quot;column way&quot;) to patrol the border and travel rapidly to the scene of an attempted crossing. It consisted of two parallel lines of perforated concrete blocks which ran beside the border for around .

Next to the &quot;Kolonnenweg&quot; was one of the control strips (&quot;Kontrollstreifen&quot;), a line of bare earth running parallel to the fences along almost the entire length of the border. There were two control strips, both located on the inward-facing sides of the fences. The secondary &quot;K2&quot; strip, wide, ran alongside the signal fence, while the primary &quot;K6&quot; strip, wide, ran along the inside of the fence or wall. In places where the border was prone to escape attempts, the control strip was illuminated at night by high-intensity floodlights (&quot;Beleuchtungsanlage&quot;), which were also used at points where rivers and streams crossed the border.

Anyone attempting to cross the control strips would leave footprints which were quickly detected by patrols. This enabled the guards to identify otherwise undetected escape attempts, recording how many individuals had crossed, where escape attempts were being made and at which times of day escapees were active. From this information, the guards were able to determine where and when patrols needed to be increased, where improved surveillance from watchtowers and bunkers was required, and which areas needed additional fortifications.

Anti-vehicle barriers were installed on the other side of the primary control strip. In some locations, &quot;chevaux-de-frise&quot; barricades, known in German as &quot;Panzersperre&quot; or &quot;Stahligel&quot; (&quot;steel hedgehogs&quot;), were used to prevent vehicles being used to cross the border. Elsewhere, V-shaped anti-vehicle ditches known as &quot;Kraftfahrzeug-Sperrgraben&quot; (&quot;KFZ-Sperrgraben&quot;) were installed along of the border and were absent only where natural obstacles such as streams, rivers, gullies or thick forests made such barriers unnecessary.

===Outer fence, walls and minefields===

The outer fences were constructed in a number of phases, starting with the initial fortification of the border from May 1952. The first-generation fence was a crudely constructed single barbed-wire fence (&quot;Stacheldrahtzaun&quot;) which stood between high and was built very close to the actual border line. This was replaced in the late 1950s with parallel rows of more strongly constructed barbed-wire fences, sometimes with concertina wire placed between the fences as an additional obstacle.


A &quot;third-generation&quot; fence, much more solidly constructed, was installed in an ongoing programme of improvements from the late 1960s to the 1980s. The fence line was moved back to create an outer strip between the fence and the actual border. The barbed-wire fences were replaced with a barrier that was usually 3.2–4.0 metres (10–13 ft) high. It was constructed with expanded metal mesh (&quot;Metallgitterzaun&quot;) panels. The openings in the mesh were generally too small to provide finger-holds and were very sharp. The panels could not easily be pulled down, as they overlapped, and they could not be cut through with a bolt- or wire-cutter. Nor could they be tunnelled under easily, as the bottom segment of the fences was partially buried in the ground. In a number of places, more lightly constructed fences (&quot;Lichtsperren&quot;) consisting of mesh and barbed wire lined the border. The fences were not continuous but could be crossed at a number of places. Gates were installed to enable guards to patrol up to the line and to give engineers access for maintenance on the outward-facing side of the barrier.

In some places, villages adjoining the border were fenced with wooden board fences (&quot;Holzlattenzaun&quot;) or concrete barrier walls (&quot;Betonsperrmauern&quot;) standing around high. Windows in buildings adjoining the border were bricked or boarded up, and buildings deemed too close to the border were pulled down. The barrier walls stood along only a small percentage of the border of the total length by 1989.

Anti-personnel mines were installed along approximately half of the border&#x27;s length starting in 1966; by the 1980s, some 1.3 million mines of various Soviet-made types had been laid. In addition, from 1970 the outer fence was booby-trapped with around 60,000 SM-70 (&quot;Splittermine-70&quot;) directional anti-personnel mines. They were activated by tripwires connected to the firing mechanism. This detonated a horn-shaped charge filled with shrapnel that was sprayed in one direction along the line of the fence. The device was potentially lethal to a range of around . The mines were eventually removed by the end of 1984 in the face of international condemnation of the East German government.

===Border line===

Until the late 1960s the fortifications were constructed almost up to the actual border line. When the third-generation fortifications were constructed, the fences were moved back from between to as much as . This gave the guards a clear field of fire to target escapees and provided a buffer zone where engineers could work on maintaining the outward face of the fence in East German territory. Access to the outer strip was very tightly controlled, to ensure that the guards themselves would not be tempted to escape. Although often described by Western sources as a &quot;no-man&#x27;s land&quot;, it was in fact wholly East German territory; trespassers could be arrested or shot.

The actual line between West and East Germany was located on the far side of the outer strip. It was marked by granite stones (&quot;Grenzsteine&quot;) with the letters &quot;DDR&quot; carved on the west-facing edge. Around 2,600 distinctive East German concrete &quot;barber pole&quot; (&quot;Grenzsäule&quot; or &quot;Grenzpfähle&quot;) markers were installed just behind the border line at intervals of about . A metal East German coat of arms, the &quot;Staatsemblem&quot;, was fixed to the side of the marker that faced West Germany.

On the West German side, there were no fortifications of any kind, nor even any patrol roads in most areas. Warning signs (&quot;Grenzschilder&quot;) with messages such as &quot;Achtung! Zonengrenze!&quot; (&quot;Danger! Zonal border!&quot;) or &quot;Halt! Hier Zonengrenze&quot; (&quot;Stop! The zonal border is here&quot;) notified visitors of the presence of the border. Foreign military personnel were restricted from approaching the border to avoid clashes or other unwanted incidents. Signs in English and German provided notifications of the distance to the border to discourage accidental crossings. No such restriction applied to Western civilians, who were free to go up to the border line, and there were no physical obstacles to stop them crossing it.

==East Germany&#x27;s sea border==

The inner German border system also extended along the Baltic coast, dubbed the &quot;blue border&quot; or sea border of the GDR. The coastline was partly fortified along the east side mouth of the river Trave opposite the West German port of Travemünde. Watchtowers, walls and fences stood along the marshy shoreline to deter escape attempts and the water was patrolled by high-speed East German boats. The continuous line of the inner German border ended at the peninsula of Priwall, still belonging to Travemünde, but already on the east side of the Trave. From there to Boltenhagen, along some 15 km of the eastern shore of the Bay of Mecklenburg, the GDR shoreline was part of the restricted-access &quot;protective strip&quot; or &quot;Schutzgebiet&quot;. Security controls were imposed on the rest of the coast from Boltenhagen to Altwarp on the Polish border, including the whole of the islands of Poel, Rügen, Hiddensee, Usedom and the peninsulas of Darß and Wustrow.

The GDR implemented a variety of security measures along its Baltic coastline to hinder escape attempts. Camping and access to boats was severely limited and 27 watchtowers were built along the Baltic coastline. If a suspected escape attempt was spotted, high-speed patrol boats would be dispatched to intercept the fugitives. Armed patrols equipped with powerful mobile searchlights monitored the beaches.

Escapees aimed for the western (West German) shore of the Bay of Mecklenburg, a Danish lightship off the port of Gedser, the southern Danish islands of Lolland and Falster, or simply the international shipping lanes in the hope of being picked up by a passing freighter. The Baltic Sea was, however, an extremely dangerous escape route. In all, 189 people are estimated to have died attempting to flee via the Baltic.

Some East Germans tried to escape by jumping overboard from East German ships docked in Baltic harbours. So many East Germans attempted to flee this way in Danish ports that harbourmasters installed extra life-saving equipment on quaysides where East German vessels docked. The GDR&#x27;s government responded by stationing armed &quot;Transportpolizei&quot; (&quot;Trapos&quot;) on passenger ships to deal forcefully with escape attempts. On one occasion in August 1961, the &quot;Trapos&quot; caused an international incident in the Danish port of Gedser, when they beat up a would-be escapee on the quayside and opened fire, hitting a Danish boat in the harbour. The next day, thousands of Danes turned out to protest against &quot;&quot;Vopo&quot; (Volkspolizei) methods.&quot; The &quot;boat-jumpers&quot; were eventually stopped by further restricting the already limited travel rights of the GDR&#x27;s population.

==River borders==
The border also ran along part of the length of three major rivers of central Germany: the Elbe between Lauenburg and Schnackenburg (around ), the Werra and the Saale. The river borders were especially problematic; although the Western Allies and West Germany held that the demarcation line ran along the eastern bank, the East Germans and Soviets insisted that it was located in the middle of the river (the Thalweg principle). In practice, the waterways were shared 50/50 but the navigation channels often strayed across the line. This led to tense confrontations as East or West German vessels sought to assert their right to free passage on the waterways.

The rivers were as heavily guarded as other parts of the border. On the Elbe, East Germany maintained a fleet of about 30 fast patrol boats and West Germany had some sixteen customs vessels. The river border was closely watched for escapees, many of whom drowned attempting to cross. Numerous bridges blown up in the closing days of the Second World War remained in ruins, while other surviving bridges were blocked or demolished on the East German side. There were no ferry crossings and river barges were rigorously inspected by the GDR border guards. To prevent escape attempts, the East German river banks were barricaded with a continuous line of metal fences and concrete walls. At one location, Rüterberg on the Elbe, the border fortifications completely surrounded the village and sealed off the inhabitants from the rest of East Germany as well as the West.

==Border guards of the inner German border==

The guards of the inner German border comprised tens of thousands of military, paramilitary and civilian personnel from both East and West Germany, as well as from the United Kingdom, the United States and initially the Soviet Union.

===East Germany===
Following the end of the Second World War, the East German side of the border was guarded initially by the Border Troops (&quot;Pogranichnyie Voiska&quot;) of the Soviet NKVD (later the KGB). They were supplemented from 1946 by a locally recruited paramilitary force, the German Border Police (&quot;Deutsche Grenzpolizei&quot; or DGP), before the Soviets handed over full control of the border to the East Germans in 1955/56. In 1961 the DGP was converted into a military force within the National People&#x27;s Army (&quot;Nationale Volksarmee&quot;, NVA). The newly renamed Border Troops of the GDR (&quot;Grenztruppen der DDR&quot;, commonly nicknamed the &quot;Grenzer&quot;) came under the NVA&#x27;s Border Command or &quot;Grenzkommando&quot;. They were responsible for securing and defending the borders with West Germany, Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Baltic Sea and West Berlin. At their peak, the &quot;Grenztruppen&quot; had up to 50,000 personnel.

Around half of the &quot;Grenztruppen&quot; were conscripts, a lower proportion than in other branches of the East German armed forces. Many potential recruits were screened out as potentially unreliable; for instance, actively religious individuals or those with close relatives in West Germany. They were all subjected to close scrutiny to assure their political reliability and were given intensive ideological indoctrination. A special unit of the Stasi secret police worked covertly within the &quot;Grenztruppen&quot;, posing as regular border guards, between 1968 and 1985, to weed out potential defectors. One in ten officers and one in thirty enlisted men were said to have been recruited by the Stasi as informers. The Stasi regularly interviewed and maintained files on every guard. Stasi operatives were directly responsible for some aspects of security; passport control stations at crossings were manned by Stasi officers wearing &quot;Grenztruppen&quot; uniforms.

The &quot;Grenztruppen&quot; were closely watched to ensure that they could not take advantage of their inside knowledge to escape across the border. Patrols, watchtowers and observation posts were always manned by two or three guards at a time. They were not allowed to go out of each other&#x27;s sight in any circumstances. If a guard attempted to escape, his colleagues were under instructions to shoot him without hesitation or prior warning; 2,500 did escape to the West, 5,500 more were caught and imprisoned for up to five years, and a number were shot and killed or injured in the attempt.

The work of the guards involved carrying out repair work on the defences, monitoring the zone from watchtowers and bunkers and patrolling the line several times a day. Border Reconnaissance (&quot;Grenzaufklärungszug&quot; or GAK) soldiers, an elite reconnaissance force, carried out patrols and intelligence-gathering on the western side of the fence. Western visitors to the border were routinely photographed by the GAKs, who also oversaw work detachments maintaining the fence. The workers would be covered by machine guns to discourage them from attempting to escape.
===West Germany===

A number of West German state organisations were responsible for policing the western side of the border. These included the &quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot; (BGS, Federal Border Protection), the &quot;Bayerische Grenzpolizei&quot; (Bavarian Border Police) and the &quot;Bundeszollverwaltung&quot; (Federal Customs Administration). West German Army units were not allowed to approach the border without being accompanied by BGS personnel.

The BGS, established in 1951, was responsible for policing a zone deep along the border. Its 20,000 personnel were equipped with armoured cars, anti-tank guns, helicopters, trucks and jeeps. The BGS had limited police powers within its zone of operations to tackle threats to the peace of the border.

The &quot;Bundeszollverwaltung&quot; (BZV) was responsible for policing much of the inner German border and manning the West German crossings. Its personnel lived with their families in communities along the border and carried out regular policing tasks in a zone about deep along the border. They had the power to arrest and search suspects in their area of operations with the exception of the section of border in Bavaria. The BZV&#x27;s remit overlapped significantly with that of the BGS, which led to a degree of feuding between the two agencies.

The &quot;Bayerische Grenzpolizei&quot; (BGP) was a border police force raised by the Bavarian government to carry out policing duties along the inner German border&#x27;s in Bavaria. By the late 1960s, the BGP had 600 men patrolling its sector of the border, alongside the BZV, BGS and US Army. Its duties were very similar to those of the BZV, leading to turf wars between the two agencies.

===Western Allies===

The British Army conducted only relatively infrequent patrols along its sector of the inner German border, principally for training purposes and symbolic value. By the 1970s it was carrying out only one patrol a month, only rarely using helicopters or ground surveillance radar and erecting no permanent observation posts. The British border zone was divided into two sectors covering a total distance of about along the border. Unlike the Americans, the British did not assign specific units to border duty but rotated the task between the divisions of the British Army of the Rhine.

The border was also patrolled in the British sector by the British Frontier Service, the smallest of the Western border surveillance organisations. Its personnel served as a liaison between British military and political interests and the German agencies on the border. The BFS was disbanded in 1991 following Germany&#x27;s reunification.

The United States Army maintained a substantial and continuous military presence at the inner German border throughout the entire period from 1945 to after the end of the Cold War. Regular American soldiers manned the border from the end of the war until they were replaced in 1946 by the United States Constabulary, which was disbanded in 1952 after policing duties were transferred to the German authorities. It was replaced by two dedicated armoured cavalry regiments assigned to provide a permanent defence. The 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment based at Nuremberg and the 14th Armored Cavalry Regiment based at Fulda – later replaced by the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment – monitored the border using observation posts, ground and air patrols, countering intrusions and gathering intelligence on Warsaw Pact activities.

===Cross-border contacts===

There was little informal contact between the two sides; East German guards were under orders not to speak to Westerners. After the initiation of &quot;détente&quot; between East and West Germany in the 1970s, the two sides established procedures for maintaining formal contacts through fourteen direct telephone connections or &quot;Grenzinformationspunkte&quot; (GIP, &quot;border information points&quot;). They were used to resolve local problems affecting the border, such as floods, forest fires or stray animals.

For many years, the two sides waged a propaganda battle across the border using propaganda signs and canisters of leaflets fired or dropped into each other&#x27;s territory. West German leaflets sought to undermine the willingness of East German guards to shoot at refugees attempting to cross the border, while East German leaflets promoted the GDR&#x27;s view of West Germany as a militaristic regime intent on restoring Germany&#x27;s 1937 borders.

During the 1950s, West Germany sent millions of propaganda leaflets into East Germany each year. In 1968 alone, over 4,000 projectiles containing some 450,000 leaflets were fired from East Germany into the West. Another 600 waterproof East German leaflet containers were recovered from cross-border rivers. The &quot;leaflet war&quot; was eventually ended by mutual agreement in the early 1970s as part of the normalisation of relations between the two German states.

==Crossing the inner German border==
The inner German border was never entirely sealed in the fashion of the border between the two Koreas and could be crossed in either direction throughout the Cold War. The post-war agreements on the governance of Berlin specified that the Western Allies were to have access to the city via defined air, road, rail and river corridors. This was mostly respected by the Soviets and East Germans, albeit with periodic interruptions and harassment of travellers. Even during the Berlin Blockade of 1948, supplies could be brought in by air – the famous Berlin Airlift. Before and after the Blockade, Western civilian and military trains, road traffic and barges routinely passed through East Germany &quot;en route&quot; to Berlin.

The border could be crossed legally only through a limited number of air, road, rail and river routes. Foreigners were able to cross East German territory to or from West Berlin, Denmark, Sweden, Poland and Czechoslovakia. However, they had only limited and very tightly controlled access to the rest of East Germany and faced restrictions on travel, accommodation and expenditure. The process for driving from West Germany to West Berlin through East Germany was tightly controlled. After passing the crossing checkpoint, vehicles had to remain on designated autobahn routes and were not permitted to leave apart from at specified exits. If a vehicle accidentally took the wrong route, it had immediately to return to the highway. If a vehicle was caught outside the permitted route without a reasonable explanation, penalties followed. Inspections caused long delays to traffic at the crossing points. Westerners found crossing the inner German border to be a disturbing experience; Jan Morris wrote:

===Crossing points===
Before 1952, the inner German border could be crossed at almost any point along its length. The fortification of the border resulted in the severing of 32 railway lines, three autobahns, 31 main roads, eight primary roads, about 60 secondary roads and thousands of lanes and cart tracks. The number of crossing points was reduced to three air corridors, three road corridors, two railway lines and two river connections giving transit access to Berlin, plus a handful of additional crossing points for freight traffic. The situation improved somewhat after the initiation of &quot;détente&quot; in the 1970s. Additional crossings for so-called &quot;kleine Grenzverkehr&quot; – &quot;small border traffic&quot;, essentially meaning West German day trippers – were opened at various locations along the border. By 1982, there were 19 border crossings: six roads, three autobahns, eight railway lines plus the Elbe river and the Mittellandkanal. The largest was at Helmstedt-Marienborn on the Hanover–Berlin autobahn, through which 34.6 million travellers passed between 1985 and 1989. Codenamed Checkpoint Alpha, this was the first of three Allied checkpoints on the road to Berlin. The others were Checkpoint Bravo, where the autobahn crossed from East Germany into West Berlin, and most famous of all, Checkpoint Charlie, the only place where non-Germans could cross from West to East Berlin.

It was not possible to simply drive through the gap in the fence that existed at crossing points, as the East Germans installed high-impact vehicle barriers and mobile rolling barriers that could (and did) kill drivers that attempted to ram them. Vehicles were subjected to rigorous checks to uncover fugitives. Inspection pits and mirrors allowed the undersides of vehicles to be scrutinised. Probes were used to investigate the chassis and even the fuel tank, where a fugitive might be concealed, and vehicles could be partially dismantled in on-site garages. At Marienborn there was even a mortuary garage where coffins could be checked to confirm that the occupants really were dead. Passengers were checked and often interrogated about their travel plans and reasons for travelling. The system used simple technology and was slow, relying largely on vast card indexes recording travellers&#x27; details, but it was effective nonetheless; during the 28 years of operation of the Marienborn complex, no successful escapes were recorded.

===Border crossing regulations===

West Germans were able to cross the border relatively freely to visit relatives, but had to go through numerous bureaucratic formalities. East Germans were subjected to far stricter restrictions. It was not until November 1964 that they were allowed to visit the West at all, and even then only pensioners were allowed, as they were believed to be less likely to escape. This gave rise to a joke that only in East Germany did people look forward to old age. Younger East Germans were not allowed to travel to the West until 1972, though few did so until the mid-1980s. They had to apply for an exit visa and passport, pay a substantial fee, obtain permission from their employer and undergo an interrogation from the police. The odds were against successful applications, and only approximately 40,000 a year were approved. Refusal was often arbitrary, dependent on the goodwill of local officials. Members of the Party elite and cultural ambassadors were frequently given permission to travel, as were essential transport workers. However, they were not permitted to take their families with them.

Until the late 1980s, ordinary East Germans were only permitted to travel to the West on &quot;urgent family business&quot; such as the marriage, serious illness or death of a close relative. In February 1986, the regime relaxed the definition of &quot;urgent family business&quot;, which prompted a massive increase in the number of East German citizens able to travel to the West. The relaxation of the restrictions was reported to have been motivated by a desire on the part of the East German leadership to reduce their citizens&#x27; desire to travel and shrink the number applying to emigrate. In practice, however, it had exactly the opposite effect.

===Emigrating from East Germany===

There was no formal legal basis under which a citizen could emigrate from East Germany. In 1975, however, East Germany signed up to the Helsinki Accords, a pan-European treaty to improve relations between the countries of Europe. An increasing number of East German citizens sought to use the Accords&#x27; provision on freedom of movement to secure exit visas. By the late 1980s over 100,000 applications for visas were being submitted annually with around 15,000–25,000 being granted.

The GDR&#x27;s government nonetheless remained opposed to emigration and sought to dissuade would-be émigrés. The process of applying for an exit permit was deliberately made slow, demeaning, frustrating and often fruitless. Applicants were marginalised, demoted or sacked from their jobs, excluded from universities and subjected to social ostracisation. They faced the threat of having their children taken into state custody on the grounds that they were unfit to bring up children. The law was used to punish those who continued to apply for emigration; over 10,000 applicants were arrested by the Stasi between the 1970s and 1989. A report for the Central Committee&#x27;s security section noted: &quot;The emigration problem is confronting us with a fundamental problem of the GDR&#x27;s development. Experience shows that the current repertoire of solutions (improved travel possibilities, expatriation of applicants, etc.) have not brought the desired results, but rather the opposite.&quot; The agitation for emigration, the report concluded, &quot;threatens to undermine beliefs in the correctness of the Party&#x27;s policies.&quot;

===Ransoms and &quot;humanitarian releases&quot;===

East German citizens could also emigrate through the semi-secret route of being ransomed by the West German government in a process termed &quot;Freikauf&quot; (literally the buying of freedom). Between 1964 and 1989, 33,755 political prisoners were ransomed. A further 2,087 prisoners were released to the West under an amnesty in 1972. Another 215,000 people, including 2,000 children cut off from their parents, were allowed to leave East Germany to rejoin their families. In exchange, West Germany paid over 3.4 billion DM – nearly $2.3 billion at 1990 prices – in goods and hard currency. Those ransomed were valued on a sliding scale, ranging from around 1,875 DM for a worker to around 11,250 DM for a doctor. The justification, according to East Germany, was that this was compensation for the money invested by the state in the prisoner&#x27;s training. For a while, payments were made in kind using goods that were in short supply in East Germany, such as oranges, bananas, coffee and medical drugs. The average prisoner was worth around 4,000 DM worth of goods. The scheme was highly controversial in the West. &quot;Freikauf&quot; was denounced by many as human trafficking but was defended by others as an &quot;act of pure humanitarianism&quot;; the West German government budgeted money for &quot;Freikauf&quot; under the euphemistic heading of &quot;support of special aid measures of an all-German character.&quot;

==Escape attempts and victims of the inner German border==
===Refugee flows and escape attempts===

Between 1950 and 1988, around four million East Germans migrated to the West; 3.454 million left between 1950 and the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961. After the border was fortified and the Berlin Wall constructed, the number of illegal crossings fell dramatically and continued to fall as the defences were improved over the subsequent decades. However, escapees were never more than a small minority of the total number of emigrants from East Germany. During the 1980s, only about 1% of those who left East Germany did so by escaping across the border. Far more people left the country after being granted official permits, by fleeing through third countries or by being ransomed by the West German government.

The vast majority of refugees were motivated by economic concerns and sought to improve their living conditions and opportunities by migrating to the West. Events such as the crushing of the 1953 uprising, the imposition of collectivisation and East Germany&#x27;s final economic crisis in the late 1980s prompted surges in the number of escape attempts.

Attempts to flee across the border were carefully studied and recorded by the GDR authorities to identify possible weak points. These were addressed by strengthening the fortifications in vulnerable areas. At the end of the 1970s a study was carried out by the East German army to review attempted &quot;border breaches&quot; (&quot;Grenzdurchbrüche&quot;). It found that 4,956 people had attempted to escape across the border between 1 January 1974 and 30 November 1979. Of those, 3,984 people (80.4%) were arrested by the &quot;Volkspolizei&quot; in the &quot;Sperrzone&quot;, the outer restricted zone. 205 people (4.1%) were caught at the signal fence. Within the inner security zone, the &quot;Schutzstreifen&quot;, a further 743 people (15%) were arrested by the guards. 48 people (1%) were stopped – i.e. killed or injured – by landmines and 43 people (0.9%) by SM-70 directional mines on the fence. A further 67 people (1.35%) were intercepted at the fence (shot and/or arrested). A total of 229 people – just 4.6% of attempted escapees, representing less than one in twenty – made it across the fence. Of these, the largest number (129, or 55% of successful escapees) succeeded in making it across the fence in unmined sectors. 89 people (39% of escapees) managed to cross both the minefields and the fence, but just 12 people (6% of the total) succeeded in getting past the SM-70s booby-trap mines on the fences.

Escape attempts were severely punished by the GDR. From 1953, the regime described the act of escaping as &quot;Republikflucht&quot; (literally &quot;flight from the Republic&quot;), by analogy with the existing military term &quot;Fahnenflucht&quot; (&quot;desertion&quot;). A successful escapee was not a &quot;Flüchtling&quot; (&quot;refugee&quot;) but a &quot;Republikflüchtiger&quot; (&quot;Republic deserter&quot;). Those who attempted to escape were called &quot;Sperrbrecher&quot; (literally &quot;blockade runners&quot; but more loosely translated as &quot;border violators&quot;). Those who helped escapees were not &quot;Fluchthelfer&quot; (&quot;escape helpers&quot;), the Western term, but &quot;Menschenhändler&quot; (&quot;human traffickers&quot;). Such ideologically coloured language enabled the regime to portray border crossers as little better than traitors and criminals.

&quot;Republikflucht&quot; became a crime in 1957, punishable by heavy fines and up to three years&#x27; imprisonment. Any act associated with an escape attempt – including helping an escapee – was subject to this legislation. Those caught in the act were often tried for espionage as well and given proportionately harsher sentences. More than 75,000 people – an average of more than seven people a day – were imprisoned for attempting to escape across the border, serving an average of one to two years&#x27; imprisonment. Border guards who attempted to escape were treated much more harshly and were on average imprisoned for five years.

===Escape methods===

Refugees used a variety of methods to escape across the border. The great majority crossed on foot, though some took more unusual routes. One of the most spectacular was the escape in September 1979 of eight people from two families in a home-made hot-air balloon. Their flight involved an ascent to more than before landing near the West German town of Naila. Other escapees relied more on physical strength and endurance. An escapee in 1987 used meat hooks to scale the fences, while in 1971 a doctor swam across the Baltic Sea from Rostock almost to the Danish island of Lolland, before he was picked up by a West German yacht. Another escapee used an air mattress to escape across the Baltic in 1987. Mass escapes were rare. One of the few that succeeded took place on 2 October 1961, when 53 people from the border village of Böseckendorf – a quarter of the village&#x27;s population – escaped &quot;en masse&quot;, followed by another 13 inhabitants in February 1963. An unusual mass escape occurred in September 1964 when 14 East Germans, including eleven children, were smuggled across the border in a refrigerated truck. They were able to escape detection by being concealed under the carcasses of slaughtered pigs being transported to the West.

The traffic was not one-way; thousands of people migrated each year from West Germany to the east, motivated by reasons such as marital problems, family estrangement and homesickness. A number of Allied military personnel, including British, French, West German and United States troops, also defected. By the end of the Cold War, as many as 300 United States citizens were thought to have defected across the Iron Curtain for a variety of reasons – whether to escape criminal charges, for political reasons or because (as the &quot;St. Petersburg Times&quot; put it) &quot;girl-hungry GI&#x27;s [were tempted] with seductive sirens, who usually desert the love-lorn soldier once he is across the border&quot;. The fate of such defectors varied considerably. Some were sent straight to labour camps on charges of espionage. Others committed suicide, while a few were able to find wives and work on the eastern side of the border.

===Order to fire===
From 1945 onwards, unauthorised crossers of the inner German border risked being shot by Soviet or East German guards. The use of deadly force was termed the &quot;Schießbefehl&quot; (&quot;order to fire&quot; or &quot;command to shoot&quot;). It was formally in force as early as 1948, when regulations concerning the use of firearms on the border were promulgated. A regulation issued to East German police on 27 May 1952 stipulated that &quot;failure to obey the orders of the Border Patrol will be met by the use of arms.&quot; From the 1960s through to the end of the 1980s, the border guards were given daily verbal orders (&quot;Vergatterung&quot;) to &quot;track down, arrest or annihilate violators.&quot; The GDR formally codified its regulations on the use of deadly force in March 1982, when the State Border Law mandated that firearms were to be used as the &quot;maximum measure in the use of force&quot; against individuals who &quot;publicly attempt to break through the state border&quot;. The GDR&#x27;s leadership explicitly endorsed the use of deadly force. General Heinz Hoffmann, the GDR defence minister, declared in August 1966 that &quot;anyone who does not respect our border will feel the bullet.&quot; In 1974, Erich Honecker, as Chairman of the GDR&#x27;s National Defence Council, ordered: &quot;Firearms are to be ruthlessly used in the event of attempts to break through the border, and the comrades who have successfully used their firearms are to be commended.&quot;

The &quot;Schießbefehl&quot; was very controversial in the West and was singled out for criticism by the West Germans. The GDR authorities occasionally suspended the &quot;Schießbefehl&quot; on occasions when it would have been politically inconvenient to have to explain dead refugees, such as during a visit to the GDR by the French foreign minister in 1985. It was also a problem for many of the East German guards and was the motivating factor behind a number of escapes, when guards facing a crisis of confidence defected because of their unwillingness to shoot fellow citizens.

===Deaths on the border===

It is still not certain how many people died on the inner German border or who they all were, as the GDR treated such information as a closely guarded secret. But estimates have risen steadily since unification, as evidence has been gathered from East German records. As of 2009, unofficial estimates are up to 1,100 people, though officially released figures give a lower count for the death toll before and after the Berlin Wall was built.

There were many ways to die on the inner German border. Numerous escapees were shot by the border guards, while others were killed by mines and booby-traps. A substantial number drowned while trying to cross the Baltic and the Elbe river. Not all of those killed on the border were attempting to escape. On 13 October 1961, &quot;Westfälische Rundschau&quot; journalist Kurt Lichtenstein was shot on the border near the village of Zicherie after he attempted to speak with East German farm workers. His death aroused condemnation across the political spectrum in West Germany. The incident prompted students from Braunschweig to erect a sign on the border protesting the killing. An Italian truck driver and member of the Italian Communist Party was shot at a crossing point in August 1976; the GDR government was severely embarrassed and, unusually, offered an apology. In one notorious shooting on 1 May 1976, a former East German political prisoner, Michael Gartenschläger, who had fled to the West some years before, was ambushed and killed by a Stasi commando squad on the border near Büchen. The Stasi reported that he had been &quot;liquidated by security forces of the GDR&quot;.

Twenty-five East German border guards died after being shot from the Western side of the border or were killed by resisting escapees or (often accidentally) by their own colleagues. The East German government described them as &quot;victims of armed assaults and imperialist provocations against the state border of the GDR&quot; and alleged that &quot;bandits&quot; in the West took potshots at guards doing their duty – a version of events that was uncorroborated by Western accounts of border incidents.

The two sides commemorated their dead in very different ways. Various mostly unofficial memorials were set up on the western side by people seeking to commemorate victims of the border. West Germans such as Michael Gartenschläger and Kurt Lichtenstein were commemorated with signs and memorials, some of which were supported by the government. The death of East German Heinz-Josef Große in 1982 was commemorated annually by demonstrations on the Western side of the border. After the policy of &quot;détente&quot; was initiated in the 1970s this became politically inconvenient and state support for border memorials largely ceased.

The taboo in East Germany surrounding escapees meant that the great majority of deaths went unpublicised and uncommemorated. However, the deaths of border guards were used for GDR propaganda, which portrayed them as &quot;martyrs&quot;. Four stone memorials were erected in East Berlin to mark their deaths. The regime named schools, barracks and other public facilities after the dead guards and used their memorials as places of pilgrimage to signify that (as a slogan put it) &quot;their deaths are our commitment&quot; to maintaining the border. After 1989 the memorials were vandalised, neglected and ultimately removed.

==Fall of the inner German border==
The fall of the inner German border came rapidly and unexpectedly in November 1989, along with the fall of the Berlin Wall. Its integrity had been fatally compromised in May 1989 when a reformist Communist government in Hungary, supported by the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, began to dismantle its border fortifications. Hungary was already a popular tourist destination for East Germans. Its government was still notionally Communist but planned free elections and economic reform as part of a strategy of &quot;rejoining Europe&quot; and reforming its struggling economy. Opening the Hungarian border with Austria was essential to this effort; West Germany had secretly offered a much-needed hard currency loan of DM 500 million ($250 million) in return for allowing citizens of the GDR to freely emigrate. Pictures of the barbed-wire fences being taken down were transmitted into East Germany by West German television stations. They prompted a mass exodus by hundreds of thousands of East Germans which began in earnest in September 1989. In addition to those crossing the Hungarian border, tens of thousands of East Germans scaled the walls of the West German embassies in Prague, Warsaw and Budapest, where they were regarded as &quot;German citizens&quot; by the federal government, claiming &quot;asylum&quot;.

Czechoslovakia&#x27;s hardline communist government agreed to close its border with East Germany to choke off the exodus. The closure produced uproar across East Germany and the GDR government&#x27;s bid to humiliate refugees by expelling them from the country in sealed trains backfired disastrously. Torn-up identity papers and East German passports littered the train tracks as the refugees threw them out of the windows. When the trains passed through Dresden, 1,500 East Germans stormed the main railway station in an attempt to board. Dozens were injured, and the station concourse was virtually destroyed.

The small pro-democracy Monday demonstrations soon swelled into crowds of hundreds of thousands of people in cities across East Germany. The East German leadership considered using force but ultimately backed down, lacking support from the Soviet Union for a violent Tiananmen Square-style military intervention. Reformist members of the East German Politburo sought to rescue the situation by forcing the resignation of the hardline Party chairman Erich Honecker, replacing him in October 1989 with the marginally less hardline Egon Krenz. The new government sought to appease the protesters by reopening the border with Czechoslovakia. This, however, merely resulted in the resumption of the mass exodus through Hungary. On 8 November 1989, with huge demonstrations continuing across the country, the entire Politburo resigned and a new, more moderate Politburo was appointed under Krenz&#x27;s continued leadership.

===Opening of the border and the fall of the GDR===

The East German government sought to defuse the situation by relaxing the country&#x27;s border controls with effect from 10 November 1989; the announcement was on the evening of 9 November 1989 by Politburo member Günter Schabowski at a somewhat chaotic press conference in East Berlin, who proclaimed the new control regime as liberating the people from a situation of psychological pressure by legalising and simplifying migration. Misunderstanding the note passed to him about the decision to open the border, he announced the border would be opened &quot;immediately, without delay&quot;, rather than from the following day as the government had intended. Crucially, it was neither meant to be an uncontrolled opening nor to apply to East Germans wishing to visit the West as tourists. At an interview in English after the press conference, Schabowski told the NBC reporter Tom Brokaw that &quot;it is no question of tourism. It is a permission of leaving the GDR [permanently].&quot;

As the press conference had been broadcast live, within hours, thousands of people gathered at the Berlin Wall demanding that the guards open the gates. The border guards were unable to contact their superiors for instructions and, fearing a stampede, opened the gates. The iconic scenes that followed – people pouring into West Berlin, standing on the Wall and attacking it with pickaxes – were broadcast worldwide.

While the eyes of the world were on the &quot;Mauerfall&quot; (the fall of the Wall) in Berlin, a simultaneous process of &quot;Grenzöffnung&quot; (border opening) was taking place along the entire length of the inner German border. Existing crossings were opened immediately. Within the first four days, 4.3 million East Germans – a quarter of the country&#x27;s entire population – poured into West Germany. At the Helmstedt crossing point on the Berlin–Hanover autobahn, cars were backed up for 65 km (40 miles); some drivers waited 11 hours to cross to the West. The border was opened in stages over the next few months. Many new crossing points were created, reconnecting communities that had been separated for nearly 40 years. BBC correspondent Ben Bradshaw described the jubilant scenes at the railway station of Hof in Bavaria in the early hours of 12 November:

Even the East German border guards were not immune to the euphoria. One of them, Peter Zahn, described how he and his colleagues reacted to the opening of the border:


To the surprise of many West Germans, many of the East German visitors spent their DM 100 &quot;welcome money&quot; buying great quantities of bananas, a highly prized rarity in the East. For months after the opening of the border, bananas were sold out at supermarkets along the western side of the border as East Germans bought up whole crates, believing supplies would soon be exhausted. The rush for fruit made the banana the unofficial symbol of the changes in East Germany, which some dubbed the &quot;banana revolution&quot;. Some West German leftists protested what they saw as rampant consumerism by tossing bananas at East Germans coming to visit the West. The easterners&#x27; obsession with bananas was famously spoofed by the West German satirical magazine &quot;Titanic&quot; on the front cover of its November 1989 edition, which depicted &quot;Easterner Gaby (17), happy to be in West Germany: My first banana&quot;. Gaby was shown holding a large peeled cucumber.

The opening of the border had a profound political and psychological effect on the East German public. For many people the very existence of the GDR, which the SED had justified as the first &quot;Socialist state on German soil&quot;, came to seem pointless. The state was bankrupt, the economy was collapsing, the political class was discredited, the governing institutions were in chaos and the people were demoralised by the evaporation of the collective assumptions which had underpinned their society for forty years. Membership of the Party collapsed and Krenz himself resigned on 6 December 1989 after only 50 days in office, handing over to the moderate Hans Modrow. The removal of restrictions on travel prompted hundreds of thousands of East Germans to migrate to the West – more than 116,000 did so between 9 November and 31 December 1989, compared with 40,000 for the whole of the previous year.

The new East German leadership initiated &quot;round table&quot; talks with opposition groups, similar to the processes that had led to multi-party elections in Hungary and Poland. When the first free elections were held in East Germany in March 1990, the former SED, which had renamed itself as the Party of Democratic Socialism, was swept from power and replaced by a pro-reunification Alliance for Germany coalition led by the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), Chancellor Kohl&#x27;s party. Both countries progressed rapidly towards reunification, while international diplomacy paved the way abroad. In July 1990, monetary union was achieved. A &quot;Treaty on the establishment of a unified Germany&quot; was agreed on in August 1990 and political reunification took place on 3 October 1990.

===Abandonment of the border===

The border fortifications were progressively torn down and eventually abandoned in the months following its opening. Dozens of new crossings were opened by February 1990, and the guards no longer carried weapons or made much effort to check travellers&#x27; passports. The guards&#x27; numbers were rapidly reduced; half were dismissed within five months of the opening. On 1 July 1990 the border was abandoned and the &quot;Grenztruppen&quot; were officially abolished; all but 2,000 of them were dismissed or transferred to other jobs.

The Bundeswehr gave the remaining border guards and other ex-NVA soldiers the task of clearing the fortifications, which was completed only in 1994. The scale of the task was immense, involving both the clearing of the fortifications and the rebuilding of hundreds of roads and railway lines. A serious complication was the presence of mines along the border. Although the 1.4 million mines laid by the GDR were supposed to have been removed during the 1980s, it turned out that 34,000 were unaccounted for. A further 1,100 mines were found and removed following reunification at a cost of more than DM 250 million, in a programme that was not concluded until the end of 1995.

The border clearers&#x27; task was aided unofficially by German civilians from both sides of the former border who scavenged the installations for fencing, wire and blocks of concrete to use in home improvements. Much of the fence was sold to a West German scrap-metal company. Environmental groups undertook a programme of re-greening the border, planting new trees and sowing grass seeds to fill in the clear-cut area along the line.

==Border area today==
Very little remains of the installations along the former inner German border. At least 30 public, private and municipal museums along the old line present displays of equipment and other artifacts relating to the border. Among the preserved sites are several dozen watchtowers, short stretches of the fence and associated installations (some of which have been reconstructed), sections of the wall still &quot;in situ&quot; at Hötensleben and Mödlareuth, and a number of buildings related to the border, such as the GDR crossing point at Marienborn and Teistungen.

Substantial sections of the &quot;Kolonnenweg&quot; remain in place to serve as farm and forestry access roads, though the accompanying anti-vehicles ditches, fences and other obstacles have been almost entirely removed. Artworks, commemorative stones, memorials and signs have been erected at many points along the former border to mark its opening, to remember its victims and to record the division and reunification of Germany.

The closure of the border region for nearly 40 years created a haven for wildlife in some places. Although parts of the East German side of the border were farmed, intensive farming of the kind practised elsewhere in Germany was absent and large areas were untouched by agriculture. Conservationists became aware as early as the 1970s that the border had become a refuge for rare species of animals and plants. Their findings led the Bavarian government to begin a programme of buying land along the border to ensure its protection from development.

In December 1989, only a month after the opening of the border, conservationists from East and West Germany met to work out a plan to establish a &quot;German Green Belt&quot; (&quot;Grünes Band Deutschland&quot;) stretching from the Baltic Sea to the Czech border. The Bundestag voted unanimously in December 2004 to extend federal protection to the Green Belt and incorporate it into a &quot;European Green Belt&quot; being developed along the entire length of the former Iron Curtain. The German Green Belt now links 160 natural parks, 150 flora-and-fauna areas, three UNESCO biosphere reservations and the Harz Mountains National Park. It is home to a wide variety of species that are rare elsewhere in Germany, including the wild cat, black stork, otter and rare mosses and orchids. Most of Germany&#x27;s Red Kites – more than half of the 25,000 that live in Europe – live along the former border. The Bund Naturschutz, one of Germany&#x27;s largest conservation groups, is campaigning to extend the area within the Green Belt designated as nature conservation zones.

==See also==
* Berlin border crossings
* Czechoslovakian border fortifications during the Cold War
* Israeli separation barrier
* Military Demarcation Line (Korea)

==Notes==

==References==
===Books===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
===News reports===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


===Other sources===

* Ministry of Federal Affairs, Displaced Persons and Refugees, Bonn. &quot;Attention Demarcation Line!&quot;. Leaflet published &quot;c.&quot; mid-1960s.
* Synopsis of &quot;Grenzer&quot; (Filmstudio der Nationalen Volksarmee, 1981, dir. Reiner Bachmann, Jochen Hoffmann). Progress Film-Verleih, Berlin. Retrieved 6 August 2009.
* Bild 175-P05-00002-0001 (Picture 175-P05-00002-0001) in the collection of the Gesamtdeutsches Institut – Bundesanstalt für gesamtdeutsche Aufgaben (All-German Institut – Federal Institute for All-German Affairs). Photographer: n.a. Dated: &quot;c.&quot; 1961/7. Held in: Bundesarchiv Deutschland (Federal Archive of Germany) Last accessed: 26 October 2009.
* Gesetz über die Staatsgrenze der Deutschen Demokratischen Republik (Law on the State Border of the German Democratic Republic) (25 March 1982)
* Gedenkstätte Deutsche Teilung Marienborn (Memorial to the division of Germany in Marienborn).
* Grenzmuseum Eichsfeld (Border Museum Eichsfeld).
* Zonengrenze-Museum Helmstedt (Zonal Border Museum Helmstedt)
* Grenzturm e.V, Kühlungsborn (Baltic Border Tower in Kühlungsborn). English German
==External links==

* Grenzinnerungen. Comprehensive overview of the inner German border system with lots of photos. (In German)
* Information on the GDR border system (in German, but with many pictures)
* Experten Forum DDR Grenze (in German and English, with pictures and videos)
* Allied military trains crossing the zonal border at Marienborn. Includes 1969 sound clip with guard dogs.
* Disturbed Ground: Journeys along the remnants of the Iron Curtain. A free book by Eron Witzel about a series of journeys along the remnants of the border in 2003. (In English)
* Grenzer. Documents the soldiers on both sides who guarded the inner German border during the Cold War. (In English)
* European Green Belt. An initiative to turn the length of the former Iron Curtain into an international network of protected areas for wildlife. (In English)
* Das Grünes Band. Project of the conservation organisation BUND to preserve the inner German border as a nature reserve. (In German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="4" end="23" title="Inner German border" label="inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="135" end="161" title="East Germany" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="190" end="217" title="West Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="327" end="338" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="377" end="387" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405089" start="391" end="405" title="Protection of Czechoslovak borders during the Cold War" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="443" end="460" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="506" end="513" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q55300" start="518" end="540" title="Soviet occupation zone" label="Soviet occupation zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q704449" start="833" end="850" title="GDR border guards" label="GDR border guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944642" start="910" end="916" title="Border guards of the inner German border" label="guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="989" end="993" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="998" end="1009" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1099" end="1123" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="1137" end="1149" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1205" end="1213" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q695699" start="1340" end="1354" title="Republikflucht" label="Republikflucht"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1772" end="1783" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="2420" end="2440" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q734890" start="2585" end="2604" title="European Green Belt" label="European Green Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="2698" end="2711" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="2719" end="2728" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2991" end="3020" title="Allies of World War II" label="Second World War Allies&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="3240" end="3262" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="3363" end="3375" title="British Occupation zone of Germany" label="British zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="3398" end="3411" title="American Occupation of Germany" label="American zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q55300" start="3431" end="3442" title="Soviet occupation zone" label="Soviet zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944917" start="3481" end="3485" title="Monnet plan" label="zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="4057" end="4079" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035794" start="4361" end="4377" title="capitalist state" label="capitalist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146844" start="4383" end="4405" title="free and fair election" label="free and fair election"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="4471" end="4486" title="communist state" label="communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4568" end="4580" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="4613" end="4625" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="5403" end="5410" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5491" end="5502" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q883338" start="5672" end="5689" title="interzonal traffic" label="between the zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="5754" end="5758" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56040" start="6456" end="6468" title="Volkspolizei" label="Volkspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q56027" start="6724" end="6741" title="Bundesgrenzschutz" label="Bundesgrenzschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="9104" end="9116" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424107" start="9830" end="9844" title="expanded metal" label="expanded metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="10635" end="10647" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q169505" start="10661" end="10671" title="Ostpolitik" label="Ostpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="11601" end="11612" title="Red Army" label="Soviet army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="11624" end="11641" title="Soviet-Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="11965" end="11973" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q157011" start="14357" end="14373" title="East German mark" label="East German mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q704449" start="14594" end="14611" title="Border Troops of the German Democratic Republic" label="GDR border troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q392752" start="15426" end="15438" title="Agent provocateur" label="provocateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q672150" start="16214" end="16224" title="Mödlareuth" label="Mödlareuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q631315" start="16752" end="16757" title="Kella, Thuringia" label="Kella"/>
<link wikidata="Q321792" start="17168" end="17178" title="Travemünde" label="Travemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424107" start="18613" end="18627" title="expanded metal" label="expanded metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="18709" end="18720" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q89556" start="22531" end="22546" title="concertina wire" label="concertina wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424107" start="22980" end="22994" title="expanded metal" label="expanded metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351692" start="24423" end="24428" title="SM-70" label="SM-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="24609" end="24617" title="Fragmentation (weaponry)" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="25459" end="25477" title="no-man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no-man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302" start="27115" end="27120" title="Trave" label="Trave"/>
<link wikidata="Q631074" start="27485" end="27496" title="Boltenhagen" label="Boltenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q446425" start="27749" end="27756" title="Altwarp" label="Altwarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193" start="27817" end="27821" title="Poel" label="Poel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="27823" end="27828" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218" start="27830" end="27839" title="Hiddensee" label="Hiddensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255" start="27841" end="27847" title="Usedom" label="Usedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q694117" start="27870" end="27874" title="Darß" label="Darß"/>
<link wikidata="Q503759" start="27879" end="27886" title="Wustrow, Nordvorpommern" label="Wustrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q831515" start="28384" end="28393" title="lightvessel" label="lightship"/>
<link wikidata="Q634481" start="28410" end="28416" title="Gedser" label="Gedser"/>
<link wikidata="Q605839" start="28449" end="28456" title="Lolland" label="Lolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q735905" start="28461" end="28468" title="Falster" label="Falster"/>
<link wikidata="Q896886" start="29052" end="29068" title="Transportpolizei" label="Transportpolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q56040" start="29469" end="29481" title="Volkspolizei" label="Volkspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q492380" start="29761" end="29770" title="Lauenburg" label="Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q638404" start="29775" end="29788" title="Schnackenburg" label="Schnackenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424" start="29804" end="29809" title="Werra" label="Werra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678" start="29818" end="29823" title="Saale" label="Saale"/>
<link wikidata="Q944672" start="30066" end="30073" title="Thalweg" label="Thalweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q896118" start="31020" end="31029" title="Rüterberg" label="Rüterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="31656" end="31660" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="31672" end="31675" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q155740" start="32011" end="32031" title="Nationale Volksarmee" label="Nationale Volksarmee"/>
<link wikidata="Q704449" start="32063" end="32087" title="Border Troops of the German Democratic Republic" label="Border Troops of the GDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="34949" end="34965" title="German Army" label="West German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="35999" end="36006" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="36333" end="36345" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="36887" end="36912" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480076" start="36974" end="36998" title="British Frontier Service" label="British Frontier Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="37260" end="37278" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576258" start="37545" end="37571" title="United States Constabulary" label="United States Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600858" start="37700" end="37726" title="List of US Army armored cavalry regiments" label="armoured cavalry regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q210609" start="37772" end="37800" title="2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment" label="2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="37810" end="37819" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550002" start="37828" end="37857" title="14th Armored Cavalry Regiment" label="14th Armored Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963" start="37867" end="37872" title="Fulda" label="Fulda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756475" start="37897" end="37926" title="11th Armored Cavalry Regiment" label="11th Armored Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="39657" end="39686" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="border between the two Koreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="40060" end="40075" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="40134" end="40148" title="Berlin Airlift" label="Berlin Airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395844" start="41299" end="41309" title="Jan Morris" label="Jan Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="41921" end="41928" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746627" start="42024" end="42044" title="small border traffic" label="small border traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48480" start="42267" end="42282" title="Mittellandkanal" label="Mittellandkanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q68689" start="42643" end="42661" title="Checkpoint Charlie" label="Checkpoint Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q318161" start="45742" end="45758" title="Helsinki Accords" label="Helsinki Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="48460" end="48477" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q695699" start="51439" end="51453" title="Republikflucht" label="Republikflucht"/>
<link wikidata="Q503450" start="53239" end="53244" title="Naila" label="Naila"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="53404" end="53414" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q605839" start="53459" end="53466" title="Lolland" label="Lolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020086" start="53716" end="53728" title="Böseckendorf" label="Böseckendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q62963" start="56178" end="56192" title="Heinz Hoffmann" label="Heinz Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="56331" end="56345" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q97131" start="58020" end="58037" title="Kurt Lichtenstein" label="Kurt Lichtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58081" end="58089" title="Zicherie" label="Zicherie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="58263" end="58275" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="58372" end="58395" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58603" end="58625" title="SM-70#Michael Gartenschläger" label="Michael Gartenschläger"/>
<link wikidata="Q631683" start="58740" end="58746" title="Büchen" label="Büchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700533" start="59716" end="59733" title="Heinz-Josef Große" label="Heinz-Josef Große"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="60904" end="60921" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="61826" end="61832" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="61834" end="61840" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="61845" end="61853" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="62424" end="62431" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q263047" start="62606" end="62627" title="Monday demonstrations in East Germany" label="Monday demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="62849" end="62865" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607" start="63031" end="63045" title="Erich Honecker" label="Erich Honecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602" start="63111" end="63121" title="Egon Krenz" label="Egon Krenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q57445" start="63770" end="63787" title="Günter Schabowski" label="Günter Schabowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="64421" end="64424" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="64434" end="64444" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q264618" start="65716" end="65728" title="Ben Bradshaw" label="Ben Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938" start="65785" end="65788" title="Hof, Germany" label="Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q47879" start="66781" end="66788" title="Titanic (magazine)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="67147" end="67150" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="SED"/>
<link wikidata="Q57241" start="67649" end="67660" title="Hans Modrow" label="Hans Modrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q561886" start="68092" end="68132" title="East German general election, 1990" label="free elections were held in East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q152554" start="68196" end="68225" title="Party of Democratic Socialism (Germany)" label="Party of Democratic Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q521030" start="68284" end="68304" title="Alliance for Germany" label="Alliance for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="69269" end="69279" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q504045" start="70956" end="70966" title="Teistungen" label="Teistungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="71566" end="71583" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q883390" start="72105" end="72122" title="German Green Belt" label="German Green Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="72223" end="72232" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="72525" end="72531" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398" start="72693" end="72704" title="black stork" label="black stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="72764" end="72772" title="Red Kite" label="Red Kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q897009" start="72861" end="72877" title="Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland" label="Bund Naturschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q456362" start="73043" end="73066" title="Berlin border crossings" label="Berlin border crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405089" start="73069" end="73126" title="Czechoslovakian border fortifications during the Cold War" label="Czechoslovakian border fortifications during the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948166" start="73129" end="73155" title="Israeli barrier (disambiguation)" label="Israeli separation barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q588599" start="73158" end="73191" title="Military Demarcation Line" label="Military Demarcation Line (Korea)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73434" end="73461" title=":File:Attention demarcation line.jpg" label="Attention Demarcation Line!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849190" wikidata="Q42624" url="?curid=849190" title="Casorezzo">
<text>Casorezzo ( , locally &quot;Casoesso&quot; ) is a town and comune in the Metropolitan City of Milan, Lombardy, northern Italy, about from Milan, Italy.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42624" start="0" end="9" title="Casorezzo" label="Casorezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288155" start="73" end="99" title="Metropolitan City of Milan" label="Metropolitan City of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="101" end="109" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="138" end="143" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="145" end="150" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849192" wikidata="Q7489838" url="?curid=849192" title="Shark net">
<text>A shark net is a submerged section of gillnets placed at beaches designed to intercept large marine animals including sharks, with the aim to reduce the likelihood of shark attacks on swimmers. Shark nets used are gillnets which is a wall of netting that hangs in the water and captures the marine animals by entanglement, however only around 10% of catch is the intended target shark species. The nets in Queensland, Australia, are typically 186m long, set at a depth of 6m, have a mesh size of 500mm and are designed to catch sharks longer than 2m in length. The nets in New South Wales, Australia, are typically 150m long, set on the sea floor, extending approximately 6m up the water column, are designed to catch sharks longer than 2m in length. Shark nets do not create an exclusion zone between sharks and humans, and are not to be confused with shark barriers.

Shark nets do not offer complete protection but work on the principle of &quot;fewer sharks, fewer attacks&quot;. They aim to reduce occurrence via shark mortality. Shark nets such as those in New South Wales are designed to entangle and capture sharks that pass near them. Reducing the local shark populations reduces the chance of an attack. Historical shark attack figures suggest that the use of shark nets and drumlines does markedly reduce the incidence of shark attack when implemented on a regular and consistent basis. However a 2019 study argued this conclusion overlooks key factors. The large mesh size of the nets is designed specifically to capture sharks and prevent their escape until eventually, they drown. Due to boating activity, the nets also float 4 metres or more below the surface and do not connect with the shoreline (excluding Hong Kong&#x27;s shark barrier nets) thus allowing sharks the opportunity to swim over and around nets. Shark nets can cost A$1 million or A$20,000 per beach per year.

Shark nets have been criticized by environmentalists, conservationists and animal rights activists — they say shark nets are unethical and harm the marine ecosystem. They also argue there is no science showing that nets make the ocean safer for people.

==History==
Shark net meshing was developed by the New South Wales Fisheries in 1937, after a decade and a half of repeated shark attacks off Sydney beaches. In March 1935, for example, two people — one at North Narrabeen and one at Maroubra — perished after great white shark attacks in a single week. The meshing was never designed to enclose a piece of water, as barrier nets couldn&#x27;t survive a surf zone. Instead, it was designed to catch large sharks as they swam within range of the surf. At first, the catch was huge; over 600 sharks in the first year of operation, off just a few Sydney beaches. But over time, even without adjusting for the spread of the program across almost all Sydney beaches and into Wollongong and Newcastle, the catch declined. Today&#x27;s New South Wales meshing annual average catch is 143 sharks, many of which are released alive.

Nets were first deployed off certain beaches in KwaZulu-Natal (formerly Natal), South Africa, in 1952.

Shark nets were also used off Dunedin, New Zealand for roughly 40 years, and were removed in 2011. The nets were found to be detrimental to the environment; 700 non-target species were killed. No shark attacks have occurred since their removal.

As of 2018, shark nets are used in New South Wales, Queensland and KwaZulu-Natal. In August 2018, it was announced that the nets in northern New South Wales would be removed, but that the nets in Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong would stay. The New South Wales Green party said they wanted all shark nets removed.

==Effectiveness==
Ongoing shark control programs have been very successful in reducing the incidence of shark attack at the protected beaches. In the years from 1900 to 1937, 13 people died off New South Wales surf beaches after shark attacks; over the next 72 years, the death rate fell to eight, only one of which was at a meshed beach. This in a period when the New South Wales human population rose from 1.4 million to seven million — and when more people began going to the beach.

In Queensland, there has been only one fatal attack on a controlled beach since 1962, compared to 27 fatal attacks between 1919 and 1961. Statistics from the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries indicate that before nets were introduced in New South Wales in 1936 there was an average of one fatal shark attack every year. There has been only one fatal attack on a protected beach since then and that was in 1951. Similarly, between 1943 and 1951 the South African city of Durban experienced seven fatal attacks but there have been none since nets were introduced in 1952. A more recent comparison shows that in South Africa there were three shark attacks, none fatal, at protected beaches in KwaZulu-Natal between 1990 and 2011, while there were 20 fatal attacks in the same period at unprotected beaches in the Eastern and Western Cape Provinces.

However, the net program in New South Wales has been called &quot;outdated and ineffective&quot; by environmental groups; they argue that shark nets do not protect swimmers. 65% of shark attacks in New South Wales occurred at netted beaches.

==Environmental impact==
Shark nets result in incidence of bycatch, including threatened and endangered species like sea turtles, dugongs, dolphins and whales. In Queensland in the 2011/12 summer season there were 700 sharks caught, 290 above 4 metres in shark nets and drum lines.

In New South Wales, the meshing averages one humpback whale every two years; the whale is almost always released alive. In Queensland in 2015, the bycatch included one bottlenose and seven common dolphin (one released alive), 11 catfish, eight cow-nose rays, nine eagle rays, 13 loggerhead turtles, five manta rays (all but one survived), eight shovelnose rays, three toadfish, four tuna, and a white spotted eagle, which was safely released.

New South Wales and Queensland also utilize acoustic pingers attached to the nets to reduce bycatch of dolphins, whales and other marine mammals. Use of the pingers has been shown to significantly reduce marine mammal bycatch.

The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being &quot;extremely destructive&quot; to marine life. Between September 2017 and April 2018, more than 403 animals perished in the nets in New South Wales, including 10 critically endangered grey nurse sharks, 7 dolphins, 7 green sea turtles and 14 great white sharks. Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks died in the nets in New South Wales — also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals perished in the nets. More than 5,000 marine turtles have been caught on the nets. The New South Wales government prohibits people from rescuing entangled animals — this prohibition has been called &quot;heartless and cruel&quot;.

In a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have perished in KwaZulu-Natal&#x27;s shark net program. During the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins died in KwaZulu-Natal&#x27;s shark net program.

Animal welfare groups note the suffering and cruelty that nets inflict upon animals, such as lacerations, stress, pain, and disease. They suggest alternatives such as surf lifesaving patrols, public education on shark behaviour, radio signals, sonar technology and electric nets.

Political scientist Christopher Neff notes, &quot;Internationally, shark nets have been labeled a &#x27;key threatening process&#x27; for killing endangered species.&quot; He adds: &quot; ... killing endangered species to boost public confidence or to show government action is not workable. It is a disservice to the public.&quot; Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark nets a &quot;knee-jerk reaction&quot; and says, &quot;sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans.&quot; Sea World Research &amp; Rescue Foundation also oppose the use of shark nets to cull shark populations &quot;In an ideal world we would like for there to be no culling of sharks in Australia and around the world however, this is not a reality. We understand the pressure on governments to protect swimmers through the use of shark control programs. We continue our stance against shark nets and maintain our rescue operations to save dolphins, whales, turtles that become entrapped within them, along with working with the authoritative agencies to research improved methods which will lessen the impact on our marine life&quot;.

However bycatch from shark nets is minor compared to bycatch from other activities. On average 15 Great white sharks are caught by the NSW and Queensland shark control programme each year, compared to 186 caught in Australia from other activities. Australia&#x27;s commercial shark fishing industry is catching over 1200 tonne of shark each year, of which 130 are Great white sharks. The NSW prawn trawling industry alone results in 64 tonne of shark as bycatch each year, with two thirds dying. Tuna and swordfish longline fishing off the coast of South Africa reported 39,000 to 43,000 sharks died each year between 1995 and 2005. &quot;Sharksavers&quot; estimates that in total 50 million sharks are caught unintentionally each year as bycatch by the commercial fishing industry.

==Cost==

Total cost for the Shark netting program in NSW for the 2009/10 year was approximately AUD $1m, which included the cost of the nets, contractors, observers and shark technician, shark meshing equipment (dolphin pingers and whale alarms etc.), and compliance audit activities. For the 51 beaches protected, this represents a financial cost of approximately AUD$20,000 per beach per year.

==Australia==

In New South Wales, Australia, 51 beaches are netted. The nets are maintained by the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries. The nets are generally 150 metres long, 6 m wide and &quot;bottom-set&quot; on the seabed in depths of 10 m. The nets can be 500 metres from the beach. The mesh is sized 50–60 centimetres. Nets are lifted every 24 to 48 hours for servicing so as to prevent rotting, to clean out debris and to remove dead sharks and other marine life. It is said that 35–50% of the sharks are entangled from the beach side. Acoustic &quot;pingers&quot; have been fitted to the nets to warn off dolphins and whales and the nets are not in place in winter, the whale migration season. The department states that the nets have &quot;never been regarded as a means of absolutely preventing any attacks&quot;, but help to deter sharks from establishing territories. From 1950 to 2008, hundreds of great white sharks and tiger sharks perished in the nets in New South Wales.

In Queensland, Australia, drum lines are used in combination with shark nets. Queensland&#x27;s Shark Control Program has been in place since the early 1960s. In Queensland&#x27;s 2011/12 summer season there were 714 sharks caught, 281 above 2 metres in shark nets and drum lines. Since 1997, 500-900 sharks perished annually in the program, including several shark species of conservation concern. They include the following:

A fatal attack in Queensland occurred in January 2006 at Amity Point on North Stradbroke Island. The water at this location drops off to 30 metres depth, and bull sharks are known to frequent the area. Drum lines were installed at beaches around the island at the time. Another shark attack occurred at Greenmount Beach on the Gold Coast in 2020. Drumlines and shark nets were installed at the beach at this time.

==South Africa==
In South Africa, shark nets are installed at numerous beaches in KwaZulu-Natal by the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board. Shark nets have been installed in KwaZulu-Natal since the 1950s and have greatly reduced the number of shark attacks along the beaches where they are installed. However more than 33,000 sharks have perished in KwaZulu-Natal&#x27;s nets in a 30-year period. KwaZulu-Natal&#x27;s shark net program has been called &quot;archaic&quot; and &quot;disastrous to the ecosystem&quot;.

==See also==
*Drum line
*Shark attack prevention
*Shark Shield
*Shark proof cage
*Shark culling

==References==
==External links==

*Shark Nets at the Smithsonian Ocean Portal
* Beyond the panic: the facts about shark nets (Coastalwatch - surf website)
* Baby whale dies in shark net (News24)
* ABC story detailing history and science behind shark nets</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7489838" start="2" end="11" title="Shark net" label="shark net"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474920" start="38" end="46" title="Gillnetting" label="gillnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="57" end="62" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q900214" start="167" end="179" title="shark attack" label="shark attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="184" end="191" title="swimmer" label="swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474920" start="214" end="222" title="Gillnetting" label="gillnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908696" start="853" end="866" title="shark barrier" label="shark barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1063" end="1078" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1724" end="1733" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="1968" end="1981" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3405" end="3420" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="3422" end="3432" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="3437" end="3450" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="3566" end="3572" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="3574" end="3583" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="3588" end="3598" title="Wollongong, New South Wales" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q900214" start="5215" end="5227" title="shark attack" label="shark attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q814689" start="5336" end="5343" title="bycatch" label="bycatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="5370" end="5388" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="5394" end="5404" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129544" start="5407" end="5413" title="dugong" label="dugong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="5416" end="5423" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="5429" end="5434" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309090" start="5547" end="5557" title="Drum line (shark control)" label="drum lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q625161" start="6490" end="6506" title="grey nurse shark" label="grey nurse shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="6511" end="6518" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="6523" end="6539" title="green sea turtle" label="green sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="6548" end="6565" title="great white shark" label="great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188212" start="6595" end="6606" title="tiger shark" label="tiger shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="6616" end="6633" title="great white shark" label="great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="7025" end="7038" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="7192" end="7206" title="Animal welfare" label="Animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q114197669" start="7359" end="7374" title="surf lifesaving" label="surf lifesaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q113030104" start="7493" end="7509" title="Christopher Pepin-Neff" label="Christopher Neff"/>
<link wikidata="Q505518" start="8057" end="8066" title="Sea World (Australia)" label="Sea World"/>
<link wikidata="Q814689" start="9427" end="9434" title="bycatch" label="bycatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="9888" end="9903" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9905" end="9914" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="10876" end="10886" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468553" start="11358" end="11369" title="Amity Point, Queensland" label="Amity Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="11373" end="11396" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="North Stradbroke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604331" start="11604" end="11620" title="Greenmount Beach, Queensland" label="Greenmount Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="11628" end="11638" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="11736" end="11748" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="11798" end="11811" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449896" start="11819" end="11845" title="KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board" label="KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309090" start="12239" end="12248" title="Drum line (shark control)" label="Drum line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456528" start="12250" end="12273" title="Shark attack prevention" label="Shark attack prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327421" start="12275" end="12287" title="Shark Shield" label="Shark Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489830" start="12289" end="12305" title="Shark proof cage" label="Shark proof cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741296" start="12307" end="12320" title="Shark culling" label="Shark culling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849193" wikidata="Q1142205" url="?curid=849193" title="Tama Toshi Monorail Line">
<text>The , also referred to as the Tama Monorail, is a monorail system in Western Tokyo.

Operated by the Tokyo Tama Intercity Monorail Co., Ltd., the double tracked, monorail line carries passengers between the suburban cities of Higashiyamato and Tama via Tachikawa, Hino, and Hachiōji in 36 minutes. 

, , and stations are the most important stations, enabling transfer at Tachikawa to JR East&#x27;s Chūō Main Line and at Tama-Center to the Odakyu Tama Line and Keio Sagamihara Line.

Tourist venues along the line include Tama Zoo and Keio Rail-Land (a railway museum), both adjacent to Tama-Dōbutsukōen Station.

== Stations ==
All stations are located in Tokyo. Most stations have an associated shape/image (as seen in the left-most column of the table below).

== History ==
The line opened in two phases. The section from Kamikitadai to Tachikawa-Kita opened in November 1998 while the section south to Tama-Center opened in January 2000.

Station numbering was introduced to all stations in February 2018.

=== Future plans ===
As of October 2022, there are plans to extend the route. One route is an extension north from the current terminus at Kamikitadai to Hakonegasaki Station on the Hachiko Line. The other two are southbound extensions from Tama-Center to Hachioji and Machida respectively.

==== Kamikitadai to Hakonegasaki ====
In 2016, a proposal was made to extend the line from the current northern terminus at Kamikitadai Station to Hakonegasaki Station on the Hachikō Line. The planned extension to Hakonegasaki had been considered since planning for the entire route began in 1981. The seven-station extension will be long and is projected to cost . 

==== Tama-Center to Hachioji ====
A southward expansion of the monorail line to Hachiōji Station was also considered since the planning phase of the line in the 1980s. The expansion had also been considered to be run as a separate light rail transit line, but was ultimately abandoned in December 2016 citing topographical and technological constraints. As of 2016 the projected cost is . 

==== Tama-Center to Machida ====
An extension from Tama-Center to Machida Station has also been considered since the planning phase of the line in the 1980s. As of January 2022, the exact route remains undecided. The most recent estimate determined that the construction would cost . 

== See also ==
* Monorails in Japan
* List of rapid transit systems

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1142205" start="30" end="43" title="Tama Toshi Monorail Line" label="Tama Monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q187934" start="50" end="58" title="monorail" label="monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323122" start="69" end="82" title="Western Tokyo" label="Western Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142205" start="101" end="134" title="Tama Toshi Monorail Line" label="Tokyo Tama Intercity Monorail Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q390788" start="226" end="239" title="Higashiyamato, Tokyo" label="Higashiyamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q213263" start="244" end="248" title="Tama, Tokyo" label="Tama"/>
<link wikidata="Q269634" start="253" end="262" title="Tachikawa, Tokyo" label="Tachikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q236197" start="264" end="268" title="Hino, Tokyo" label="Hino"/>
<link wikidata="Q208863" start="274" end="282" title="Hachiōji, Tokyo" label="Hachiōji"/>
<link wikidata="Q499071" start="384" end="391" title="JR East" label="JR East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078110" start="399" end="413" title="Chūō Main Line" label="Chūō Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063832" start="440" end="456" title="Odakyu Tama Line" label="Odakyu Tama Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q906348" start="461" end="481" title="Keio Sagamihara Line" label="Keio Sagamihara Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413736" start="522" end="530" title="Tama Zoological Park" label="Tama Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11374577" start="535" end="549" title="Keio Rail-Land" label="Keio Rail-Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450752" start="587" end="611" title="Tama-dōbutsukōen Station" label="Tama-Dōbutsukōen Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="657" end="662" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6357916" start="1428" end="1447" title="Kamikitadai Station" label="Kamikitadai Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q844354" start="1451" end="1471" title="Hakonegasaki Station" label="Hakonegasaki Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372071" start="1479" end="1491" title="Hachikō Line" label="Hachikō Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q800868" start="1752" end="1768" title="Hachiōji Station" label="Hachiōji Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="1903" end="1921" title="Light rail" label="light rail transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q801146" start="2129" end="2144" title="Machida Station (Tokyo)" label="Machida Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099904" start="2366" end="2384" title="Monorails in Japan" label="Monorails in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058973" start="2387" end="2416" title="List of rapid transit systems" label="List of rapid transit systems"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849200" wikidata="Q401078" url="?curid=849200" title="Foyle">
<text>Foyle may refer to:

* The River Foyle in Ireland
** Lough Foyle, an estuary of the River Foyle

==Entities named for the River Foyle==
* BBC Radio Foyle, local radio station
* Foyle (Assembly constituency)
* Foyle (Northern Ireland Parliament constituency)
* Foyle (UK Parliament constituency)
* Foyle and Londonderry College, a grammar school in Derry
* Foyle Film Festival
* Ulsterbus Foyle, the Derry-based bus operator

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Kitty Foyle&quot; (film), a 1940 film
* Detective Chief Superintendent Christopher Foyle, the protagonist of the TV series &quot;Foyle&#x27;s War&quot;
* Foyle, a partner of Bonehead in the film &quot;Detectives on the Edge of a Nervous Breakdown&quot;

==Other uses==
* Foyle (surname), a list of notable people with this surname
* Foyles, a bookshop in London
* HMS &quot;Foyle&quot; (T48), a Mersey Class trawler built for the Royal Navy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401078" start="0" end="5" title="Foyle" label="Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q958530" start="27" end="38" title="River Foyle" label="River Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314643" start="53" end="64" title="Lough Foyle" label="Lough Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834915" start="138" end="153" title="BBC Radio Foyle" label="BBC Radio Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477379" start="177" end="206" title="Foyle (Assembly constituency)" label="Foyle (Assembly constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477381" start="209" end="257" title="Foyle (Northern Ireland Parliament constituency)" label="Foyle (Northern Ireland Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q751642" start="260" end="294" title="Foyle (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Foyle (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477388" start="297" end="326" title="Foyle and Londonderry College" label="Foyle and Londonderry College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477383" start="356" end="375" title="Foyle Film Festival" label="Foyle Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880069" start="378" end="393" title="Ulsterbus Foyle" label="Ulsterbus Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471328" start="454" end="484" title="Kitty Foyle (film)" label="&amp;quot;Kitty Foyle&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377188" start="589" end="605" title="Foyle&amp;#x27;s War" label="Foyle&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="655" end="712" title="Detectives on the Edge of a Nervous Breakdown#Bonehead and Foyle" label="&amp;quot;Detectives on the Edge of a Nervous Breakdown&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30669610" start="731" end="746" title="Foyle (surname)" label="Foyle (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440267" start="793" end="799" title="Foyles" label="Foyles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="824" end="845" title="HMSAS Foyle" label="HMS &amp;quot;Foyle&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849208" wikidata="Q51761713" url="?curid=849208" title="Delibes (surname)">
<text>Delibes is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Alicia Delibes (born 1950), Spanish politician and teacher
* François Delibes (1873–?), French fencer
* Léo Delibes (1836–1891), French composer
* Miguel Delibes (1920–2010), Spanish novelist, journalist, and newspaper editor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47464110" start="66" end="80" title="Alicia Delibes" label="Alicia Delibes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="127" end="143" title="François Delibes" label="François Delibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207951" start="170" end="181" title="Léo Delibes" label="Léo Delibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157326" start="213" end="227" title="Miguel Delibes" label="Miguel Delibes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849217" wikidata="Q751745" url="?curid=849217" title="West Tyrone (UK Parliament constituency)">
<text>West Tyrone is a parliamentary constituency in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. The current MP is Órfhlaith Begley, a member of Sinn Féin, who has represented the constituency since the 2018 by-election.

==Constituency profile==
The seat is rural and includes the towns of Strabane and Omagh.

==Boundaries==

Since the constituency&#x27;s creation in 1997, it has consisted of the territory of the former Districts of Omagh and Strabane. There were major local government boundary changes in 2015, but the constituency boundaries remained unchanged.

The seat was created in a boundary review conducted in 1995 and was predominantly made out of the western half of the old Mid Ulster constituency – indeed it contains more of the old Mid Ulster than the current seat of that name. It also contains parts of the old Foyle constituency.

*Artigarvan; Ballycolman; Castlederg; Dunnamanagh; Finn; Glenderg; Glenelly Valley; Newtownstewart; Sion Mills; Slievekirk; Strabane North; Strabane West from Derry City and Strabane District Council
*Beragh; Camowen; Coolnagard; Dergmoney; Dromore; Drumnakilly; Drumquin; Fairy Water; Fintona; Gortin; Gortrush; Killyclogher; Newtownsaville; Owenkillew; Sixmilecross; Strule; Termon; Trillick from Fermanagh and Omagh District Council
*Pomeroy from Mid Ulster District Council

==History==
For the history of the equivalent seat prior to 1997, see Mid Ulster.

The seat is overwhelmingly nationalist, as evidenced by the election results in which nationalist parties have always won over 50% of the vote since the seat was created. However, the nationalist vote has traditionally been split between the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) and Sinn Féin, whilst the unionist parties have been more willing to make pacts to increase their chances of victory.

When the seat was created it was nominally held by the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), based on mapping the 1992 general election results onto the new boundaries, but this was because the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) had not contested the equivalent area. In the 1996 Forum elections the UUP outpolled the DUP and it was agreed that the DUP would not contest the seat. As a result, William Thompson of the UUP won in 1997 with a narrow majority over the SDLP, with Sinn Féin coming third on a large vote.

During the Parliament that followed, the Omagh bombing took place in the constituency, killing 29 people.

In the 2001 general election the SDLP and Sinn Féin both targeted the constituency heavily, in the hope that a shift in the vote from one nationalist party to the other would enable them to outpoll the Ulster Unionists. In the event Sinn Féin&#x27;s Pat Doherty won.

In 1998 both Sinn Féin and the SDLP won two seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly, with the UUP and DUP winning one each. However, there was much speculation that an increase in Sinn Féin&#x27;s vote at the SDLP&#x27;s expense would result in Sinn Féin taking a seat from its nationalist rival at the next assembly election. However, the election was complicated by the intervention of the independent candidate Dr. Kieran Deeny, campaigning on the sole issue of the retention of the hospital in Omagh. In a result that shocked commentators he took one of the SDLP&#x27;s assembly seats.

Deeny stood again in the 2005 general election and asked most parties to withdraw to support him. Many local activists and voters appeared to agree with this, with some making their support public, but in the end the UUP, DUP and SDLP all fielded candidates. Doherty held the seat for Sinn Féin, but with Deeny polling strongly in second place.

== Members of Parliament ==
West Tyrone&#x27;s first MP upon its 1997 creation was William Thompson of the Ulster Unionist Party. He was defeated in 2001 by Pat Doherty of Sinn Féin, who held the seat until his retirement at the 2017 general election. He was succeeded by Barry McElduff, also of Sinn Féin, who was MP for just over half a year before he announced his resignation on 15 January 2018, following widespread backlash against a video he posted on Twitter that appeared to mock victims of the Kingsmill massacre. This triggered a by-election won by Sinn Féin&#x27;s Órfhlaith Begley, who has remained the MP for West Tyrone to the present day.

== Elections ==
=== Elections in the 2020s ===





=== Elections in the 2010s ===



 



 













=== Elections in the 2000s ===








=== Elections in the 1990s ===





== See also ==
* List of parliamentary constituencies in Northern Ireland

==References==
==External links==
*2017 Election House of Commons Library 2017 Election report
*A Vision Of Britain Through Time (Constituency elector numbers)
*Politics Resources
*West Tyrone UK Parliament constituency (boundaries April 2010 – May 2024) at &quot;MapIt UK&quot;
*West Tyrone UK Parliament constituency (boundaries from June 2024) at &quot;MapIt UK&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751745" start="0" end="11" title="West Tyrone (UK Parliament constituency)" label="West Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="17" end="43" title="United Kingdom constituencies" label="parliamentary constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="51" end="89" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q52587398" start="109" end="125" title="Órfhlaith Begley" label="Órfhlaith Begley"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="139" end="148" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814827" start="197" end="213" title="2018 West Tyrone by-election" label="2018 by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q751660" start="686" end="709" title="Mid Ulster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mid Ulster constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q751642" start="828" end="846" title="Foyle (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Foyle constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988669" start="1008" end="1048" title="Derry City and Strabane District Council" label="Derry City and Strabane District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992116" start="1248" end="1284" title="Fermanagh and Omagh District Council" label="Fermanagh and Omagh District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997729" start="1299" end="1326" title="Mid Ulster District Council" label="Mid Ulster District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="1388" end="1392" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q751660" start="1398" end="1408" title="Mid Ulster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mid Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="1438" end="1449" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="1653" end="1687" title="Social Democratic and Labour Party" label="Social Democratic and Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="1699" end="1708" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="1721" end="1729" title="Unionists (Ireland)" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="1869" end="1894" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="1923" end="1944" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="2003" end="2024" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947124" start="2196" end="2212" title="William Thompson (Ulster Unionist politician)" label="William Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="2231" end="2235" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358366" start="2361" end="2374" title="Omagh bombing" label="Omagh bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="2434" end="2455" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q300269" start="2677" end="2688" title="Pat Doherty (Northern Ireland politician)" label="Pat Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="2752" end="2777" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405360" start="3108" end="3124" title="Kieran Deeny" label="Dr. Kieran Deeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q510513" start="3192" end="3197" title="Omagh" label="Omagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="3310" end="3331" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947124" start="3714" end="3730" title="William Thompson (Ulster Unionist politician)" label="William Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q300269" start="3788" end="3799" title="Pat Doherty (Northern Ireland politician)" label="Pat Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864486" start="3903" end="3917" title="Barry McElduff" label="Barry McElduff"/>
<link wikidata="Q547328" start="4135" end="4153" title="Kingsmill massacre" label="Kingsmill massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631994" start="4485" end="4541" title="List of parliamentary constituencies in Northern Ireland" label="List of parliamentary constituencies in Northern Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849220" wikidata="Q595991" url="?curid=849220" title="Greenstone belt">
<text>Greenstone belts are zones of variably metamorphosed mafic to ultramafic volcanic sequences with associated sedimentary rocks that occur within Archaean and Proterozoic cratons between granite and gneiss bodies.

The name comes from the green hue imparted by the colour of the metamorphic minerals within the mafic rocks: The typical green minerals are chlorite, actinolite, and other green amphiboles. Greenstone belts also often contain ore deposits of gold, silver, copper, zinc, and lead.

A greenstone belt is typically several dozens to several thousand kilometres long. Typically, a greenstone belt within the greater volume of otherwise homogeneous granite-gneiss within a craton contains a significantly larger degree of heterogeneity and complications and forms a tectonic marker far more distinct than the much more voluminous and homogeneous granites. Additionally, a greenstone belt contains far more information on tectonic and metamorphic events, deformations, and paleogeologic conditions than the granite and gneiss events, because the vast majority of greenstones are interpreted as altered basalts and other volcanic or sedimentary rocks. As such, understanding the nature and origin of greenstone belts is the most fruitful way of studying Archaean geological history.

== Nature and formation ==

Greenstone belts have been interpreted as having formed at ancient oceanic spreading centers and island arc terranes.

Greenstone belts are primarily formed of volcanic rocks, dominated by basalt, with minor sedimentary rocks inter-leaving the volcanic formations. Through time, the degree of sediment contained within greenstone belts has risen, and the amount of ultramafic rock (either as layered intrusions or as volcanic komatiite) has decreased.

There is also a change in the structure and relationship of greenstone belts to their basements between the Archaean where there is little clear relationship, if any, between basalt-peridotite sheets of a greenstone belt and the granites they abut, and the Proterozoic where greenstone belts sit upon granite-gneiss basements and / or other greenstone belts, and the Phanerozoic where clear examples of island arc volcanism, arc sedimentation and ophiolite sequences become more dominant.

This change in nature is interpreted as a response to the maturity of the plate tectonics processes throughout the Earth&#x27;s geological history. Archaean plate tectonics did not take place on mature crust and as such the presence of thrust-in allochthonous greenstone belts is expected. By the Proterozoic, magmatism was occurring around cratons and with established sedimentary sources, with little recycling of the crust, allowing preservation of more sediments. By the Phanerozoic, extensive continental cover and lower heat flow from the mantle has seen greater preservation of sediments and greater influence of continental masses.

Greenstones, aside from containing basalts, also give rise to several types of metamorphic rocks which are used synonymously with &#x27;metabasalt&#x27; et cetera; greenschist, whiteschist and blueschist are all terms spawned from the study of greenstone belts.

The West African early Proterozoic greenstone belts are similar to the Archean greenstone belts. These similarities include a decrease in the
amount of ultramafic and mafic rocks as you move up the stratigraphic column, in addition to an increase in pyroclastics, felsic and/or andesite rocks. Also, the rock successions tend to have clastics in the upper portion and tholeiitic suites in the lower. Calc-alkaline dikes are common in these suites.

== Distribution ==
Archaean greenstones are found in the Slave craton, northern Canada, Pilbara craton and Yilgarn Craton, Western Australia, Gawler Craton in South Australia, and in the Wyoming Craton in the US. Examples are found in South and Eastern Africa, namely the Kaapvaal craton and also in the cratonic core of Madagascar, as well as West Africa and Brazil, northern Scandinavia and the Kola Peninsula (see Baltic Shield).

Proterozoic greenstones occur sandwiched between the Pilbara and Yilgarn cratons in Australia, and adjoining the Gawler Craton and within the extensive Proterozoic mobile belts of Australia, within West Africa, throughout the metamorphic complexes surrounding the Archaean core of Madagascar; the eastern United States, northern Canada and northern Scandinavia. The Abitibi greenstone belt in Ontario and Quebec is one of the largest Archean greenstone belts in the world.

In Antarctica, the Proterozoic-aged Fisher Massif closely resembles the composition and structure of a greenstone belt.

One of the best known greenstone belts in the world is the South African Barberton greenstone belt, where gold was first discovered in South Africa. The Barberton Greenstone belt was first uniquely identified by Prof Annhauser at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. His work in mapping and detailing the characteristics of the Barberton Greenstone belt has been used as a primer for other greenstone belts around the world. He noted the existence of pillow lavas, indicating a lava being rapidly cooled in water, as well as the spinifex textures created by crystals formed under rapidly cooling environments, namely water.

==List of greenstone belts==
===Africa===
* Barberton Greenstone Belt (South Africa)
* Giyani Greenstone Belt (South Africa)
* Pietersberg greenstone belt (South Africa)
* Gwanda Greenstone Belt (Zimbabwe)
* Kilimafedha Greenstone Belt (East Africa)
* Lake Victoria Greenstone Belt (East Africa)
* Boromo-Goren Greenstone Belt (West Africa)
* Hounde Greenstone Belt (Burkina Faso)
* Boromo Greenstone Belt (Burkina Faso)

===Asia===
*Taishan greenstone belt (East Asia)
*Ramagiri-Hungund greenstone belt (Dharwar Craton), India
*Babina greenstone belt (Bundelkhand craton), India
*Mauranipur greenstone belt (Bundelkhand craton), India
*Iron Ore Group, East Indian Shield, India

===Europe===
*Kostomuksha greenstone belt (Russia)
*Central Lapland Greenstone Belt (Lapland, Finland)
*Kuhmo-Suomussalmi Greenstone Belt, Finland
*Mauken greenstone belt (Norway)

===North America===
* Abitibi greenstone belt (Quebec/Ontario, Canada)
* Bird River greenstone belt (Manitoba, Canada)
* Elmers Rock greenstone belt (Wyoming, USA)
* Flin Flon greenstone belt (Manitoba/Saskatchewan, Canada)
* Hope Bay greenstone belt (in the western portion of Kivalliq Region, Nunavut, Canada)
* Hunt River greenstone belt (Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada)
* Isua greenstone belt (Southwestern Greenland)
* Nuvvuagittuq greenstone belt (Quebec, Canada)
* Pecos greenstone belt (New Mexico, US)
* Rattlesnake Hills greenstone belt (Wyoming, US)
* Seminoe Mountains greenstone belt (Wyoming, US)
* South Pass greenstone belt (Wyoming, US)
* Temagami Greenstone Belt (Ontario, Canada)
* Yellowknife greenstone belt (Northwest Territories, Canada)

===South America===
*Rio-das-Velhas greenstone belt (Minas Gerais, Brazil)
*Piumhi greenstone belt (Minas Gerais, Brazil)
*Rio-Itapicuru greenstone belt (Bahia, Brazil)
*Mundo Novo greenstone belt (Bahia, Brazil)
*Umburanas greenstone belt (Bahia, Brazil)
*Crixás greenstone belt (Goiás, Brazil)
*Faina greenstone belt (Goiás, Brazil)
*Guarinos greenstone belt (Goiás, Brazil)
*Pilar-de-Goiás greenstone belt (Goiás, Brazil)
*Northern Guiana Shield greenstone belt (Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana)

===Australia===
* Harris greenstone belt (Australia)
* Jack Hills greenstone belt (Australia)
* Lake Johnston greenstone belt (Australia)
* Norseman-Wiluna greenstone belt (Australia)
* Southern Cross greenstone belt (Australia)
* Yandal Greenstone Belt (Australia)
* Yalgoo-Singleton greenstone belt (Australia)

==References==
==Sources==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595991" start="0" end="16" title="Greenstone belt" label="Greenstone belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="39" end="52" title="Metamorphism" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="53" end="58" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="62" end="72" title="ultramafic" label="ultramafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="73" end="81" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="108" end="125" title="sedimentary rocks" label="sedimentary rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="144" end="152" title="Archean" label="Archaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="157" end="168" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="169" end="175" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="185" end="192" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="197" end="203" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="289" end="296" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="353" end="361" title="Chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104692" start="363" end="373" title="actinolite" label="actinolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="391" end="401" title="amphiboles" label="amphiboles"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="439" end="442" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="455" end="459" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="461" end="467" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="469" end="475" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="477" end="481" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="487" end="491" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="657" end="664" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="665" end="671" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="681" end="687" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="929" end="937" title="tectonic" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="942" end="953" title="Metamorphism" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1109" end="1115" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1127" end="1135" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="1139" end="1155" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="1260" end="1268" title="Archean" label="Archaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="1415" end="1425" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="1426" end="1433" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1507" end="1513" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292632" start="1710" end="1727" title="layered intrusion" label="layered intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q664329" start="1744" end="1753" title="komatiite" label="komatiite"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="1953" end="1963" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="2028" end="2039" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="2138" end="2149" title="Phanerozoic" label="Phanerozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="2174" end="2184" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="2218" end="2227" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="2335" end="2350" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="2497" end="2506" title="Thrust fault" label="thrust-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979583" start="2507" end="2517" title="allochthon" label="allochthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467769" start="2571" end="2580" title="magmatism" label="magmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190256" start="2664" end="2686" title="Crustal recycling" label="recycling of the crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q335239" start="3038" end="3048" title="metabasalt" label="metabasalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q917402" start="3066" end="3077" title="greenschist" label="greenschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996240" start="3079" end="3090" title="whiteschist" label="whiteschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048428" start="3095" end="3105" title="blueschist" label="blueschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="3188" end="3199" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="3236" end="3243" title="Archean" label="Archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="3317" end="3327" title="ultramafic" label="ultramafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="3332" end="3337" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172299" start="3363" end="3383" title="stratigraphic column" label="stratigraphic column"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="3415" end="3426" title="Pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="3429" end="3435" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="3443" end="3451" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="3499" end="3506" title="clastic" label="clastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106459" start="3533" end="3543" title="tholeiitic" label="tholeiitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018669" start="3565" end="3578" title="Calc-alkaline" label="Calc-alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="3579" end="3583" title="Dike (geology)" label="dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190129" start="3671" end="3683" title="Slave craton" label="Slave craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3694" end="3700" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930261" start="3702" end="3716" title="Pilbara craton" label="Pilbara craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053599" start="3721" end="3735" title="Yilgarn Craton" label="Yilgarn Craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="3737" end="3754" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528467" start="3756" end="3769" title="Gawler Craton" label="Gawler Craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="3773" end="3788" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409210" start="3801" end="3815" title="Wyoming Craton" label="Wyoming Craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q178248" start="3886" end="3901" title="Kaapvaal craton" label="Kaapvaal craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="3935" end="3945" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="3958" end="3969" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="3974" end="3980" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="3991" end="4002" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="4011" end="4025" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q580133" start="4031" end="4044" title="Baltic Shield" label="Baltic Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="4345" end="4366" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667988" start="4414" end="4437" title="Abitibi greenstone belt" label="Abitibi greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="4441" end="4448" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4453" end="4459" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641485" start="4558" end="4571" title="Fisher Massif" label="Fisher Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379514" start="4716" end="4741" title="Barberton greenstone belt" label="Barberton greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4778" end="4790" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q534643" start="4877" end="4908" title="University of the Witwatersrand" label="University of the Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="4910" end="4922" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q502339" start="5108" end="5119" title="pillow lava" label="pillow lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="5164" end="5169" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="5186" end="5194" title="Rock microstructure" label="spinifex"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="5215" end="5222" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379514" start="5326" end="5351" title="Barberton Greenstone Belt" label="Barberton Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131198315" start="5369" end="5391" title="Giyani Greenstone Belt" label="Giyani Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5409" end="5436" title="Pietersberg greenstone belt" label="Pietersberg greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5454" end="5476" title="Gwanda Greenstone Belt" label="Gwanda Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5490" end="5517" title="Kilimafedha Greenstone Belt" label="Kilimafedha Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5534" end="5563" title="Lake Victoria Greenstone Belt" label="Lake Victoria Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5580" end="5608" title="Boromo-Goren Greenstone Belt" label="Boromo-Goren Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5625" end="5647" title="Hounde Greenstone Belt" label="Hounde Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5665" end="5687" title="Boromo Greenstone Belt" label="Boromo Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5716" end="5739" title="Taishan greenstone belt" label="Taishan greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5753" end="5785" title="Ramagiri-Hungund greenstone belt" label="Ramagiri-Hungund greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269412" start="5787" end="5801" title="Dharwar Craton" label="Dharwar Craton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5811" end="5833" title="Babina greenstone belt" label="Babina greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5835" end="5853" title="Bundelkhand craton" label="Bundelkhand craton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5863" end="5889" title="Mauranipur greenstone belt" label="Mauranipur greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5919" end="5953" title="Iron Ore Group, East Indian Shield" label="Iron Ore Group, East Indian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5976" end="6003" title="Kostomuksha greenstone belt" label="Kostomuksha greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061341" start="6014" end="6045" title="Central Lapland Greenstone Belt" label="Central Lapland Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6066" end="6099" title="Kuhmo-Suomussalmi Greenstone Belt" label="Kuhmo-Suomussalmi Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6110" end="6132" title="Mauken greenstone belt" label="Mauken greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667988" start="6165" end="6188" title="Abitibi greenstone belt" label="Abitibi greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915892" start="6216" end="6242" title="Bird River greenstone belt" label="Bird River greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6264" end="6291" title="Elmers Rock greenstone belt" label="Elmers Rock greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459395" start="6309" end="6334" title="Flin Flon greenstone belt" label="Flin Flon greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899172" start="6369" end="6393" title="Hope Bay greenstone belt" label="Hope Bay greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508363" start="6421" end="6436" title="Kivalliq Region" label="Kivalliq Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="6438" end="6445" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6447" end="6453" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226891" start="6457" end="6483" title="Hunt River greenstone belt" label="Hunt River greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626318" start="6522" end="6542" title="Isua greenstone belt" label="Isua greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219139" start="6570" end="6598" title="Nuvvuagittuq greenstone belt" label="Nuvvuagittuq greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6618" end="6639" title="Pecos greenstone belt" label="Pecos greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295999" start="6659" end="6692" title="Rattlesnake Hills greenstone belt" label="Rattlesnake Hills greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449491" start="6709" end="6742" title="Seminoe Mountains greenstone belt" label="Seminoe Mountains greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568185" start="6759" end="6785" title="South Pass greenstone belt" label="South Pass greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697979" start="6802" end="6826" title="Temagami Greenstone Belt" label="Temagami Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051959" start="6847" end="6874" title="Yellowknife greenstone belt" label="Yellowknife greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6929" end="6959" title="Rio-das-Velhas greenstone belt" label="Rio-das-Velhas greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6984" end="7006" title="Piumhi greenstone belt" label="Piumhi greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7031" end="7060" title="Rio-Itapicuru greenstone belt" label="Rio-Itapicuru greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7078" end="7104" title="Mundo Novo greenstone belt" label="Mundo Novo greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7122" end="7147" title="Umburanas greenstone belt" label="Umburanas greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7165" end="7187" title="Crixás greenstone belt" label="Crixás greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7205" end="7226" title="Faina greenstone belt" label="Faina greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7244" end="7268" title="Guarinos greenstone belt" label="Guarinos greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7286" end="7316" title="Pilar-de-Goiás greenstone belt" label="Pilar-de-Goiás greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7334" end="7372" title="Northern Guiana Shield greenstone belt" label="Northern Guiana Shield greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7440" end="7462" title="Harris greenstone belt" label="Harris greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7477" end="7503" title="Jack Hills greenstone belt" label="Jack Hills greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7518" end="7547" title="Lake Johnston greenstone belt" label="Lake Johnston greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7562" end="7593" title="Norseman-Wiluna greenstone belt" label="Norseman-Wiluna greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7608" end="7638" title="Southern Cross greenstone belt" label="Southern Cross greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7653" end="7675" title="Yandal Greenstone Belt" label="Yandal Greenstone Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7690" end="7722" title="Yalgoo-Singleton greenstone belt" label="Yalgoo-Singleton greenstone belt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849222" wikidata="Q1010790" url="?curid=849222" title="Qualicum Beach">
<text>Qualicum Beach () is a town located on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Canada. In the 2021 census, it had a population of 9,303. It is situated at the foot of Mount Arrowsmith, along the Strait of Georgia on Vancouver Island&#x27;s northeastern coast.

Qualicum Beach&#x27;s natural environment and proximity to Victoria and Vancouver have made it a tourist destination, with cottages along the coast. The community is mostly of retirement age, with the oldest average population in Canada with a median age of 65.9 in 2016.

Qualicum Beach is served by the coast-spanning Island Highway, the Island Rail Corridor, a local airport, and a nearby ferry to Lasqueti Island.

==History==

=== Etymology ===
The name &quot;Qualicum&quot; comes from a Pentlatch term that means &quot;Where the dog salmon (chum salmon) run.&quot;

=== Qualicum First Nation ===
Qualicum Beach is located within the traditional territory of the Qualicum First Nation.

People from all over would come to the Qualicum area to gather camas flowers in the spring and chum salmon in the fall. Camas bulbs are sweet tasting and were traded as a delicacy. The traditional diet of the Qualicum First Nation includes clams, including geoducks, butter clams, and horse clams. Pentlatch is the language that was spoken in this area. A large portion of the Qualicum First Nation population was lost due to small pox and war, leading to a loss of the Pentlatch language. Small pox was brought to what is now Canada by French settlers in the 17th century. Additionally, the loss of the Pentlatch language may also be attributed to the residential school system.

=== European Settlers ===
In May 1856, Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company explorer Adam Grant Horne, with a group of aboriginal guides, found a route across Vancouver Island from the Qualicum River to the Alberni Inlet. Horne Lake is named after him.

In 1864, the botanist and explorer Robert Brown led the Vancouver Island Exploring Expedition through the area. He found the area deserted as a result of the small pox epidemic of 1862. The first settlers arrived in the 1880s.

A road was built from Nanaimo to Parksville in 1886 and extended to Qualicum in 1894.

=== The 20th century ===
A school house was built in 1912. The school served as an elementary and secondary school until 1952. The school house was later converted into an arts centre.

A train station was built in 1913. The E&amp;N Railway reached Qualicum in 1914.

H.E. Beasley, a railway official, sponsored the creation of The Merchants Trust and Trading Company which organised the original layout of the town and built the golf links and the Qualicum Beach Hotel in 1913. The Qualicum Beach Hotel was managed by Noel Money. During World War 1 the hotel was used as a hospital, which was visited by the Prince of Wales in 1918. Visitors to the hotel included Shirley Temple, Bing Crosby, and the King of Thailand. The hotel was eventually torn down in 1969. The golf course (Memorial Golf Course) remains and is preserved by the Town of Qualicum Beach.

In 1914, the residence of Noel Money, the Crown Mansion, was built. The Crown Mansion overlooks the town&#x27;s first golf course, the Memorial Golf Course, and is built in a Georgian Revival style. The Crown Mansion is now protected by the Brown Preservation Society and operates as a hotel.

In the 1920s, Giuseppe Roat, also known as the Hermit of Qualicum Beach, moved to the area. He opened the first museum in Qualicum Beach, called the Crystal Springs Museum of Nature Art. Alongside the museum, Roat also had a spring called Crystal Spring. Visitors could drink from the spring for 25 cents. Roat purchased 75 lots in the area of Qualicum Beach, totalling 44 acres. This land is now what is known as the Hermitage Park subdivision.

In the 1930s, Alexander Duncan McRae and his wife Blaunche built an upscale family retreat, known as Eaglecrest, in Qualicum Beach. Visitors included Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh in 1951. In the late 1960s, Eaglecrest was converted into a resort. A fire in 1969 burnt down the main house. In 1972, the new owners replicated the original house and opened a golf course. In 1981 a fire once again destroyed Eaglecrest. 

A private boys&#x27; residential school, the Qualicum College, was established in 1935 by Robert Ivan Knight. The school grew through the 1960s, however, attendance diminished with the school closing in 1970. The structure was operated as a hotel for a number of years, however, the college has now been demolished. Its playing fields have been turned into a housing subdivision.

St. Andrews Lodge, a hotel built in a Tudor style, was built in 1938 by Sam Little. The Lodge was especially popular during World War 2 with members of the Canadian armed forces.

Qualicum Beach was officially incorporated as a village on May 5, 1942, and was changed to town status on January 7, 1983.

=== The 21st century ===
In 2002, the town&#x27;s primary grocery store, Qualicum Foods, was destroyed by a fire. In 2003 a new Qualicum Foods was built. In 2021, Qualicum Beach councillor Teunis Westbroek was sued for allegedly suggesting that the owners of Qualicum Foods burnt down their own store in 2002. In 2023 Westbroek agreed to pay $130,000 to settle the defamation suit and issued a public apology in the local newspaper. Ultimately, Westbroek only paid $2,839 personally. The rest of the settlement was covered by the Town&#x27;s liability insurance and the Town paid a $10,000 deductible.

In 2007, the Gardens, a long-term care facility, was built in Qualicum Beach. Another retirement home, Berwick, opened in 2019. There are currently 5 retirement homes in Qualicum Beach.

Trains stopped operating in 2011. The station is now used as an office space.

St. Andrews Lodge was purchased by the Town of Qualicum Beach in 2018 with hopes to transform the land into a waterfront park. The Town considered demolishing the Lodge. In late 2020 The St. Andrew Lodge Cultural and Historical Society was formed by local residents, with the goal of saving the Lodge from demolition. They succeeded in this goal, and the Lodge and park is currently being renovated. Qualicum First Nation gifted the new name of &quot;Saahtlam&quot; for the park.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Qualicum Beach had a population of 9,303 living in 4,435 of its 4,763 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 8,943. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

=== Age ===

The majority (56.3% in 2021) of residents are 65 years of age or older. The median age in 2021 was 67.5 and the average age was 61.2.

=== Education ===
The majority (92.8% in 2021) of citizens aged 25 to 64 have obtained a high school diploma or equivalency certificate. 64% of citizens have obtained a postsecondary certificate, diploma, or degree.

According to the 2021 census, the most common major fields of study of citizens in Qualicum Beach included:

* Business, management, and public administration (1,130 persons or 37.6%)
* Architecture, engineering, and related trades (895 persons or 29.8%)
* Health and related fields (855 persons or 28.5%)
* Education (635 persons or 21.1%)
* Social and behavioural sciences and law (475 persons or 15.8%)

=== Occupation and Income ===
The median total income of households in 2020 was $76,500.

Of the labour force, 55% work as permanent employees and 32% are self-employed. The remaining hold casual, seasonal, temporary, short-term, or fixed (1 year or more) term positions. As of 2021, 7.7% of the population is unemployed. The majority (65.5% in 2021) of the population is not in the labour force.

According to the 2021 census, the most common occupational categories in Qualicum Beach included:

* Sales and service (705 persons or 25.5%)
* Business, finance, and administration (515 persons or 18.6%)
* Trades, transport, and equipment operators (485 persons or 17.5%)
* Education, law and social, community and government services (300 persons or 10.8%)
* Health (255 persons or 9.2%)
* Natural and applied sciences (210 persons or 7.6%)

=== Ethnicity ===
According to the 2021 census, the ethnic or cultural origin of citizens in Qualicum Beach included:
* English (3,315 persons or 37.8%)
* Irish (1,955 persons or 22.3%)
* Scottish (2,115 persons or 24.1%)
* German (1,040 persons or 11.9%)
* French (770 persons or 8.8%)
* Canadian (735 persons or 8.4%)
* Ukrainian (515 persons or 5.9%)
* Dutch (415 persons or 4.7%)

=== Religion ===
According to the 2021 census, religious groups in Qualicum Beach included:
*Irreligion (4,615 persons or 52.6%)
*Christianity (4,015 persons or 45.7%)
*Judaism (30 persons or 0.3%)
*Buddhism (20 persons or 0.2%)
*Islam (20 persons or 0.2%)
*Other (65 persons or 0.7%)

==Politics and government==

Municipal government of the Town of Qualicum Beach has a council-manager form of government. It is headed by a mayor (who also represents Qualicum Beach on the governing board of the Regional District of Nanaimo) and a four-member council. These positions are filled by at-large elections every four years, as provided by British Columbia law. As of October 2022, the current mayor of Qualicum Beach is Teunis Westbroek. Voter turnout in the 2022 election was 52.53%.

School board trustees, for representation on School District 69 Qualicum, are also elected by residents of the town, the City of Parksville and the surrounding area. The town funds a volunteer fire department, which serves the town and nearby rural communities. The town has a local ambulance station. The nearest full hospital is Nanaimo Regional General Hospital in Nanaimo.

Qualicum Beach is part of the Parksville-Qualicum provincial electoral district. Qualicum Beach is represented by Independent Adam Walker. Walker was dismissed from his position as a parliamentary secretary and removed from the BC NDP caucus following an internal investigation. Federally, Qualicum Beach, in the Courtenay—Alberni riding, is represented in the House of Commons of Canada by NDP Member of Parliament Gord Johns, who was first elected in 2015.

==Transportation==

Highway 19A, runs the length of the town along the shoreline of the Strait of Georgia. Highway 19 includes a junction with Highway 4, which runs through Cathedral Grove to Port Alberni and Tofino, Ucluelet, Bamfield and the Pacific Rim National Park Reserve on the south-west coast of the Island. Scenic, flight training and charter flights are offered by Qualicum Flight Center. The town has no marina or harbour, however, there is a boat launch for trailered boats. French Creek Harbour is south-east on Highway 19A.

Via Rail&#x27;s Malahat service served Qualicum Beach station from 1979 until 2011. In 2011, service was suspended indefinitely due to track replacement work. As of 2015, service has not yet resumed.

==Geography==
The town has an approximate area of .

Qualicum Beach is on the Nanaimo lowlands, a narrow plain which lies between the Georgia Basin to the northeast and the Beaufort Range (one of the Vancouver Island Ranges) to the south-west. Landforms were significantly changed by the most recent advance of glacial ice about 18,000 to 19,000 years ago.

Marshall-Stevenson Wildlife Sanctuary, in the west end of Qualicum Beach, is a tidal wetlands at the mouth of the Little Qualicum River.

Wildlife include: black-tailed deer, Roosevelt elk, black bear, and cougar. With the presence of human population, deer, raccoons and rodents persist.

Soil types in the area, mostly classified as Orthic Dystric Brunisols and Duric Dystric Brunisols, vary from marginal to unsuitable for agriculture. They tend to be loamy sand or gravelly loamy sand. Their fertility is low and they are strongly acidic except in near-shore areas where Native American shell middens provide abundant calcium and organic matter. However, they are suitable for development.

===Climate===
The climate is a Mediterranean Climate. The town has cool, wet winters with 80 to 85% of the year&#x27;s precipitation between October and April. The average annual precipitation is . Mean daily temperature ranges from in January, with cloud and rain from north Pacific air masses dominating the winter weather. High pressure ridges over the mainland can produce easterly air flows, bringing snow and freezing temperatures during winter but do not persist, as moist westerly winds bring above-freezing temperatures. North Pacific high pressure cells influence summer weather, making it warm and dry. July and August have an average precipitation of and average maximum temperatures of .

With the longest freeze-free period in Canada, at 180 days per year, the Nanaimo lowlands area is favourable for agriculture. The area is within the small Coastal Douglas Fir bio-geographic zone, which is considered the mildest climate in Canada. The Vancouver Island Ranges, which includes nearby Mount Arrowsmith, shadows rainfall. This bio-geographic area can also support Garry Oak and Arbutus.

== Education ==
Qualicum Beach is part of School District 69. There are two elementary schools in Qualicum Beach and one high school. Students in the district can also enroll in distance education through CEAP (Collaborative Education Alternative Program).

=== Kwalikum Secondary School ===
Kwalikum Secondary School (KSS) is the only high school located in Qualicum Beach. Approximately 700 students are enrolled. The school offers programmes such as ROAMS, a leadership programme featuring outdoor guide training; Golf Academy, a year long training programme that covers golf swing instruction, golf etiquette, and course management; a music programme, and athletics. In the past, the school has faced potential closure due to fears of decreasing enrolment.

=== Qualicum Beach Elementary School ===
Qualicum Beach Elementary School is one of two elementary school in Qualicum Beach and has approximately 400 students enrolled. The school offers programmes such as the Mountain Bike Club, featuring weekly treks through woodlands; a Musical Theatre Club, putting on several performances each year; and the STREAM programme, a programme focused on technology and innovation.

=== Arrowview Elementary School ===
Arrowview Elementary School is an elementary school in Qualicum Beach. The school has approximately 300 students.

== Culture, recreation, and leisure ==

=== Events ===
==== Farmers Market ====
The Farmers Market takes place every Saturday and is year round. All products must adhere to a &quot;Make it, Bake it, Grow it&quot; policy, meaning that all products are locally made, grown, or baked by the vendors. The first Qualicum Beach Farmers Market took place in 1997, with approximately 20 regular vendors in its first year. The market currently takes place on Veterans Way and features approximately 100 vendors and sees approximately 2,500 visitors each Saturday.

==== Canada Day ====
Each year on July 1, the town of Qualicum Beach and the Royal Canadian Legion hold a Pancake Breakfast, parade, and activities around town. The parade usually starts at the Civic Centre goes down Second Avenue. The event was cancelled for two years during the COVID-19 pandemic.

==== Family Day ====
Family Day is an annual event taking place on the last Sunday of May in Qualicum Beach, with each year featuring a unique theme. Activities include a pancake breakfast, a parade, music and other live entertainment.

==== Brant Wildlife Festival ====
The Brant Wildlife Festival is an annual 4 week long event that celebrates nature, in particular the Brant goose. Activities include counting Brant geese, estuary and field station tours, and a film festival.

==== Show &amp; Shine ====
The Seaside Cruizers Car Club hosts an annual Father&#x27;s day Show &#x27;n Shine day, where vintage and collectible cars are featured. Over 30,000 spectators come to Qualicum Beach per year for the event. Trophies and prizes are handed out, such as &quot;Best Truck&quot;, &quot;Best Import&quot;, and &quot;People&#x27;s Choice&quot;.

==== Seedy Saturday ====
Seedy Saturday is an annual gardening event in Qualicum Beach run by volunteers. Visitors may swap or purchase seeds and plants, receive gardening advice, and socialise at the Seedy Cafe. The first Seedy Saturday in Qualicum Beach was organised by Joy Smith in 2002. In 2018, the event saw approximately 2700 visitors.

==== Moonlight Madness ====
Moonlight Madness is an annual event that takes place in November. The event features late-night shopping, live music, photos with Santa Claus, and carolers. The event promotes shopping local.

==== Ocean Mile Swim ====
The Ocean Mile Swim is an annual swimming event that has taken place for over 60 years. Prizes are awarded under varying categories such as fastest swimmer and youngest swimmer.

==== Fire and Ice Festival (defunct) ====
The Fire and Ice Festival was an annual event that took place each year in Qualicum Beach. The event featured, concurrently, a chili cook-off contest (the fire) and an ice sculpture contest (the ice). The event took place for 25 years, but was cancelled in 2018 due to a lack of volunteers.

=== Arts ===

==== The Old School House Arts Centre ====
The Old School House (TOSH) is an arts centre located centrally in Qualicum Beach. Originally built as a school in 1912, the school served as an elementary and secondary school until 1952. The building was then used by the Board of Education until 1985. Threatened by demolition, a group of citizens formed a non-profit cultural association to save the building. The building was restored and re-opened in February 1988 as an arts centre. The mission of TOSH Arts Centre is to &quot;foster a vibrants arts centre that promotes and encourages the development of multi-dimensional artists and musicians for the enjoyment of all ages, residents and visitors alike, in Qualicum Beach and throughout central Vancouver Island&quot;. TOSH offers workshops, classes, and features several galleries and resident artists.

==== Village Theatre ====
The Village Theatre was originally built in 1948 as a movie house, but is currently used for live theatre performances. ECHO Players is a non-profit society that was founded in 1934 and has been active for over 45 years in the Village Theatre. ECHO Players is composed of more than 240 members and produces four main stage shows per season.

=== Qualicum Beach Museum ===
The Qualicum Beach Museum was founded in 1982 by Elizabeth Little and is located in a former power generating station. The museum features both permanent as well as temporary exhibits, documenting the history of the town of Qualicum Beach. 

=== Recreation and leisure ===

==== Milner Gardens ====
Milner Gardens is a 70-acre estate that was previously owned by H.R. Milner. Member of the royal family have visited twice; Prince Charles and Princess Diana visited the gardens in 1986. Prince Philip and Queen Elizabeth stayed in 1987. Vancouver Island University acquired the estate in 1996 and converted the private gardens to a public garden. The gardens feature old growth Douglas firs, cedar trees, and rare rhododendrons.

==== Memorial Golf Course ====
Memorial Golf Course is a public golf course that was opened in 1913. It is the fourth oldest golf course in British Columbia. The course is open year-round.

==== Little Qualicum Falls ====
Little Qualicum Falls is a provincial park and campground near Qualicum Beach. The falls are surrounded by old growth forests. Visitors can walk the trails, swim, and camp at this provincial park.

==== Parks and other spaces ====
Qualicum Beach has 280 hectares (15% of the town) of Town-owned green spaces and parks:

===== Beach Front Park =====
The park is located along Island Highway 19A and is popular for walking and sunbathing. The park has picnic tables, benches, shade trees, public washrooms, a public boat ramp, and a concession stand.

===== Brant Viewing area =====
The park is located along Island Highway 19A, in the west end of Qualicum Beach. There is a viewing platform that is popular with birdwatchers and photographers. The park has picnic tables and benches.

===== Christleton Park =====
The park is located in the Qualicum Woods neighbourhood. The park has mature native trees, benches, and a children&#x27;s playground.

===== Community Park =====
The park is located in the west side of downtown Qualicum Beach, by the Ravensong Aquatic Centre and the Civic Centre. The park is over 38 hectares and has a skateboard park, 7 baseball diamonds, a cricket pitch, a children&#x27;s playground, a BMX track, soccer pitches, an off-leash dog park, walking trails, and public washrooms.

===== Taylor Road Trail =====
The trail is located inside Eagle Ridge Place. There are benches and a nature trail.

===== General Money Park =====
The park is located between Harlech Road and Sunningdale Road West. The Qualicum Beach Train Station is located within the park, as well as a church and steam locomotive. There are benches, flower gardens, a community garden, and fruit trees.

===== Glassford Square =====
The square is located centrally in the town, next to the Public Library and Town Hall. The square features an artisan sculpted marble fountain, benches, and an information kiosk.

===== Grandon Creek =====
The park is located in the west part of Qualicum Beach. The park is heavily forested and features a ravine with fish ladders. There are nature trails and benches. The Qualicum Beach Streamkeepers count smolt annually in Grandon Creek and work to improve the habitat.
===== Heritage Forest =====
Heritage Forest is a 50-acre forest in Qualicum Beach that features pockets of old growth coastal Douglas fir, western red cedar, grand fir, Sitka spruce, and hemlock. Heritage Forest is situated within the Coastal Douglas fir biogeoclimatic zone. This zone is the most biologically diverse forest type in British Columbia. The land was previously owned by General Noel Money and later the Brown Family Trust.

In 1996, plans were in place to subdivide the land into 110 building lots. Anne and Leo Klees and others formed the Brown Property Preservation Society to raise funds to purchase the land and save it from development. In 2004, the group was able to purchase the forest with help from the town of Qualicum Beach. The Heritage Forest represents 20% of all coastal Douglas fir protected forest in British Columbia.

===== Jubilee Park =====
The park is located on Island Highway 19A, along the waterfront. The park features benches and picnic tables.

===== Miraloma Park =====
The park is located on Bennett Road. The park is a third of a hectare and features nature trails.

===== Seacrest Park =====
The park is located on Seacrest Place. It functions as a beach access and has benches.

===== Spirit Square =====
The square is located on Memorial Avenue. The square is next to the Community Hall and has sitting areas. The square is often used for events.

===== Yambury Park =====
The park is located on Yambury Road. The park is partially forested and has nature trails. It is a popular spot for dog walking.

==Heritage sites==
Qualicum Beach has a number of places on the Canadian Register of Historic Places.
==Landmarks==

==Image gallery==

== In popular culture ==
The Hallmark TV series &quot;Chesapeake Shores&quot; was primarily filmed in Qualicum Beach. The Thrall Residence (also known as the Leigh House) was used as Sally&#x27;s Café, a frequent filming location throughout the series.

== Notable people ==

* Noel Ernest Money, a British Canadian brigadier-general.
* Coral Eswyn (née Ellinor) Lyster, a British Canadian war bride author who lived in Qualicum Beach.
* Alexander Duncan McRae, a Canadian Politician.
* Horatio Ray Milner, Canadian lawyer and businessman.
* Herbert John Welch, former mayor and politician.
* Harrison Houde, Canadian singer and actor.

==Other==

=== Freedom of the Town ===
The following people and military units have received the Freedom of the Town of Qualicum Beach.

==== People ====

* Margaret Little in 1998
* James Robert Storey in 2006
* Anna Maria Klees in 2011
* Arthur Norman Skipsey in 2011
* John E. Collins in 2011
* Leo Klees in 2011

==== Military Units ====
* 19 Mission Support Squadron, RCAF: 7 May 2022.

HMS Qualicum was a ship in the Royal Navy named for the community.

=== Serval Escape ===
On October 2, 2022, a pair of Servals escaped from a private residence in Qualicum Beach. A neighbour&#x27;s pet cat was killed by one of the escaped servals. The first serval was found on October 3, while the second roamed free, killing several ducks, until it was captured on October 9. The incident, among others, prompted the BC SPCA to request a provincial ban on serval cats as pets.

=== Town Crier ===
Since 1999, the town&#x27;s official Town crier is Leonard Mustard.

== See also ==
* General A.D. McRae, who built Eaglecrest.
* Little Qualicum Falls Provincial Park.
* Horne Lake Caves Provincial Park.
* List of former mayors.
* Parksville, British Columbia.
* MacMillan Provincial Park Cathedral Grove
* Qualicum First Nation
* Eswyn Lyster - warbride author
* Englishman River Falls Provincial Park
* Noel Money

== Notes ==
==References==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1010790" start="0" end="14" title="Qualicum Beach" label="Qualicum Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="57" end="73" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="90" end="101" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950351" start="163" end="179" title="Mount Arrowsmith" label="Mount Arrowsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258" start="191" end="208" title="Strait of Georgia" label="Strait of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="212" end="228" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="316" end="324" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="329" end="338" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783996" start="380" end="388" title="cottages" label="cottages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413228" start="433" end="447" title="retirement age" label="retirement age"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="487" end="493" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083191" start="577" end="591" title="Island Highway" label="Island Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368477" start="597" end="617" title="Island Rail Corridor" label="Island Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009604" start="658" end="673" title="Lasqueti Island" label="Lasqueti Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069475" start="750" end="759" title="Pentlatch language" label="Pentlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q475211" start="804" end="815" title="chum salmon" label="chum salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122037" start="925" end="946" title="Qualicum First Nation" label="Qualicum First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810294" start="1012" end="1025" title="Camassia" label="camas flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q475211" start="1044" end="1055" title="chum salmon" label="chum salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068209" start="1206" end="1213" title="geoduck" label="geoduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788076" start="1216" end="1228" title="Saxidomus gigantea" label="butter clams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016512" start="1234" end="1245" title="Tresus capax" label="horse clams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069475" start="1247" end="1256" title="Pentlatch language" label="Pentlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="1375" end="1384" title="Smallpox" label="small pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q945507" start="1602" end="1628" title="Canadian Indian residential school system" label="residential school system."/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1669" end="1694" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679142" start="1704" end="1720" title="Adam Grant Horne" label="Adam Grant Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q268377" start="1804" end="1818" title="Qualicum River" label="Qualicum River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709549" start="1826" end="1839" title="Alberni Inlet" label="Alberni Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269338" start="1908" end="1920" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Caithness)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914203" start="1929" end="1966" title="Vancouver Island Exploring Expedition" label="Vancouver Island Exploring Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2031" end="2040" title="small pox" label="small pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="2041" end="2049" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268632" start="2376" end="2389" title="Qualicum Beach station" label="train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368477" start="2413" end="2428" title="E&amp;amp;N Railway" label="E&amp;amp;N Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996479" start="2707" end="2717" title="Noel Money" label="Noel Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2726" end="2737" title="World War I" label="World War 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="2797" end="2812" title="Edward VIII" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q182580" start="2853" end="2867" title="Shirley Temple" label="Shirley Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="2869" end="2880" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="2890" end="2906" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="King of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996479" start="3074" end="3084" title="Noel Money" label="Noel Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718776" start="3803" end="3825" title="Alexander Duncan McRae" label="Alexander Duncan McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3939" end="3957" title="Elizabeth II" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="3966" end="3983" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268631" start="4269" end="4285" title="Qualicum College" label="Qualicum College"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="4833" end="4840" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="4876" end="4880" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="6285" end="6310" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="6324" end="6341" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="6516" end="6534" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="6637" end="6643" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q202785" start="6673" end="6680" title="average" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="6930" end="6941" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="7735" end="7746" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="8197" end="8208" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="8282" end="8289" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="8317" end="8322" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="8350" end="8358" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8386" end="8392" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="8420" end="8426" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="8451" end="8459" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="8484" end="8493" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="8518" end="8523" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="8581" end="8592" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073649" start="8640" end="8650" title="Irreligion in Canada" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193115" start="8677" end="8689" title="Christianity in Canada" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="8716" end="8723" title="Judaism in Canada" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097993" start="8746" end="8754" title="Buddhism in Canada" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022915" start="8777" end="8782" title="Islam in Canada" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="8862" end="8882" title="Municipal government" label="Municipal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="8919" end="8934" title="council-manager" label="council-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095362" start="9045" end="9073" title="Regional District of Nanaimo" label="Regional District of Nanaimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="9132" end="9140" title="Plurality-at-large voting" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="9184" end="9200" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="9331" end="9343" title="Board of education" label="School board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432215" start="9376" end="9403" title="School District 69 Qualicum" label="School District 69 Qualicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438931" start="9460" end="9470" title="Parksville, British Columbia" label="Parksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16461" start="9699" end="9706" title="Nanaimo" label="Nanaimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138727" start="9739" end="9758" title="Parksville-Qualicum" label="Parksville-Qualicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q101032088" start="9835" end="9846" title="Adam Walker (Canadian politician)" label="Adam Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="9937" end="9943" title="BC NDP" label="BC NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952299" start="10022" end="10039" title="Courtenay—Alberni" label="Courtenay—Alberni"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="10070" end="10096" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="10100" end="10103" title="New Democratic Party" label="NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="10104" end="10124" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278424" start="10125" end="10135" title="Gord Johns" label="Gord Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="10162" end="10166" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q918904" start="10189" end="10200" title="British Columbia Highway 19A" label="Highway 19A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258" start="10257" end="10274" title="Strait of Georgia" label="Strait of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918988" start="10312" end="10321" title="British Columbia Highway 4" label="Highway 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q751854" start="10342" end="10357" title="MacMillan Provincial Park" label="Cathedral Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022127" start="10361" end="10373" title="Port Alberni" label="Port Alberni"/>
<link wikidata="Q462564" start="10378" end="10384" title="Tofino, British Columbia" label="Tofino"/>
<link wikidata="Q994047" start="10386" end="10394" title="Ucluelet" label="Ucluelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q806004" start="10396" end="10404" title="Bamfield, British Columbia" label="Bamfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756401" start="10413" end="10446" title="Pacific Rim National Park Reserve" label="Pacific Rim National Park Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="10478" end="10484" title="Vancouver Island" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="10709" end="10717" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927172" start="10725" end="10732" title="Malahat (passenger train)" label="Malahat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877478" start="11083" end="11097" title="Beaufort Range" label="Beaufort Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611163" start="11110" end="11133" title="Vancouver Island Ranges" label="Vancouver Island Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773463" start="11268" end="11305" title="Marshall-Stevenson Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Marshall-Stevenson Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880944" start="11424" end="11441" title="Black-tailed Deer" label="black-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060769" start="11443" end="11456" title="Roosevelt elk" label="Roosevelt elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="11458" end="11468" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="11474" end="11480" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="11527" end="11534" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="11994" end="12015" title="Mediterranean Climate" label="Mediterranean Climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789796" start="12289" end="12308" title="Ridge (meteorology)" label="High pressure ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611163" start="12916" end="12939" title="Vancouver Island Ranges" label="Vancouver Island Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950351" start="12963" end="12979" title="Mount Arrowsmith" label="Mount Arrowsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="12981" end="12997" title="Rain shadow" label="shadows rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029492" start="13041" end="13050" title="Garry Oak" label="Garry Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q430057" start="13055" end="13062" title="Arbutus" label="Arbutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432215" start="13107" end="13126" title="School District 69 Qualicum" label="School District 69."/>
<link wikidata="Q6450058" start="13357" end="13382" title="Kwalikum Secondary School" label="Kwalikum Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270231" start="15027" end="15048" title="Royal Canadian Legion" label="Royal Canadian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010112" start="15056" end="15073" title="Pancake breakfast" label="Pancake Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15231" end="15248" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050" start="15623" end="15634" title="Brant (goose)" label="Brant goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445717" start="16123" end="16137" title="Seedy Sunday" label="Seedy Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628494" start="18835" end="18846" title="H.R. Milner" label="H.R. Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="18895" end="18909" title="Charles III" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="18914" end="18928" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="18958" end="18971" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18976" end="18991" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="19149" end="19160" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="19185" end="19197" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651433" start="19423" end="19444" title="Little Qualicum Falls Provincial Park" label="Little Qualicum Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q215184" start="20643" end="20646" title="BMX" label="BMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832888" start="21560" end="21565" title="Juvenile salmon" label="smolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="21751" end="21762" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="21764" end="21781" title="Thuja plicata" label="western red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q147434" start="21783" end="21792" title="Abies grandis" label="grand fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q147426" start="21794" end="21806" title="Picea sitchensis" label="Sitka spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="21812" end="21819" title="Tsuga" label="hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996479" start="22010" end="22028" title="Noel Money" label="General Noel Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456275" start="23241" end="23277" title="Canadian Register of Historic Places" label="Canadian Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q24088358" start="23367" end="23384" title="Chesapeake Shores" label="Chesapeake Shores"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996479" start="23591" end="23608" title="Noel Money" label="Noel Ernest Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402312" start="23650" end="23682" title="Eswyn Lyster" label="Coral Eswyn (née Ellinor) Lyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718776" start="23751" end="23773" title="Alexander Duncan McRae" label="Alexander Duncan McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628494" start="23800" end="23818" title="H. R. Milner" label="Horatio Ray Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999397" start="23855" end="23873" title="Herbert John Welch" label="Herbert John Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238651" start="23906" end="23920" title="Harrison Houde" label="Harrison Houde"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="24047" end="24066" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="24323" end="24327" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="RCAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q42699" start="24462" end="24468" title="Serval" label="Serval"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849154" start="24762" end="24769" title="British Columbia Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="BC SPCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500389" start="24879" end="24889" title="Town crier" label="Town crier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718776" start="24928" end="24946" title="Alexander Duncan McRae" label="General A.D. McRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651433" start="24972" end="25009" title="Little Qualicum Falls Provincial Park" label="Little Qualicum Falls Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060537" start="25013" end="25045" title="Horne Lake Caves Provincial Park" label="Horne Lake Caves Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627670" start="25049" end="25070" title="List of mayors of Qualicum Beach, British Columbia" label="List of former mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438931" start="25074" end="25102" title="Parksville, British Columbia" label="Parksville, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q751854" start="25106" end="25131" title="MacMillan Provincial Park" label="MacMillan Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122037" start="25150" end="25171" title="Qualicum First Nation" label="Qualicum First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402312" start="25174" end="25186" title="Eswyn Lyster" label="Eswyn Lyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342877" start="25207" end="25245" title="Englishman River Falls Provincial Park" label="Englishman River Falls Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996479" start="25248" end="25258" title="Noel Money" label="Noel Money"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849225" wikidata="Q695116" url="?curid=849225" title="Notes from Underground">
<text>Notes from Underground (Russian: ; Russian: ; also translated as Notes from the Underground or Letters from the Underworld) is a novella by Fyodor Dostoevsky first published in the journal &quot;Epoch&quot; in 1864. It is a first-person narrative in the form of a &quot;confession&quot;. The work was originally announced by Dostoevsky in &quot;Epoch&quot; under the title &quot;A Confession&quot;.

The novella presents itself as an excerpt from the memoirs of a bitter, isolated, unnamed narrator (generally referred to by critics as the Underground Man), who is a retired civil servant living in St. Petersburg. Although the first part of the novella has the form of a monologue, the narrator&#x27;s form of address to his reader is acutely dialogized. According to Mikhail Bakhtin, in the Underground Man&#x27;s confession &quot;there is literally not a single monologically firm, undissociated word&quot;. The Underground Man&#x27;s every word anticipates the words of an other, with whom he enters into an obsessive internal polemic.

The Underground Man attacks contemporary Russian philosophy, especially Nikolay Chernyshevsky&#x27;s &quot;What Is to Be Done?&quot; More generally, the work can be viewed as an attack on and rebellion against determinism: the idea that everything, including the human personality and will, can be reduced to the laws of nature, science and mathematics.

==Plot summary==
The novella is divided into two parts. The title of the first part—&quot;Underground&quot;—is itself given a footnoted introduction by Dostoevsky in which the character of the &#x27;author&#x27; of the Notes and the nature of the &#x27;excerpts&#x27; are discussed.

===Part 1: &quot;Underground&quot;===
The first part of &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; has eleven sections:

* Section I propounds a number of riddles whose meanings are further developed as the narration continues. 
* Sections 2, 3, &amp; 4 deal with suffering and the irrational pleasure of suffering. 
* Sections 5 &amp; 6 discuss the moral and intellectual fluctuation that the narrator feels along with his conscious insecurities regarding &quot;inertia&quot;—inaction. 
* Sections 7, 8, &amp; 9 cover theories of reason and logic, closing with the last two sections as a summary and transition into Part 2.

The narrator observes that utopian society removes suffering and pain, but man desires both things and needs them in order to be happy. He argues that removing pain and suffering in society takes away a man&#x27;s freedom. He says that the cruelty of society makes human beings moan about pain only to spread their suffering to others.

Unlike most people, who typically act out of revenge because they believe justice is the end, the Underground Man is conscious of his problems and feels the desire for revenge, but he does not find it virtuous; the incongruity leads to spite towards the act itself with its concomitant circumstances. He feels that others like him exist, but he continuously concentrates on his spitefulness instead of on actions that would help him avoid the problems that torment him. The main issue for the Underground Man is that he has reached a point of ennui (boredom) and inactivity. He even admits that he would rather be inactive out of laziness.

The first part also gives a harsh criticism of determinism, as well as of intellectual attempts at dictating human action and behavior by logic, which the Underground Man discusses in terms of the simple math problem: &quot;two times two makes four&quot; (cf. necessitarianism). He argues that despite humanity&#x27;s attempt to create a utopia where everyone lives in harmony (symbolized by The Crystal Palace in Nikolai Chernyshevsky&#x27;s &quot;What Is to Be Done?&quot;), one cannot avoid the simple fact that anyone, at any time, can decide to act in a way that might not be considered to be in their own self-interest; some will do so simply to validate their existence and to protest and confirm that they exist as individuals. The Underground Man ridicules the type of enlightened self-interest that Chernyshevsky proposes as the foundation of Utopian society. The idea of cultural and legislative systems relying on this rational egoism is what the protagonist despises. The Underground Man embraces this ideal in praxis, and seems to blame it for his current state of unhappiness.

===Part 2: &quot;Apropos of the Wet Snow&quot;===
The title of Part 2 is an allusion to the critic Pavel Annenkov&#x27;s observation that &quot;damp showers and wet snow&quot; were indispensable to writers of the natural school in Petersburg. Following the title there is an epigraph containing the opening lines from Nekrasov&#x27;s poem &quot;When from the darkness of delusion...&quot; about a woman driven to prostitution by poverty. The quotation is interrupted by an ellipsis and the words &quot;Etc., etc., etc.&quot;

Part 2 consists of ten sections covering some events from the narrator&#x27;s life. While he continues in his self-conscious, polemical style, the themes of his confession are now developed anecdotally.

The first section tells of the Underground Man&#x27;s obsession with an officer who once insulted him in a pub. This officer frequently passes him by on the street, seemingly without noticing his existence. He sees the officer on the street and thinks of ways to take revenge, eventually borrowing money to buy an expensive overcoat and intentionally bumping into the officer to assert his equality. To the Underground Man&#x27;s surprise, however, the officer does not seem to notice that it even happened.

Sections II to V focus on a going-away dinner party with some old school friends to bid farewell to one of these friends—Zverkov—who is being transferred out of the city. The Underground Man hated them when he was younger, but after a random visit to Simonov&#x27;s, he decides to meet them at the appointed location. They fail to tell him that the time has been changed to six instead of five, so he arrives early. He gets into an argument with the four of them after a short time, declaring to all his hatred of society and using them as the symbol of it. At the end, they go off without him to a secret brothel, and, in his rage, the underground man follows them there to confront Zverkov once and for all, regardless if he is beaten or not. He arrives at the brothel to find Zverkov and the others already retired with prostitutes to other rooms. He then encounters Liza, a young prostitute.

The remaining sections deal with his encounter with Liza and its repercussions. The story cuts to Liza and the Underground Man lying silently in the dark together. The Underground Man confronts Liza with an image of her future, by which she is unmoved at first, but after challenging her individual utopian dreams (similar to his ridicule of the Crystal Palace in Part 1), she eventually realizes the plight of her position and how she will slowly become useless and will descend more and more, until she is no longer wanted by anyone. The thought of dying such a terribly disgraceful death brings her to realize her position, and she then finds herself enthralled by the Underground Man&#x27;s seemingly poignant grasp of the destructive nature of society. He gives her his address and leaves.

He is subsequently overcome by the fear of her actually arriving at his dilapidated apartment after appearing such a &quot;hero&quot; to her and, in the middle of an argument with his servant, she arrives. He then curses her and takes back everything he said to her, saying he was, in fact, laughing at her and reiterates the truth of her miserable position. Near the end of his painful rage he wells up in tears after saying that he was only seeking to have power over her and a desire to humiliate her. He begins to criticize himself and states that he is in fact horrified by his own poverty and embarrassed by his situation. Liza realizes how pitiful he is and tenderly embraces him. The Underground Man cries out &quot;They—they won&#x27;t let me—I—I can&#x27;t be good!&quot;

After all this, he still acts terribly toward her, and, before she leaves, he stuffs a five ruble note into her hand, which she throws onto the table (it is implied that the Underground Man had sex with Liza and that the note is payment). He tries to catch her as she goes out to the street, but he cannot find her and never hears from her again. He tries to stop the pain in his heart by &quot;fantasizing.&quot;And isn&#x27;t it better, won&#x27;t it be better?… Insult—after all, it&#x27;s a purification; it&#x27;s the most caustic, painful consciousness! Only tomorrow I would have defiled her soul and wearied her heart. But now the insult will never ever die within her, and however repulsive the filth that awaits her, the insult will elevate her, it will cleanse her…He recalls this moment as making him unhappy whenever he thinks of it, yet again proving the fact from the first section that his spite for society and his inability to act makes him no better than those he supposedly despises.

The concluding sentences recall some of the themes explored in the first part, and he tells the reader directly, &quot;I have merely carried to an extreme in my life what you have not dared to carry even halfway.”

At the end of Part 2, a further editorial note is added by Dostoevsky, indicating that the &#x27;author&#x27; couldn&#x27;t help himself and kept writing, but that &quot;it seems to us that we might as well stop here&quot;.

== Themes and context ==

The narration by the Underground Man is laden with ideological allusions and complex conversations regarding the political climate of the period. Using his fiction as a weapon of ideological discourse, Dostoevsky challenges the ideologies of his time, mainly nihilism and rational egoism. The novel rejects the rationalist assumptions which underlie Jeremy Bentham&#x27;s utilitarian social philosophy.

In Part 2, the rant that the Underground Man directs at Liza as they sit in the dark, and her response to it, is an example of such discourse. Liza believes she can survive and rise up through the ranks of her brothel as a means of achieving her dreams of functioning successfully in society. However, as the Underground Man points out in his rant, such dreams are based on a utopian trust of not only the societal systems in place, but also humanity&#x27;s ability to avoid corruption and irrationality in general. The points made in Part 1 about the Underground Man&#x27;s pleasure in being rude and refusing to seek medical help are his examples of how idealised rationality is inherently flawed for not accounting for the darker and more irrational side of humanity.

The Stone Wall is one of the symbols in the novella and represents all the barriers of the laws of nature that stand against man and his freedom. Put simply, the rule that &quot;two plus two equals four&quot; angers the Underground Man because he wants the freedom to say &quot;two plus two equals five&quot;, but that the Stone Wall of nature&#x27;s laws stands in front of him and his free will.

=== Political climate ===
In the 1860s, Russia was beginning to absorb the ideas and culture of Western Europe at an accelerated pace, nurturing an unstable local climate. There was especially a growth in revolutionary activity accompanying a general restructuring of tsardom where liberal reforms, enacted by an unwieldy autocracy, only induced a greater sense of tension in both politics and civil society. Many of Russia&#x27;s intellectuals were engaged in a debate with the Westernizers on one hand, and the Slavophiles on the other, concerned with favoring importation of Western reforms or promoting pan-Slavic traditions to address Russia&#x27;s particular social reality. Although Tsar Alexander emancipated the serfs in 1861, Russia was still very much a post-medieval, traditional peasant society.

When &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; was written, there was an intellectual ferment on discussions regarding religious philosophy and various &#x27;enlightened&#x27; utopian ideas. The work is a challenge to, and a method of understanding, the larger implications of the ideological drive toward a utopian society. Utopianism largely pertains to a society&#x27;s collective dream, but what troubles the Underground Man is this very idea of collectivism. The point the Underground Man makes is that individuals will ultimately always rebel against a collectively imposed idea of paradise; a utopian image such as The Crystal Palace will always fail because of the underlying irrationality of humanity.

== Writing style ==
Although the novella is written in first-person narrative, the &quot;I&quot; is never really discovered. The syntax can at times seem &quot;multi-layered&quot;; the subject and the verb are often at the very beginning of the sentence before the object goes into the depths of the narrator&#x27;s thoughts. The narrator repeats many of his concepts.

In chapter 11, the narrator refers to his inferiority to everyone around him and describes listening to people as like &quot;listening through a crack under the floor.&quot; The word &quot;underground&quot; actually comes from a bad translation into English. A better translation would be a crawl space: a space under the floor that is not big enough for a human, but where rodents and bugs live. According to Russian folklore, it is also a place where evil spirits live.

== Legacy ==
The challenge posed by the Underground Man towards the idea of an &quot;enlightened&quot; society laid the groundwork for later writing. The work has been described as &quot;probably the most important single source of the modern dystopia.&quot;

&quot;Notes from Underground&quot; has had an impact on various authors and works in the fields of philosophy, literature, and film, including:

* the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche
* &quot;The Metamorphosis&quot; (1915), a novella by Franz Kafka
* &quot;Invisible Man&quot; (1952), by Ralph Ellison
* &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; (1976), directed by Martin Scorsese
* &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; (1995), a film adaptation of Dostoevsky&#x27;s novella, directed by Gary Walkow, with Henry Czerny and Sheryl Lee in the leading roles.
* &quot;Yeraltı&quot; (2012), directed by Zeki Demirkubuz
* &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; (2014), by Roger Scruton

==English translations==
Since &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; was first published in Russian, there have been a number of translations into English over the years, including: 
* 1913. C. J. Hogarth. &quot;Letters from the Underworld&quot;.
* 1918. Constance Garnett.
** Revised by Ralph E. Matlaw, 1960.
* 1955. David Magarshack. &quot;Notes from the Underground&quot;.
* 1961. Andrew R. MacAndrew. 
* 1969. Serge Shishkoff.
* 1972. Jessie Coulson.
* 1974. Mirra Ginsburg.
* 1989. Michael R. Katz.
* 1991. Jane Kentish. &quot;Notes from the Underground&quot;.
* 1994. Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky.
* 2009. Ronald Wilks.
* 2009. Boris Jakim.
* 2010. Kyril Zinovieff and Jenny Hughes.
* 2014. Kirsten Lodge. &quot;Notes from the Underground&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Full text of &quot;Notes from Underground&quot; in the original Russian
* EDSITEment&#x27;s Launchpad Dostoevsky&#x27;s &quot;Notes from Underground&quot;
* The theory of self-interest in &quot;Notes from Underground&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1938758" start="24" end="31" title="Reforms of Russian orthography" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="35" end="42" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="129" end="136" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="140" end="157" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383780" start="189" end="206" title="Epoch (Russian magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Epoch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q847337" start="270" end="280" title="confession" label="confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="599" end="613" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="672" end="681" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="744" end="754" title="Dialogue (Bakhtin)#Double-voiced discourse" label="dialogized"/>
<link wikidata="Q185375" start="769" end="784" title="Mikhail Bakhtin" label="Mikhail Bakhtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192331" start="1113" end="1134" title="Nikolay Chernyshevsky" label="Nikolay Chernyshevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251772" start="1148" end="1167" title="What Is to Be Done? (novel)" label="What Is to Be Done?"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="1251" end="1262" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34255" start="3178" end="3183" title="ennui" label="ennui"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="3323" end="3334" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3500" end="3524" title="2 + 2 = 5#Russia" label="two times two makes four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048501" start="3532" end="3535" title="cf." label="cf."/>
<link wikidata="Q3346832" start="3536" end="3552" title="necessitarianism" label="necessitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="3668" end="3686" title="The Crystal Palace" label="The Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q192331" start="3690" end="3711" title="Nikolai Chernyshevsky" label="Nikolai Chernyshevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251772" start="3725" end="3744" title="What Is to Be Done? (novel)" label="What Is to Be Done?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379073" start="4054" end="4079" title="enlightened self-interest" label="enlightened self-interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621223" start="4207" end="4222" title="rational egoism" label="rational egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247560" start="4300" end="4306" title="praxis (process)" label="praxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373475" start="4468" end="4482" title="Pavel Annenkov" label="Pavel Annenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314206" start="4582" end="4596" title="natural school" label="natural school"/>
<link wikidata="Q208003" start="4687" end="4695" title="Nikolay Nekrasov" label="Nekrasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="9734" end="9755" title="ideological discourse" label="ideological discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="9814" end="9822" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="9905" end="9919" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="9927" end="9938" title="Utilitarianism" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q979531" start="10735" end="10745" title="Stone wall" label="Stone Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="10822" end="10836" title="Law of Nature" label="laws of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097227" start="11003" end="11039" title="2 + 2 = 5" label="&amp;quot;two plus two equals five&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26210461" start="11163" end="11168" title="1860 in Russia" label="1860s"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="11398" end="11405" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="tsardom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260815" start="11412" end="11427" title="Liberalism in Russia" label="liberal reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q370870" start="11609" end="11620" title="Westernizer" label="Westernizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46699" start="11643" end="11654" title="Slavophiles" label="Slavophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="11820" end="11834" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Tsar Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="11835" end="11864" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="emancipated the serfs in 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498278" start="11922" end="11937" title="Serfdom in Russia" label="peasant society"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="12383" end="12395" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q616622" start="12700" end="12722" title="first-person narrative" label="first-person narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="12774" end="12780" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="12830" end="12837" title="Subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="12846" end="12850" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="12910" end="12916" title="Object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010360" start="13306" end="13317" title="crawl space (basement)" label="crawl space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5863468" start="13425" end="13441" title="Folklore of Russia" label="Russian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="13731" end="13739" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="13911" end="13930" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q184222" start="13939" end="13956" title="The Metamorphosis" label="The Metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="13973" end="13980" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="13984" end="13995" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784288" start="14004" end="14017" title="Invisible Man" label="Invisible Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="14035" end="14048" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="14057" end="14068" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="14095" end="14110" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q739004" start="14234" end="14246" title="Henry Czerny" label="Henry Czerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q233593" start="14251" end="14261" title="Sheryl Lee" label="Sheryl Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16736826" start="14292" end="14299" title="Yeraltı" label="Yeraltı"/>
<link wikidata="Q187261" start="14326" end="14341" title="Zeki Demirkubuz" label="Zeki Demirkubuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22137305" start="14350" end="14372" title="Notes from Underground (Scruton novel)" label="Notes from Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="14390" end="14403" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944155" start="14593" end="14606" title="C. J. Hogarth" label="C. J. Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495818" start="14657" end="14674" title="Constance Garnett" label="Constance Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237036" start="14721" end="14737" title="David Magarshack" label="David Magarshack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16636833" start="14866" end="14880" title="Mirra Ginsburg" label="Mirra Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328395" start="14977" end="15015" title="Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky" label="Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849227" wikidata="Q4974261" url="?curid=849227" title="Bronze wool">
<text>Bronze wool is a bundle of very fine bronze filaments , used in finishing and repair work to polish wood or metal objects. Bronze wool is similar to steel wool, but is used in its place to avoid some problems associated with broken filaments: steel rusts quickly, especially in a marine environment. Furthermore, steel is magnetic and can affect the operation of marine equipment, such as a compass. Steel can also discolor some materials, such as oak. This discoloration results from a reaction between the tannates in the oak and the iron in the steel, forming iron tannate, a black compound.

Bronze wool also has uses for filter elements, again when rusting would be a problem.

The main US retail supplier of bronze wool is Homax Group, under their Rhodes American brand.

Bronze wool has largely been replaced for cost reasons, by plastic mesh abrasives from makers such as Webrax and 3M Scotch-Brite. These use grains of aluminium oxide or silicon carbide, bonded to a non-woven web of nylon fibres. Like bronze wool, they avoid rust problems.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4974261" start="0" end="11" title="Bronze wool" label="Bronze wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="37" end="43" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q925477" start="149" end="159" title="steel wool" label="steel wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="249" end="253" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="322" end="330" title="magnetic" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="400" end="405" title="Steel" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="448" end="451" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683610" start="508" end="516" title="tannates" label="tannates"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="536" end="540" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q159433" start="891" end="893" title="3M" label="3M"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435496" start="894" end="906" title="Scotch-Brite" label="Scotch-Brite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="928" end="943" title="aluminium oxide" label="aluminium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="947" end="962" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="993" end="1005" title="Nylon" label="nylon fibres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849232" wikidata="Q7897982" url="?curid=849232" title="Up North">
<text>Up North may refer to:

== Regions ==
* Northern England
* Northern Wisconsin, including the Northern Highland, Lake Superior Lowland, Door County, and various other locations with an affluence of lakes and second homes, by residents of the Chicago and Milwaukee metropolitan areas.
* Northern Minnesota, including the North Shore, Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, Superior National Forest, and other areas north of the Twin Cities with an abundance of lakes and personal cabins, by residents of Minnesota.
* Northern Michigan, by residents of the lower peninsula of Michigan
*Northern Saskatchewan, by residents of Southern Saskatchewan

== Media ==
* &quot;Up North&quot; (book), a 1992 book by Charles Jennings
* &quot;Up North&quot; (film), a 2018 Nigerian film
* &quot;Up North&quot;, a comedy series on the Essex TV website, Sheffield Live
* Up North Combine, a British amalgamation of pigeon racing clubs
*&quot;Up North (Down South, Back East, Out West)&quot;, a song by Wade Hayes from the album &quot;Highways &amp; Heartaches&quot;
==See also==
* Upstate (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7897982" start="0" end="8" title="Up North" label="Up North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="40" end="56" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058391" start="93" end="110" title="Northern Highland" label="Northern Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477889" start="112" end="133" title="Lake Superior Lowland" label="Lake Superior Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q490550" start="135" end="146" title="Door County, Wisconsin" label="Door County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754965" start="241" end="248" title="Chicago metropolitan area" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146039" start="253" end="262" title="Milwaukee metropolitan area" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056653" start="319" end="330" title="North Shore (Lake Superior)" label="North Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692538" start="332" end="369" title="Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness" label="Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079158" start="371" end="395" title="Superior National Forest" label="Superior National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="426" end="437" title="Twin Cities" label="Twin Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="502" end="511" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343570" start="515" end="532" title="Northern Michigan" label="Northern Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47368402" start="583" end="604" title="Northern Saskatchewan Administration District" label="Northern Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897985" start="659" end="686" title="Up North (book)" label="&amp;quot;Up North&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q71009416" start="722" end="749" title="Up North (film)" label="&amp;quot;Up North&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492692" start="837" end="851" title="Sheffield Live" label="Sheffield Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897987" start="854" end="870" title="Up North Combine" label="Up North Combine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843728" start="1017" end="1042" title="Highways &amp;amp; Heartaches (Wade Hayes album)" label="Highways &amp;amp; Heartaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210904" start="1064" end="1088" title="Upstate (disambiguation)" label="Upstate (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849237" wikidata="Q121088" url="?curid=849237" title="Contiki">
<text>Contiki is an operating system for networked, memory-constrained systems with a focus on low-power wireless Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Contiki is used for systems for street lighting, sound monitoring for smart cities, radiation monitoring and alarms. It is open-source software released under the BSD-3-Clause license.

Contiki was created by Adam Dunkels in 2002 and has been further developed by a worldwide team of developers from Texas Instruments, Atmel, Cisco, ENEA, ETH Zurich, Redwire, RWTH Aachen University, Oxford University, SAP, Sensinode, Swedish Institute of Computer Science, ST Microelectronics, Zolertia, and many others. Contiki gained popularity because of its built in TCP/IP stack and lightweight preemptive scheduling over event-driven kernel which is a very motivating feature for IoT. The name &quot;Contiki&quot; comes from Thor Heyerdahl&#x27;s famous Kon-Tiki raft.

Contiki provides multitasking and a built-in Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP stack), yet needs only about 10 kilobytes of random-access memory (RAM) and 30 kilobytes of read-only memory (ROM). A full system, including a graphical user interface, needs about 30 kilobytes of RAM.

A new branch has recently been created, known as Contiki-NG: The OS for Next Generation IoT Devices

==Hardware==
Contiki is designed to run on types of hardware devices that are severely constrained in memory, power, processing power, and communication bandwidth. A typical Contiki system has memory on the order of kilobytes, a power budget on the order of milliwatts, processing speed measured in megaHertz, and communication bandwidth on the order of hundreds of kilobits/second. Such systems include many types of embedded systems, and old 8-bit computers.

==Networking==
Contiki provides three network mechanisms: the uIP TCP/IP stack, which provides IPv4 networking, the uIPv6 stack, which provides IPv6 networking, and the Rime stack, which is a set of custom lightweight networking protocols designed for low-power wireless networks. The IPv6 stack was contributed by Cisco and was, when released, the smallest IPv6 stack to receive the &quot;IPv6 Ready&quot; certification. The IPv6 stack also contains the &quot;Routing Protocol for Low power and Lossy Networks&quot; (RPL) routing protocol for low-power lossy IPv6 networks and the 6LoWPAN header compression and adaptation layer for IEEE 802.15.4 links.

Rime is an alternative network stack, for use when the overhead of the IPv4 or IPv6 stacks is prohibitive. The Rime stack provides a set of communication primitives for low-power wireless systems. The default primitives are single-hop unicast, single-hop broadcast, multi-hop unicast, network flooding, and address-free data collection. The primitives can be used on their own or combined to form more complex protocols and mechanisms.

==Low-power operation==
Many Contiki systems are severely power-constrained. Battery operated wireless sensors may need to provide years of unattended operation and with little means to recharge or replace batteries. Contiki provides a set of mechanisms to reduce the power consumption of systems on which it runs. The default mechanism for attaining low-power operation of the radio is called ContikiMAC. With ContikiMAC, nodes can be running in low-power mode and still be able to receive and relay radio messages.

==Simulation==
The Contiki system includes a sensor simulator called Cooja, which simulates Contiki nodes. The nodes belong to one of the three following classes: a) emulated Cooja nodes, b) Contiki code compiled and executed on the simulation host, or c) Java nodes, where the behavior of the node must be reimplemented as a Java class. One Cooja simulation may contain a mix of sensor nodes from any of the three classes. Emulated nodes can also be used to include non-Contiki nodes in a simulated network.

In Contiki 2.6, platforms with the TI MSP430 and Atmel AVR microcontrollers can be emulated.

==Programming model==
To run efficiently on small-memory systems, the Contiki programming model is based on protothreads. A protothread is a memory-efficient programming abstraction that shares features of both multithreading and event-driven programming to attain a low memory overhead of each protothread. The kernel invokes the protothread of a process in response to an internal or external event. Examples of internal events are timers that fire or messages being posted from other processes. Examples of external events are sensors that trigger or incoming packets from a radio neighbor.

Protothreads are cooperatively scheduled. Thus, a Contiki process must always explicitly yield control back to the kernel at regular intervals. Contiki processes may use a special protothread construct to block waiting for events while yielding control to the kernel between each event invocation.

== Features ==
Contiki supports per-process optional preemptive multithreading, inter-process communication using message passing through events, as well as an optional graphical user interface (GUI) subsystem with either direct graphic support for locally connected terminals or networked virtual display with Virtual Network Computing (VNC) or over Telnet.

A full installation of Contiki includes the following features:
* Multitasking kernel
* Optional per-application preemptive multithreading
* Protothreads
* Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) networking, including IPv6
* Windowing system and GUI
* Networked remote display using Virtual Network Computing
* A web browser (claimed to be the world&#x27;s smallest)
* Personal web server
* Simple telnet client
* Screensaver

Contiki is supported by popular SSL/TLS libraries such as wolfSSL, which includes a port in its 3.15.5 release.

== Ports ==
=== Microcontrollers===
* Atmel – ARM, AVR
* NXP Semiconductors – LPC1768, LPC2103, MC13224
* Microchip – dsPIC, PIC32 (PIC32MX795F512L)
* Texas Instruments – MSP430, CC2430, CC2538, CC2630, CC2650, CC2538: cctv, Firefly, Zoul (comprises the CC2538 and CC1200 in a single module format)
* STMicroelectronics – STM32 W

=== Computers===
* Apple II
* Atari 8-bit computers
* Atari ST
* Atari Portfolio
* Pocket Viewer
* Commodore PET
* VIC-20,
* Commodore 64, Commodore 128
* Oric
* NEC PC-6001
* Sharp Wizard
* x86-based Unix-like systems, atop GTK+, or more directly using an X Window System

=== Game consoles===
* GP32
* Game Boy
* Game Boy Advance
* Jaguar
* Nintendo Entertainment System
* TurboGrafx-16

== See also ==

* BeRTOS
* ERIKA Enterprise
* Nano-RK
* RIOT
* SymbOS
* TinyOS
* Comparison of real-time operating systems

== Notes ==
==References==
* : unofficial website for historic ports of the 1.x version.
* .


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q121088" start="0" end="7" title="Contiki" label="Contiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="14" end="30" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="108" end="126" title="Internet of Things" label="Internet of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q503958" start="174" end="186" title="street light" label="street light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231558" start="212" end="224" title="smart cities" label="smart cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280357" start="226" end="246" title="radiation monitoring" label="radiation monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="265" end="285" title="open-source software" label="open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="305" end="317" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD-3-Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679001" start="351" end="363" title="Adam Dunkels" label="Adam Dunkels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649486" start="475" end="479" title="ENEA (Italy)" label="ENEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="481" end="491" title="ETH Zurich" label="ETH Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q273263" start="502" end="524" title="RWTH Aachen University" label="RWTH Aachen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654723" start="561" end="598" title="Swedish Institute of Computer Science" label="Swedish Institute of Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193100" start="727" end="748" title="preemption (computing)" label="preemptive scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q991296" start="754" end="766" title="Event-driven architecture" label="event-driven"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="767" end="773" title="kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133622" start="858" end="872" title="Thor Heyerdahl" label="Thor Heyerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q66666935" start="887" end="895" title="Kon-Tiki" label="Kon-Tiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="948" end="971" title="Internet Protocol Suite" label="Internet Protocol Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="1012" end="1020" title="kilobyte" label="kilobyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1025" end="1045" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="1072" end="1088" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="1123" end="1147" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1386" end="1392" title="random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="1394" end="1399" title="Electric power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="1437" end="1446" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1702" end="1717" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="1728" end="1733" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q291984" start="1808" end="1811" title="uIP (micro IP)" label="uIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="1841" end="1845" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="1890" end="1894" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q109775" start="2328" end="2335" title="6LoWPAN" label="6LoWPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q242039" start="2380" end="2393" title="IEEE 802.15.4" label="IEEE 802.15.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028009" start="3902" end="3911" title="TI MSP430" label="TI MSP430"/>
<link wikidata="Q216651" start="3916" end="3925" title="Atmel AVR" label="Atmel AVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113789" start="4069" end="4081" title="protothreads" label="protothreads"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="4172" end="4186" title="Multithreading (software)" label="multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135914" start="4191" end="4215" title="event-driven programming" label="event-driven programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="4935" end="4962" title="inter-process communication" label="inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="5024" end="5048" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q639653" start="5166" end="5191" title="Virtual Network Computing" label="Virtual Network Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193100" start="5328" end="5353" title="Preemption (computing)" label="preemptive multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113789" start="5356" end="5367" title="Protothread" label="Protothread"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="5371" end="5394" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet Protocol Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="5404" end="5414" title="computer network" label="networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="5426" end="5430" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190017" start="5433" end="5449" title="Windowing system" label="Windowing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q639653" start="5491" end="5516" title="Virtual Network Computing" label="Virtual Network Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="5521" end="5532" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="5586" end="5596" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="5606" end="5612" title="telnet" label="telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q753486" start="5622" end="5633" title="Screensaver" label="Screensaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="5667" end="5674" title="Transport Layer Security" label="SSL/TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197351" start="5693" end="5700" title="wolfSSL" label="wolfSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="5786" end="5791" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="5794" end="5797" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q216651" start="5799" end="5802" title="Atmel AVR" label="AVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="5805" end="5823" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545076" start="5854" end="5863" title="Microchip Technology" label="Microchip"/>
<link wikidata="Q650553" start="5866" end="5878" title="PIC microcontroller" label="dsPIC, PIC32"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="5899" end="5916" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028009" start="5919" end="5925" title="TI MSP430" label="MSP430"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="6049" end="6067" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6070" end="6077" title="STM32#STM32 W" label="STM32 W"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="6098" end="6106" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="6109" end="6130" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="6133" end="6141" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q660845" start="6144" end="6159" title="Atari Portfolio" label="Atari Portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100146" start="6162" end="6175" title="Pocket Viewer" label="Pocket Viewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="6178" end="6191" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="6194" end="6200" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="6204" end="6216" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115919" start="6218" end="6231" title="Commodore 128" label="Commodore 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042679" start="6234" end="6238" title="Oric computers" label="Oric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440971" start="6241" end="6252" title="NEC PC-6001" label="NEC PC-6001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326097" start="6255" end="6267" title="Sharp Wizard" label="Sharp Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="6270" end="6273" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="6280" end="6289" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="6304" end="6308" title="GTK+" label="GTK+"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="6336" end="6351" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q426119" start="6376" end="6380" title="GP32" label="GP32"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="6383" end="6391" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="6394" end="6410" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="6413" end="6419" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="6422" end="6451" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="6454" end="6467" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637132" start="6487" end="6493" title="BeRTOS" label="BeRTOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324042" start="6496" end="6512" title="ERIKA Enterprise" label="ERIKA Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070491" start="6515" end="6522" title="Nano-RK" label="Nano-RK"/>
<link wikidata="Q16292393" start="6525" end="6529" title="RIOT (operating system)" label="RIOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077493" start="6532" end="6538" title="SymbOS" label="SymbOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934217" start="6541" end="6547" title="TinyOS" label="TinyOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254807" start="6550" end="6591" title="Comparison of real-time operating systems" label="Comparison of real-time operating systems"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849238" wikidata="Q3132265" url="?curid=849238" title="Torridon Hills">
<text>The Torridon Hills surround Torridon village in the Northwest Highlands of Scotland. The name is usually applied to the mountains to the north of Glen Torridon. They are among the most dramatic and spectacular peaks in the British Isles and made of some of the oldest rocks in the world. Many are over high, so are considered Munros. 

==Rock types==
These are mainly made of a type of sandstone, known as Torridonian sandstone (see Geology of Great Britain), which over time has become eroded to produce the unique characteristics of the Torridon Hills. In geology, Torridonian describes a series of proterozoic arenaceous sedimentary rocks of Precambrian age. They are amongst the oldest rocks in Britain, and sit on yet older rocks, Lewisian gneiss. Some of the highest peaks, such as Beinn Eighe are crowned by white Cambrian quartzite, which gives those peaks a distinctive appearance. Some of the quartzite contains fossilized worm burrows and known as pipe rock. It is circa 500 million years old. The strata are largely horizontal, and have weathered into terraces on the mountains.

Each of the Torridon Hills sits very much apart from one another, and they are often likened to castles. They have steep sides, and broken summit crests, riven into many pinnacles. There are numerous steep gullies running down the terraced sides from the peaks. The summit ridges provide excellent scrambling, and are popular with hillwalkers and mountaineers. However, like many ridge routes, there are few escape points, so once committed, the scrambler or hillwalker must complete the entire ridge before descent.

There are numerous other mountains outside the immediate area of Loch Torridon which have the same characteristics, such as An Teallach near Ullapool.

==Major peaks==
Although many peaks in the Northwest Highlands exhibit Torridon geology, the Torridon hills are generally considered only to be those in the Torridon Forest to the north of Glen Torridon. Specifically, these are:
* Liathach
* Beinn Eighe
* Beinn Alligin
* Beinn Dearg
* Baosbheinn

Hills between Glen Torridon and Strath Carron share much of the splendour and character of the main hills, although perhaps less of the drama:
* Beinn Liath Mhòr
* Sgorr Ruadh
* Maol Cheann-dearg
* Beinn Damh
* An Ruadh-stac
* Fuar Tholl

The Torridon Hills exhibit some of the most dramatic mountain scenery in the British Isles, perhaps surpassed in grandeur only by the Cuillins of Skye.

==See also==
*W A Poucher
*Highlands of Scotland

==External links==
* Torridon at National Trust for Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3132265" start="4" end="18" title="Torridon Hills" label="Torridon Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388485" start="28" end="36" title="Torridon" label="Torridon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084560" start="52" end="71" title="Northwest Highlands" label="Northwest Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="75" end="83" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="120" end="128" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976531" start="146" end="150" title="Glen" label="Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="223" end="236" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320721" start="326" end="332" title="Munros" label="Munros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="386" end="395" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q126894755" start="406" end="427" title="Torridonian sandstone" label="Torridonian sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189179" start="433" end="457" title="Geology of Great Britain" label="Geology of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="601" end="612" title="proterozoic" label="proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q516553" start="613" end="623" title="arenaceous" label="arenaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="624" end="640" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="645" end="656" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537363" start="736" end="751" title="Lewisian complex" label="Lewisian gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396296" start="788" end="799" title="Beinn Eighe" label="Beinn Eighe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="821" end="829" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="830" end="839" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="922" end="932" title="fossilized" label="fossilized"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="959" end="968" title="pipe rock" label="pipe rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="1188" end="1194" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404375" start="1262" end="1270" title="Pinnacle (geology)" label="pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361400" start="1298" end="1305" title="gully" label="gullies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913973" start="1390" end="1400" title="scrambling" label="scrambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347618" start="1423" end="1434" title="hillwalking" label="hillwalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="1439" end="1451" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347618" start="1551" end="1561" title="hillwalker" label="hillwalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444234" start="1675" end="1688" title="Loch Torridon" label="Loch Torridon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396261" start="1734" end="1745" title="An Teallach" label="An Teallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q996526" start="1751" end="1759" title="Ullapool" label="Ullapool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1842" end="1849" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064120" start="1993" end="2001" title="Liathach" label="Liathach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396296" start="2004" end="2015" title="Beinn Eighe" label="Beinn Eighe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356612" start="2018" end="2031" title="Beinn Alligin" label="Beinn Alligin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777196" start="2034" end="2045" title="Beinn Dearg (Torridon)" label="Beinn Dearg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857474" start="2048" end="2058" title="Baosbheinn" label="Baosbheinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405694" start="2205" end="2221" title="Beinn Liath Mhòr" label="Beinn Liath Mhòr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398068" start="2224" end="2235" title="Sgorr Ruadh" label="Sgorr Ruadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406455" start="2238" end="2255" title="Maol Cheann-dearg" label="Maol Cheann-dearg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398082" start="2258" end="2268" title="Beinn Damh" label="Beinn Damh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397996" start="2271" end="2284" title="An Ruadh-stac" label="An Ruadh-stac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777062" start="2287" end="2297" title="Fuar Tholl" label="Fuar Tholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="2376" end="2389" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143317" start="2433" end="2441" title="Cuillins" label="Cuillins"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="2445" end="2449" title="Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489246" start="2466" end="2477" title="W A Poucher" label="W A Poucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="2479" end="2500" title="Highlands of Scotland" label="Highlands of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599997" start="2535" end="2562" title="National Trust for Scotland" label="National Trust for Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849240" wikidata="Q372205" url="?curid=849240" title="Outrospective">
<text>Outrospective is the third album by Faithless, released on 18 June 2001. It is the follow-up to &quot;Sunday 8PM&quot; and the predecessor to &quot;No Roots&quot;. The single &quot;We Come 1&quot; had the most success, charting at number 3 on the UK Singles Chart, while &quot;One Step Too Far&quot; with vocals from Dido charted at number 6, and both &quot;Muhammad Ali&quot; and &quot;Tarantula&quot; charted at number 29. The album itself reached number 6 on the UK Albums Chart.
The cover photograph was taken during the May 1968 students uprisings in Paris, France.
In the cover booklet of &quot;Forever Faithless – The Greatest Hits&quot;, Rollo Armstrong has stated that despite &quot;Outrospective&quot; being their biggest selling album in the UK, it is, however, his least favourite.

==Track listing==
==&quot;Outrospective / Reperspective&quot;==
Outrospective / Reperspective is a re-release of the &quot;Outrospective&quot; album from Faithless. The CD contains a bonus CD with remixes. The album won the Dancestar Award for Album of the Year in 2002.
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===


==Certifications and sales==




==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q542071" start="36" end="45" title="Faithless" label="Faithless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516932" start="102" end="112" title="Sunday 8PM" label="Sunday 8PM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970776" start="148" end="156" title="No Roots (album)" label="No Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977491" start="181" end="190" title="We Come 1" label="We Come 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="247" end="263" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110205" start="277" end="293" title="One Step Too Far" label="One Step Too Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q202550" start="317" end="321" title="Dido (singer)" label="Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954003" start="358" end="370" title="Muhammad Ali (song)" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685463" start="387" end="396" title="Crazy English Summer / Tarantula" label="Tarantula"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="466" end="481" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="525" end="552" title="May 1968 in France" label="May 1968 students uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748050" start="601" end="638" title="Forever Faithless – The Greatest Hits" label="Forever Faithless – The Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141779" start="646" end="661" title="Rollo Armstrong" label="Rollo Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q542071" start="949" end="958" title="Faithless" label="Faithless"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849241" wikidata="Q571350" url="?curid=849241" title="Oviraptoridae">
<text>Oviraptoridae is a group of bird-like, herbivorous and omnivorous maniraptoran dinosaurs. Oviraptorids are characterized by their toothless, parrot-like beaks and, in some cases, elaborate crests. They were generally small, measuring between one and two metres long in most cases, though some possible oviraptorids were enormous. Oviraptorids are currently known only from the Late Cretaceous of Asia, with the most well-known species and complete specimens found only in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia and northwestern China.

==Description==

The most characteristic feature of this group is the skull structure. Oviraptorids had short snouts and very deep mandibles. Some taxa (such as &quot;Citipati&quot;, &quot;Corythoraptor&quot;, &quot;Rinchenia&quot;) had a midline crest on top of the skull, resembling that of a cassowary. Other distinguishing characteristics include a bony spike intruding on the mandibular fenestra, nostrils placed very high and far back on the snout, an extremely thin bony bar beneath the eye, and highly pneumatized skull bones. Like their relatives the caenagnathids, the jaws were edentulous (with no teeth), having instead two small bony projections on the roof of the mouth.

==Classification==
The classification of the oviraptorids has been controversial. Most studies divide oviraptorosaurs into two primary sub-groups, the Caenagnathidae and the Oviraptoridae. However, some phylogenetic studies have suggested that many traditional members of the Caenagnathidae may be more closely related to the crested oviraptorids. Because of this, and the fact that at least one study found that &quot;Caenagnathus&quot; itself may not have been part of the &#x27;caenagnathid&#x27; group, Tom Holtz (2010) placed that group close to the Oviraptoridae and termed it the Elmisauridae, though this idea has not gained consensus among other researchers.

The Oviraptoridae itself is traditionally divided into two &quot;subfamilies&quot;: the small, short-armed, and mainly crestless subfamily Heyuanniinae and the larger, crested, long-armed Oviraptorinae (&quot;Oviraptor&quot; + &quot;Citipati&quot;). Some phylogenetic studies have shown that &quot;Oviraptor&quot; is the most primitive known oviraptorid, thus making &quot;Citipati&quot; a closer relative of the &quot;ingeniines&quot; and this traditional division into crestless and crested forms artificial.

Other possible oviraptorids include &quot;Nomingia gobiensis&quot;, &quot;Gigantoraptor erlianensis&quot;, &quot;Jiangxisaurus ganzhouensis&quot; and &quot;Shixinggia oblita&quot;. All four have been suggested to be oviraptorids, caenagnathids, or more primitive than either group.

In 2020, during their description of &quot;Oksoko&quot;, the cladogram recovered by Funston &quot;et al.&quot; is shown below. Because &quot;Oviraptor&quot; did not clade with &quot;Citipati&quot; and the other &quot;oviraptorines&quot;, they named the latter&#x27;s clade Citipatiinae, although they did not provide a formal definition. However, according to Mickey Mortimer, the clade can be considered valid because its describers explicitly name it as new, which satisfies ICZN Article 16.1.

==Paleobiology==
===Diet===

The diet of oviraptorids is not fully understood. Though some appear to have been at least partially carnivorous, they were probably primarily herbivorous or omnivorous.

Originally, oviraptorids were thought to be specialized egg raiders, based on a Mongolian find showing &quot;Oviraptor&quot; on top of a nest erroneously attributed to the ceratopsian dinosaur &quot;Protoceratops&quot;. However, discoveries in the 1990s, including &quot;Citipati&quot; specimens clearly brooding (rather than preying on) the same types of nests, and a &quot;Citipati&quot; embryo inside the same type of egg preserved in these nests, showed that the &quot;specialized egg thief&quot; idea was incorrect. Still, some scientists have suggested that oviraptorids may have fed on shelled food items like eggs or shellfish. However, animals specialized for eating shelled food typically have broad, crushing beaks or teeth. In contrast, the jaws of oviraptorids had thin, sharp edges probably supporting shearing beaks, ill-suited for cracking shells. Among other known animals, the beaks of oviraptorids most closely resemble those of herbivorous dicynodont synapsids, which are usually considered herbivorous.(This leads to the possibility that these animals are omnivorous).

Their beaks also share similarities with the beaks of herbivorous parrots and tortoises.

Evidence of partial carnivory among some oviraptorines comes from a lizard skeleton preserved in the body cavity of the type specimen of &quot;Oviraptor&quot; and two hatchling &quot;Byronosaurus&quot; skulls found in a &quot;Citipati&quot; nest. Some scientists have also suggested that some oviraptorids (especially the small-handed, weak-clawed &quot;ingeniines&quot;) fed mainly on plant material.

===Reproduction===

Although fossilized dinosaur eggs are generally rare, oviraptorid eggs are relatively well known. Several oviraptorid nests, eggs, and embryos are known, mostly uncovered in the Gobi Desert. Some specimens of &quot;Oviraptor philoceratops&quot;, &quot;Citipati osmolskae&quot;, &quot;Nemegtomaia&quot; and cf. &quot;Machairasaurus&quot; have been found in brooding positions in association with nests. All of the nesting specimens are situated on top of egg clutches, with their limbs spread symmetrically on each side of the nest, front limbs covering the nest perimeter. This brooding posture is found today only in birds and supports a behavioral link between birds and theropod dinosaurs.

Oviraptorid eggs are shaped like elongated ovals (elongatoolithid) and resemble the eggs of ratite birds (such as ostriches) in texture and shell structure. In the nest, eggs are typically found in pairs and arranged in concentric circles of up to three layers, with complete clutches consisting of as many of 22 eggs in some species. The eggs of &quot;Citipati&quot; are the largest known definitive oviraptorid eggs, at 18 cm. In contrast, eggs associated with &quot;Oviraptor&quot; are only up to 14 cm long.

The first oviraptorid eggs (of the genus &quot;Oviraptor&quot;, which mean &quot;Egg thief&quot;) were found in close proximity to the remains of the ceratopsian dinosaur &quot;Protoceratops&quot; and it was assumed that the oviraptorids were preying upon the eggs of the ceratopsians. It was not until 1993, when a &quot;Citipati&quot; embryo was discovered inside an egg of the type assigned to &quot;Protoceratops&quot;, that the error was corrected. Norell &quot;et al.&quot;, who recognized the embryo as oviraptorid, assigned it to the genus &quot;Citipati&quot;. The egg containing the embryo was smaller than most known &quot;Citipati&quot; eggs at only 12 cm, though it was partially eroded and broken into three pieces, making an accurate estimate of its original size difficult. The embryo-bearing egg was otherwise identical to other oviraptorid eggs in shell structure and was found in an isolated nest, again arranged in a circular pattern.

An oviraptorosaurian specimen from China described in 2005 was found to have two unlaid eggs within the pelvic canal. This suggests that, unlike modern crocodilians, oviraptorosaurs did not produce and lay many eggs at the same time. Rather, the eggs were produced within the reproductive organs in pairs, and laid two at a time, with the mother positioned in the center of the nest and rotating in a circle as each pair was laid. This behavior is supported by the fact that the eggs oval shape, with the more narrow end pointing backward from the birth canal, matching their orientation toward the center of the nest after being laid.

The presence of two shelled eggs within the birth canal shows that oviraptorosaurs were intermediate between the reproductive biology of crocodilians and modern birds. Like crocodilians, they had two oviducts. However, crocodilians produce multiple shelled eggs per oviduct at a time, whereas oviraptorosaurs, like birds, produced only one egg per oviduct at a time.

In 2017, paleontologists discovered colored pigments in some fossilized oviraptorid embryos of the egg-shell genus &quot;Macroolithus&quot; (which may represent eggs of &quot;Heyuannia&quot;). Examinations of eggs attributed to &quot;Heyuannia&quot; by Jasmina Wiemann and Tzu-Ruei Yang &quot;et al&quot; revealed the eggs preserved the blue-green pigment biliverdin and the reddish-brown pigment protoporphyrin, the same pigments found in many modern birds&#x27; eggshells. The eggs are thought to have been a blue-green color, because biliverdin is preserved in much greater abundance the photoporphyrin. In modern bird eggs, coloration can camouflage the eggs or help parents identify eggs, and it is correlated with more intensive parental care.

===Metabolism=== 
A study by Robert Eagle et al. of the University of California-Los Angeles indicates that from specimens of eggs found in Mongolia and examination of the isotopes carbon-13 and oxygen 18 found within, Oviraptorids had body temperatures that could be elevated higher than that of the surrounding environment but lower than that of birds. This is very different from the isotope ratios of sauropod dinosaurs like &quot;Brachiosaurus&quot;, which had body temperatures of up to and were fully endothermic.

===Feathers===

Oviraptorids were probably feathered, since some close relatives were found with feathers preserved (including species of &quot;Caudipteryx&quot;, &quot;Protarchaeopteryx&quot; and &quot;Similicaudipteryx&quot;). Another finding pointing to this is the discovery in &quot;Nomingia&quot; of a pygostyle, a bone that results from the fusion of the last tail vertebrae and is responsible in birds to hold a fan of feathers in the tail. Finally, the arm position of the brooding &quot;Citipati&quot; would have been far more effective if feathers were present to cover the eggs.

===Pathology===

The brooding oviraptorid specimen IGM 100/979 showed a callus and possible longitudinal groove left over from a healed fracture of the right ulna. Other oviraptorids have had pathological features reported in their phalanges but these have not been described in detail in the scientific literature.

==Paleoenvironment==

Almost all oviraptorids come from desert deposits of the Gobi Desert. Even in the late Cretaceous period, much of this area was desert, or at least very dry, habitat. In many of the localities where they are found, oviraptorids are among the most abundant dinosaurs present, second only to ankylosaurs and protoceratopsids. This is consistent with the idea that they were primarily herbivores, which tend to far outnumber carnivores in a given environment. Oviraptorids appear to have been far more abundant in arid habitats dominated mainly by small dinosaurs (such as those preserved in the Barun Goyot and Djadochta Formations) than in wetter ecosystems where large dinosaurs are common (such as the Nemegt Formation). The same pattern holds true for protoceratopsids, indicating that both groups preferred dry, desert-like habitat, and fed mainly on the types of tough, low-growing plant life that grows in arid climates.

==See also==

* Timeline of oviraptorosaur research

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571350" start="0" end="13" title="Oviraptoridae" label="Oviraptoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131793" start="66" end="77" title="maniraptora" label="maniraptora"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="79" end="87" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589150" start="189" end="194" title="Crest (feathers)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="476" end="487" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="491" end="499" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="517" end="522" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16370" start="656" end="664" title="mandible" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q131735" start="692" end="700" title="Citipati" label="Citipati"/>
<link wikidata="Q33666005" start="714" end="727" title="Corythoraptor" label="Corythoraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133177" start="741" end="750" title="Rinchenia" label="Rinchenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201231" start="820" end="829" title="cassowary" label="cassowary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="906" end="925" title="mandibular fenestra" label="mandibular fenestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099987" start="1035" end="1058" title="Pneumatized bones" label="pneumatized skull bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q133539" start="1085" end="1098" title="Caenagnathidae" label="caenagnathids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649530" start="1630" end="1642" title="Caenagnathus" label="Caenagnathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131070" start="2089" end="2098" title="Oviraptor" label="Oviraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131735" start="2113" end="2121" title="Citipati (dinosaur)" label="Citipati"/>
<link wikidata="Q134647" start="2434" end="2452" title="Nomingia gobiensis" label="Nomingia gobiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310496" start="2466" end="2491" title="Gigantoraptor erlianensis" label="Gigantoraptor erlianensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623729" start="2505" end="2531" title="Jiangxisaurus ganzhouensis" label="Jiangxisaurus ganzhouensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q136996" start="2548" end="2565" title="Shixinggia oblita" label="Shixinggia oblita"/>
<link wikidata="Q100152429" start="2718" end="2724" title="Oksoko avarsan" label="Oksoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q131070" start="2816" end="2825" title="Oviraptor" label="Oviraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131735" start="2857" end="2865" title="Citipati" label="Citipati"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="3544" end="3554" title="ceratopsia" label="ceratopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506" start="3571" end="3584" title="Protoceratops" label="Protoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="3762" end="3768" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131682" start="4332" end="4342" title="dicynodont" label="dicynodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q189069" start="4343" end="4351" title="synapsid" label="synapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q31431" start="4529" end="4535" title="parrot" label="parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="4541" end="4549" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="4673" end="4686" title="type specimen" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q134297" start="4736" end="4748" title="Byronosaurus" label="Byronosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817122" start="4996" end="5008" title="dinosaur egg" label="dinosaur egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="5154" end="5165" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131070" start="5191" end="5214" title="Oviraptor" label="Oviraptor philoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131735" start="5228" end="5246" title="Citipati (dinosaur)" label="Citipati osmolskae"/>
<link wikidata="Q935296" start="5260" end="5271" title="Nemegtomaia" label="Nemegtomaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048501" start="5282" end="5285" title="cf." label="cf."/>
<link wikidata="Q1930333" start="5292" end="5306" title="Machairasaurus" label="Machairasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="5332" end="5340" title="Avian incubation" label="brooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q21367198" start="5720" end="5735" title="elongatoolithid" label="elongatoolithid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19170" start="5762" end="5768" title="ratite" label="ratite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="5784" end="5791" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="6333" end="6344" title="ceratopsian" label="ceratopsian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506" start="6360" end="6373" title="Protoceratops" label="Protoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7174" end="7179" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="7291" end="7301" title="crocodilia" label="crocodilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36857" start="7976" end="7983" title="oviduct" label="oviduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725482" start="8265" end="8277" title="Macroolithus" label="Macroolithus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134594" start="8319" end="8328" title="Heyuannia" label="Heyuannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422964" start="8500" end="8510" title="biliverdin" label="biliverdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q619815" start="8541" end="8555" title="protoporphyrin" label="protoporphyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14397" start="9330" end="9343" title="Brachiosaurus" label="Brachiosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="9460" end="9467" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q131069" start="9561" end="9572" title="Caudipteryx" label="Caudipteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q131778" start="9586" end="9603" title="Protarchaeopteryx" label="Protarchaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q132745" start="9620" end="9637" title="Similicaudipteryx" label="Similicaudipteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q134647" start="9705" end="9713" title="Nomingia" label="Nomingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373859" start="9725" end="9734" title="pygostyle" label="pygostyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131735" start="10060" end="10071" title="IGM 100/979" label="IGM 100/979"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197452" start="10081" end="10087" title="callus" label="callus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016393" start="10101" end="10113" title="Geometric term of location" label="longitudinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199507" start="10167" end="10171" title="ulna" label="ulna"/>
<link wikidata="Q571350" start="10179" end="10191" title="oviraptorids" label="oviraptorids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="10382" end="10388" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="10405" end="10416" title="Gobi Desert" label="Gobi Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273617" start="10638" end="10648" title="ankylosaur" label="ankylosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133149" start="10654" end="10669" title="protoceratopsid" label="protoceratopsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q576013" start="10941" end="10952" title="Barun Goyot Formation" label="Barun Goyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879714" start="10957" end="10976" title="Djadochta Formation" label="Djadochta Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077414" start="11051" end="11067" title="Nemegt Formation" label="Nemegt Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346338" start="11291" end="11326" title="Timeline of oviraptorosaur research" label="Timeline of oviraptorosaur research"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849246" wikidata="Q161232" url="?curid=849246" title="Mentha aquatica">
<text>Mentha aquatica (water mint; syn. &quot;Mentha hirsuta&quot; Huds.) is a perennial flowering plant in the mint family, Lamiaceae. It grows in moist places and is native to much of Europe, northwest Africa and southwest Asia.

==Description==
Water mint is a herbaceous rhizomatous perennial plant growing to tall. The stems are square in cross section, green or purple, and variably hairy to almost hairless. The rhizomes are wide-spreading, fleshy, and bear fibrous roots. The leaves are ovate to ovate-lanceolate, long and broad, green (sometimes purplish), opposite, toothed, and vary from hairy to nearly hairless. The flowers of the watermint are tiny, densely crowded, purple, tubular, pinkish to lilac in colour and form a terminal hemispherical inflorescence; flowering is from mid to late summer. Water mint is visited by many types of insects, and can be characterized by a generalized pollination syndrome, but can also spread by underground rhizomes. All parts of the plant have a distinctly minty smell. Unbranched, hairless plants, with narrower leaves and paler flowers, native to areas of Sweden and Finland near the Baltic Sea, have been called &quot;Mentha aquatica&quot; var. &quot;litoralis&quot;.

&quot;Mentha aquatica&quot; is a polyploid, with 2&quot;n&quot; = 8&quot;x&quot; = 96 chromosomes.

==Taxonomy==
&quot;Mentha aquatica&quot; was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. As with other &quot;Mentha&quot; species, it was subsequently re-described under a variety of different names; , Plants of the World Online listed 87 synonyms, including four forms or varieties that it does not recognize. The cultivated eau de Cologne mint (also known as bergamot mint) is considered to be a variety of this species.

It hybridises with &quot;Mentha spicata&quot; (spearmint) to produce &quot;Mentha&quot; × &quot;piperita&quot; (peppermint), a sterile hybrid; with &quot;Mentha suaveolens&quot; (apple mint) to produce &quot;Mentha&quot; × &quot;suavis&quot;; with &quot;Mentha arvensis&quot; (corn mint) to produce &quot;Mentha&quot; × &quot;verticillata&quot;; and with both &quot;M. arvensis&quot; and &quot;M. spicata&quot; to give the tri-species hybrid &quot;Mentha&quot; × &quot;smithiana&quot;.

==Distribution and habitat==
Water mint is native to much of Europe, northern Africa and western Asia. It has been introduced to North and South America, Australia and some Atlantic islands.

As the name suggests, water mint occurs in the shallow margins and channels of streams, rivers, pools, dikes, ditches, canals, wet meadows, marshes and fens. If the plant grows in the water itself, it rises above the surface of the water. It generally occurs on mildly acidic to calcareous (it is common on soft limestone) mineral or peaty soils. &quot;M. aquatica&quot; can occur in certain fen-meadow habitats such as the &quot;Juncus subnodulosus–Cirsium palustre&quot; plant association. It is a component of purple moor grass and rush pastures – a type of Biodiversity ActPlan habitat in the UK.

==Uses==
It can be used as an edible herb (like spearmint or peppermint) and to make a herbal tea. The cultivated variety known as eau de Cologne mint or bergamot mint is used to produce mentha citrata oil, also known as bergamot mint oil, an ingredient used in perfumery (not to be confused with bergamot essential oil).

==Image gallery==
==See also==
*Peppermint
*Spearmint

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161232" start="17" end="27" title="Mentha aquatica" label="water mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="73" end="82" title="perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="83" end="98" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="106" end="110" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q53476" start="119" end="128" title="Lamiaceae" label="Lamiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="198" end="204" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="219" end="223" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="258" end="268" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="413" end="420" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="467" end="471" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="478" end="484" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="623" end="629" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q508499" start="896" end="916" title="pollination syndrome" label="pollination syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1133" end="1143" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="1252" end="1261" title="polyploidy" label="polyploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="1305" end="1315" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1383" end="1396" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="1519" end="1545" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607185" start="1643" end="1662" title="eau de Cologne mint" label="eau de Cologne mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="1744" end="1754" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridises"/>
<link wikidata="Q160114" start="1766" end="1780" title="Mentha spicata" label="Mentha spicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q156037" start="1810" end="1851" title="Peppermint" label="&amp;quot;Mentha&amp;quot; × &amp;quot;piperita&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q158892" start="1895" end="1912" title="Mentha suaveolens" label="Mentha suaveolens"/>
<link wikidata="Q160585" start="1995" end="2010" title="Mentha arvensis" label="Mentha arvensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="2699" end="2709" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2732" end="2741" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="2754" end="2758" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442946" start="2812" end="2822" title="fen-meadow" label="fen-meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="2823" end="2830" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311908" start="2844" end="2892" title="Juncus subnodulosus–Cirsium palustre fen-meadow" label="&amp;quot;Juncus subnodulosus–Cirsium palustre&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418712" start="2893" end="2910" title="plant association" label="plant association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261477" start="2933" end="2968" title="purple moor grass and rush pastures" label="purple moor grass and rush pastures"/>
<link wikidata="Q488431" start="3319" end="3341" title="bergamot essential oil" label="bergamot essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156037" start="3377" end="3387" title="Peppermint" label="Peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q160114" start="3389" end="3398" title="Spearmint" label="Spearmint"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849256" wikidata="Q412446" url="?curid=849256" title="Leith (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Leith]] is a port and area of Edinburgh, Scotland

Leith may also refer to:
== Places ==

=== Australia ===
*Leith, Tasmania

=== Canada ===
*Leith, Ontario

=== New Zealand ===
*Leith Valley, Dunedin
*Water of Leith (New Zealand), a river

=== South Georgia ===
*Leith Harbour

=== United Kingdom ===
*Leith (ward), Edinburgh, Scotland
*Leith (UK Parliament constituency), Edinburgh, Scotland
*Leith Hill, Surrey, England
*River Leith, Cumbria, England
*Water of Leith, in Edinburgh, Scotland

=== United States ===
*Leith, North Dakota
*Leith, Ohio
*Leith, Pennsylvania; see List of places in Pennsylvania: La–Ll

== People ==
*Leith (surname)

=== Given name ===
*Leith Anderson, American evangelical Christian leader, author, and pastor
*Leith Brodie (born 1986), Australian swimmer
*Leith Clark (born 1979), Canadian-born English fashion stylist, editor, and fashion journalist
*Leith Dunn, Jamaican sociologist, writer and academic
*Leith Mulligan (born 1972), Australian sports journalist
*Leith Mullings (1945–2020), Jamaican-born author, anthropologist and professor
*Leith Ratten, Australian convicted murderer
*Leith Ross, Canadian indie rock singer-songwriter and guitarist
*Leith Shankland (born 1991), South African swimmer
*Leith Stevens (1909–1970), American composer and conductor
*Lieth Von Stein (1946–1988), American murder victim

== Other uses ==
* , ships of the Royal Navy

==See also==
*Laith, an Arabic name
*Leath, an ancient subdivision of Cumberland, England
*Leithe, Bochum, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany
*Craigleith, Scotland
*Lethe (disambiguation)
*Lieth, in Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q412446" start="0" end="9" title="Leith (disambiguation)" label="[[Leith]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q412446" start="53" end="58" title="Leith (disambiguation)" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907312" start="111" end="126" title="Leith, Tasmania" label="Leith, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520370" start="144" end="158" title="Leith, Ontario" label="Leith, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520403" start="181" end="193" title="Leith Valley" label="Leith Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973564" start="204" end="232" title="Water of Leith (New Zealand)" label="Water of Leith (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q731574" start="266" end="279" title="Leith Harbour" label="Leith Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q56574031" start="305" end="317" title="Leith (ward)" label="Leith (ward)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520375" start="340" end="374" title="Leith (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leith (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162517" start="397" end="407" title="Leith Hill" label="Leith Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272699" start="426" end="437" title="River Leith" label="River Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566668" start="457" end="471" title="Water of Leith" label="Water of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146044" start="520" end="539" title="Leith, North Dakota" label="Leith, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133361" start="541" end="552" title="Leith, Ohio" label="Leith, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="554" end="573" title="Leith, Pennsylvania" label="Leith, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="579" end="616" title="List of places in Pennsylvania: La–Ll" label="List of places in Pennsylvania: La–Ll"/>
<link wikidata="Q28194326" start="632" end="647" title="Leith (surname)" label="Leith (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520379" start="669" end="683" title="Leith Anderson" label="Leith Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q960250" start="744" end="756" title="Leith Brodie" label="Leith Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q57293123" start="790" end="801" title="Leith Clark" label="Leith Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q111676950" start="886" end="896" title="Leith Dunn" label="Leith Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520394" start="941" end="955" title="Leith Mulligan" label="Leith Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816241" start="999" end="1013" title="Leith Mullings" label="Leith Mullings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520396" start="1079" end="1091" title="Leith Ratten" label="Leith Ratten"/>
<link wikidata="Q117351954" start="1124" end="1134" title="Leith Ross" label="Leith Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520400" start="1189" end="1204" title="Leith Shankland" label="Leith Shankland"/>
<link wikidata="Q257805" start="1241" end="1254" title="Leith Stevens" label="Leith Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544350" start="1301" end="1316" title="Lieth Von Stein" label="Lieth Von Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q63932715" start="1414" end="1419" title="Laith" label="Laith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510424" start="1437" end="1442" title="Leath" label="Leath"/>
<link wikidata="Q870602" start="1491" end="1497" title="Leithe" label="Leithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138743" start="1540" end="1550" title="Craigleith" label="Craigleith"/>
<link wikidata="Q395581" start="1562" end="1584" title="Lethe (disambiguation)" label="Lethe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q558160" start="1586" end="1591" title="Lieth" label="Lieth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849257" wikidata="Q6973366" url="?curid=849257" title="National Hispanic University">
<text>The National Hispanic University (NHU) was a small, private university located in San Jose, California, founded by Wichita State University and UC Berkeley graduate Dr. B. Roberto Cruz. It is the first four-year Latino university in the United States. NHU&#x27;s vision was to foster &quot;a caring learning environment where students have felt valued and supported at every step in their academic journey. Embracing diversity and multiple perspectives as guiding principles.&quot; National Hispanic University ceased operations on August 23, 2015.

==History==
The National Hispanic University was founded in 1981 in Oakland, California to address the needs of Hispanic men and women, particularly those who are first in their families to attend college. Founder Dr. Roberto Cruz, a Texas native and first-generation college graduate, had studied the disproportionately large impact historically black colleges and universities had in generating both undergraduate and professional degree graduates within the Black community. Predicting that the Latinos would be the largest population in California, Dr. Cruz&#x27;s vision was to have a similarly positive impact on the Hispanic community in the United States and to create an institution that served their particular needs.

In 1990, the university opened a San Jose campus and moved to a larger facility in Oakland. In 1994, NHU closed both campuses and moved to a new campus in East San Jose.

For several years, National Hispanic University published an annual report card on Hispanic quality of life. From 1981 to 1986, NHU also published reports on women of La Raza, Cesar Chavez, bilingual special education, Las Posadas, and &quot;Steps to Humanity.&quot;

To better serve local youth, NHU established an Upward Bound program in Oakland.

=== Campus ===
NHU was located in a predominantly Latino and working-class neighborhood in the San Jose foothills. In its inception, all of the classrooms and offices were located into one building.

===Accreditation===
The university was accredited by WASC and was rated by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a &quot;Baccalaureate College&quot;, with an academic breadth rated as &quot;Diverse Fields&quot;

== School closure ==
With so many students in need of financial support, NHU also struggled to stay afloat, especially after its founder, Cruz, died of cancer in 2002. In the 2000s, NHU was unsuccessful in its many attempts to find financial backers from Silicon Valley or Latino philanthropists who could save the school. After those options were closed, the school reached a deal with Laureate Education. In 2010, NHU became a member of the Laureate International Universities network, a for-profit college chain. Laureate hoped to turn NHU into a mostly online school; however, the institution lost federal and state funding partly due to its new for-profit status. Laureate officially closed National Hispanic University on August 23, 2015.

When Laureate made the decision to abandon National Hispanic University in 2014, one NHU student remarked &quot;The values of the school stood out for me.&quot;...&quot;Now it comes down to dollar bills.&quot; According to the &quot;San Jose Mercury News&quot;, &quot;some students who wanted a traditional, classroom approach to education said they felt abandoned by Laureate after NHU&#x27;s drive to enroll thousands of new students in Internet classes did not produce the desired results.&quot;

===Plans for NHU campus===
As part of the Foundation for Hispanic Education&#x27;s efforts, the East San Jose campus is planned to house The Center for Latino Education and Innovation, The Latino College Preparatory Academy (a bilingual charter school), and The Luis Valdez Leadership Academy, a charter high school for students in San José.

==References==
==External links==
*National Hispanic University
*Laureate International Universities</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6973366" start="4" end="38" title="National Hispanic University" label="National Hispanic University (NHU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="52" end="70" title="private university" label="private university"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="82" end="102" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q429561" start="115" end="139" title="Wichita State University" label="Wichita State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="144" end="155" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="165" end="184" title="Dr. B. Roberto Cruz" label="Dr. B. Roberto Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="212" end="218" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="618" end="637" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="884" end="928" title="historically black colleges and universities" label="historically black colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273292" start="970" end="989" title="First professional degree" label="professional degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007177" start="1011" end="1026" title="African American culture" label="Black community"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="1312" end="1320" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212165" start="1617" end="1624" title="La Raza" label="La Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q355425" start="1626" end="1638" title="Cesar Chavez" label="Cesar Chavez"/>
<link wikidata="Q429166" start="1669" end="1680" title="Las Posadas" label="Las Posadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899477" start="1766" end="1778" title="Upward Bound" label="Upward Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="2053" end="2057" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="WASC"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="2488" end="2502" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q689475" start="2676" end="2711" title="Laureate International Universities" label="Laureate International Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088876" start="2723" end="2741" title="for-profit college" label="for-profit college"/>
<link wikidata="Q575741" start="3212" end="3233" title="San Jose Mercury News" label="San Jose Mercury News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3521" end="3554" title="Foundation for Hispanic Education" label="Foundation for Hispanic Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3620" end="3662" title="Center for Latino Education and Innovation" label="Center for Latino Education and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496596" start="3668" end="3702" title="Latino College Preparatory Academy" label="Latino College Preparatory Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="3716" end="3730" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3741" end="3771" title="Luis Valdez Leadership Academy" label="Luis Valdez Leadership Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849263" wikidata="Q321475" url="?curid=849263" title="Kollam">
<text>Kollam (;), is an ancient seaport and the fourth largest city in the Indian state of Kerala. Located on the southern tip of the Malabar Coast of the Arabian Sea, the city is on the banks of Ashtamudi Lake and is 71 kilometers (44 mi) northwest of the Thiruvananthapuram. Kollam is one of India&#x27;s oldest continuously inhabited cities, with evidence of habitation stretching back to the megalithic; the city has also been a maritime entrepôt millennia, the earliest attestation of which dates back to the Phoenicians and Romans. It is the southern gateway to the Backwaters of Kerala, and is known for its cashew processing, coir manufacturing, and tourism industries.

Kollam has had a strong commercial reputation since ancient times. The Arabs, Phoenicians, Chinese, Ethiopians, Syrians, Jews, Chaldeans and Romans have all engaged in trade at the port of Kollam for millennia. As a result of Chinese trade, Kollam was mentioned by Ibn Battuta in the 14th century as one of the five Indian ports he had seen during the course of his twenty-four-year travels. Desinganadu&#x27;s rajas exchanged embassies with Chinese rulers while there was a flourishing Chinese settlement at Kollam. In the ninth century, on his way to Canton, China, Persian merchant Sulaiman al-Tajir found Kollam to be the only port in India visited by huge Chinese junks. Marco Polo, the Venetian traveller, who was in Chinese service under Kublai Khan in 1275, visited Kollam and other towns on the west coast, in his capacity as a Chinese mandarin. Kollam is also home to one of the seven churches that were established by St Thomas as well as one of the 10 oldest mosques believed to be found by Malik Deenar in Kerala. Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon is the first diocese in India.

V. Nagam Aiya in his &quot;Travancore State Manual&quot; records that in 822 AD two East Syriac bishops Mar Sabor and Mar Proth, settled in Quilon with their followers. Two years later the Malabar Era began (824 AD) and Quilon became the premier city of the Malabar region ahead of Travancore and Cochin. Kollam Port was founded by Mar Sabor at Tangasseri in 825 as an alternative to reopening the inland seaport of Kore-ke-ni Kollam near Backare (Thevalakara), which was also known as Nelcynda and Tyndis to the Romans and Greeks and as Thondi to the Tamils. Thambiran Vanakkam printed in 20 October 1578 at Kollam was the first book to be published in an Indian language.

Kollam city corporation received ISO 9001:2015 certification for municipal administration and services. As per the survey conducted by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) based on urban area growth during January 2020, Kollam became the tenth fastest growing city in the world with a 31.1% urban growth between 2015 and 2020. It is a coastal city and on the banks of Ashtamudi Lake. The city hosts the administrative offices of Kollam district and is a prominent trading city for the state. The proportion of females to males in Kollam city is second highest among the 500 most populous cities in India. Kollam is one of the least polluted cities in India.

During the later stages of the rule of the Chera monarchy in Kerala, Kollam emerged as the focal point of trade and politics. Kollam continues to be a major business and commercial centre in Kerala. Four major trading centers around Kollam are Kottarakara, Punalur, Paravur, and Karunagapally. Kollam appeared as Palombe in Mandeville&#x27;s &quot;Travels&quot;, where he claimed it contained a Fountain of Youth.

==Etymology==

In 825 AD, the Malayalam calendar, or &quot;Kollavarsham&quot;, was created in Kollam at meetings held in the city. The present Malayalam calendar is said to have begun with the re-founding of the town, which was rebuilt after its destruction by fire.

The city was known as &quot;Koolam&quot; in Arabic, &quot;Coulão&quot; in Portuguese, and &quot;Desinganadu&quot; in ancient Tamil literature.

==History==
As the ancient city of Quilon, Kollam was a flourishing port during the Pandya dynasty (c. 3rd century BC–12th century), and later became the capital of the independent Venad or the Kingdom of Quilon on its foundation in c. 825. Kollam was considered one of the four early entrepots in global sea trade during the 13th century, along with Alexandria and Cairo in Egypt, the Chinese city of Quanzhou, and Malacca in the Malaysian archipelago. It seems that trade at Kollam seems to have flourished right into the Medieval period as in 1280, there is instance of envoys of Yuan China coming to Kollam for establishing relations between the local ruler and China.

===Pandya rule===
The ancient political and cultural history of Kollam was almost entirely independent from that of the rest of Kerala. The Chera dynasty governed the area of Malabar Coast between Alappuzha in the south to Kasaragod in the north. This included Palakkad Gap, Coimbatore, Salem, and Kolli Hills. The region around Coimbatore was ruled by the Cheras during Sangam period between c. first and the fourth centuries CE and it served as the eastern entrance to the Palakkad Gap, the principal trade route between the Malabar Coast and Tamil Nadu. However the southern region of present-day Kerala state (The coastal belt between Thiruvananthapuram and Alappuzha) was under Ay dynasty, who was more related to the Pandya dynasty of Madurai than Cheras.

Along with (Muziris and Tyndis), Quilon was an ancient seaport on the Malabar Coast of India from the early centuries before the Christian era. Kollam served as a major port city for Pandya dynasty on the western coast while Kulasekharapatnam served Pandyas on the eastern coast. The city had a high commercial reputation from the days of the Phoenicians and Ancient Romans. Pliny the Elder (23–79 AD) mentions Greek ships anchored at Muziris and Nelcynda. There was also a land route over the Western Ghats. Spices, pearls, diamonds, and silk were exported to Egypt and Rome from these ports. Pearls and diamonds came to the Chera Kingdom from Ceylon and the southeastern coast of India, then known as the Pandyan Kingdom.

Cosmas Indicopleustes, a Greek Nestorian sailor, in his book the Christian Topography who visited the Malabar Coast in 550, mentions an enclave of Christian believers in &quot;Male&quot; (Malabar Coast). He writes, &quot;In the island of Tabropane (Ceylon), there is a church of Christians, and clerics and faithful. Likewise at Male, where the pepper grows, and in the farming community of Kalliana (Kalliankal at Nillackal) there is also a bishop consecrated in Persia in accordance with the Nicea Sunnahadose of 325 AD.&quot; The Nestorian Patriarch Jesujabus, who died in 660 AD, mentions Kollam in his letter to Simon, Metropolitan of Persia.

Kollam is also home to one of the oldest mosques in Indian subcontinent. According to the Legend of Cheraman Perumals, the first Indian mosque was built in 624 AD at Kodungallur with the mandate of the last the ruler (the Cheraman Perumal) of Chera dynasty, who left from Dharmadom to Mecca and converted to Islam during the lifetime of Muhammad (c. 570–632). According to &quot;Qissat Shakarwati Farmad&quot;, the &quot;Masjids&quot; at Kodungallur, Kollam, Madayi, Barkur, Mangalore, Kasaragod, Kannur, Dharmadam, Panthalayini, and Chaliyam, were built during the era of Malik Dinar, and they are among the oldest &quot;Masjid&quot;s in Indian subcontinent. It is believed that Malik Dinar died at Thalangara in Kasaragod town.

===Capital of Venad (9th to 12th centuries)===

The port at Kollam, then known as Quilon, was founded in 825 by the Nestorian Christians Mar Sabor and Mar Proth with sanction from Ayyanadikal Thiruvadikal, the king of the independent Venad or the State of Quilon, a feudatory under the Chera kingdom.

It is believed that Mar Sapor Iso also proposed that the Chera king create a new seaport near Kollam in lieu of his request that he rebuild the almost vanished inland seaport at Kollam (kore-ke-ni) near Backare (Thevalakara), also known as Nelcynda and Tyndis to the Romans and Greeks and as Thondi to the Tamils, which had been without trade for several centuries because the Cheras were overrun by the Pallavas in the sixth century, ending the spice trade from the Malabar coast. This allowed the Nestorians to stay in the Chera kingdom for several decades and introduce the Christian faith among the Nampoothiri Vaishnavites and Nair sub-castes in the St. Thomas tradition, with the Syrian liturgy as a basis for the Doctrine of the Trinity, without replacing the Sanskrit and Vedic prayers. The Tharisapalli plates presented to Maruvan Sapor Iso by Ayyanadikal Thiruvadikal granted the Christians the privilege of overseeing foreign trade in the city as well as control over its weights and measures in a move designed to increase Quilon&#x27;s trade and wealth. The two Christians were also instrumental in founding Christian churches with Syrian liturgy along the Malabar coast, distinct from the ancient Vedic Advaitam propounded by Adi Shankara in the early ninth century among the Nampoothiri Vaishnavites and Nair Sub Castes, as Malayalam was not accepted as a liturgical language until the early 18th century.

Thus began the Malayalam Era, known as Kolla Varsham after the city, indicating the importance of Kollam in the ninth century. The Persian merchant Soleyman of Siraf visited Malabar in the ninth century and found Quilon to be the only port in India used by the huge Chinese ships as their transshipment hub for goods on their way from China to the Persian Gulf. The rulers of Kollam (formerly called &#x27;Desinganadu&#x27;) had trade relations with China and exchanged embassies. According to the records of the Tang dynasty (618–913), Quilon was their chief port of call before the seventh century. The Chinese trade decreased about 600 and was again revived in the 13th century. &quot;Mirabilia Descripta&quot; by Bishop Catalani gives a description of life in Kollam, which he saw as the Catholic bishop-designate to Kollam, the oldest Catholic diocese in India. He also gives true and imaginary descriptions of life in &#x27;India the Major&#x27; in the period before Marco Polo visited the city. Sulaiman al-Tajir, a Persian merchant who visited Kerala during the reign of Sthanu Ravi Varma (9th century CE), records that there was extensive trade between Kerala and China at that time, based at the port of Kollam.

=== Kollam as &quot;Colombo&quot; in the Catalan Atlas (1375)===
In the 13th century CE, Maravarman Kulasekara Pandyan I, a Pandya ruler fought a war in Venad and captured the city of Kollam. The city appears on the Catalan Atlas of 1375 CE as Columbo and Colobo. The map marks this city as a Christian city, ruled by a Christian ruler.

The text above the picture of the king says:

The city was much frequented by the Genoese merchants during the 13th-14th centuries CE, followed by the Dominican and Franciscan friars from Europe. The Genoese merchants called the city Colõbo/Colombo.

The city was founded in 825 by Maruvān Sapir Iso, a Persian East Syriac Christian merchant, and was also Christianized early by the Saint Thomas Christians. In 1329 CE Pope John XXII established Kollam / Columbo as the first and only Roman Catholic bishopric on the Indian subcontinent, and appointed Jordan of Catalonia, a Dominican friar, as the diocese&#x27;s first bishop of the Latin sect. The Pope&#x27;s Latin scribes assigned the name &quot;Columbum&quot; to Columbo.

According to a book authored by Ilarius Augustus, published April, 2021 (&quot;&#x27;Christopher Columbus: Buried deep in Latin the Indian origin of the great explorer from Genoa&quot;&#x27;), the words Columbum, Columbus and Columbo appear for the first time in a notarial deed (lease contract) of a certain Mousso in Genoa in 1329 CE. These words appear in the form of a . The author then shows, through the Latin text of several other notarial deeds and the documents on church history, how Christopher Columbus - also carrying the same .- was part of Mousso&#x27;s family, and hence of the Indian lineage (although born in Genoa).

===Kozhikode Influences===
The port at Kozhikode held superior economic and political position in medieval Kerala coast, while Kannur, Kollam, and Kochi, were commercially important secondary ports, where the traders from various parts of the world would gather.

===Portuguese, Dutch and British Trade and Influences (16th to 18th centuries)===
The Portuguese arrived at Kappad Kozhikode in 1498 during the Age of Discovery, thus opening a direct sea route from Europe to India. They were the first Europeans to establish a trading center in Tangasseri, Kollam in 1502, which became the centre of their trade in pepper. In the wars with the Moors/Arabs that followed, the ancient church (temple) of St Thomas Tradition at Thevalakara was destroyed. In 1517, the Portuguese built the St. Thomas Fort in Thangasseri, which was destroyed in the subsequent wars with the Dutch. In 1661, the Dutch East India Company took possession of the city. The remnants of the old Portuguese Fort, later renovated by the Dutch, can be found at Thangasseri. In the 18th century, Travancore conquered Kollam, followed by the British in 1795. Thangasseri remains today as an Anglo-Indian settlement, though few Anglo-Indians remain. The Infant Jesus Church in Thangasseri, an old Portuguese-built church, remains as a memento of the Portuguese rule of the area.

===Battle of Quilon===

The Battle of Quilon was fought in 1809 between a troop of the Indian kingdom of Travancore led by the then Dalawa (prime minister) of Travancore, Velu Thampi Dalawa and the British East India Company led by Colonel Chalmers at Cantonment Maidan in Quilon. The battle lasted for only six hours and was the result of the East India Company&#x27;s invasion of Quilon and their garrison situated near the Cantonment Maidan. The company forces won the battle while all the insurrectionist who participated in the war were court-martialed and subsequently hanged at the maidan.

===Travancore Rule===
In the early 18th century CE, the Travancore royal family adopted some members from the royal family of Kolathunadu based at Kannur, and Parappanad based in present-day Malappuram district. Later, Venad Kingdom was completely merged with the Kingdom of Travancore during the reign of Marthanda Varma and Kollam remained as the capital of Travancore Kingdom. Later on, the capital of Travancore was relocated to Thiruvananthapuram.

Travancore became the most dominant state in Kerala by defeating the powerful Zamorin of Kozhikode in the battle of Purakkad in 1755. The Government Secretariat was also situated in Kollam till the 1830s. It was moved to Thiruvananthapuram during the reign of Swathi Thirunal.

===Excavation at Kollam Port seabed===
Excavations have gone on at Kollam Port premises since February 2014. The team has uncovered arrays of antique artifacts, including Chinese porcelain and coins. A Chinese team with the Palace Museum, a team from India with Kerala Council for Historical Research (KCHR) discovered Chinese coins and artifacts that show trade links between Kollam and ancient China.

==Geography==
Kollam city is bordered by the panchayats of Neendakara and Thrikkaruva to the north, Mayyanad to the south, and Thrikkovilvattom and Kottamkara to the east, and by the Laccadive Sea to the west. Ashtamudi Lake is in the heart of the city. The city is about away from Thiruvananthapuram, away from Kochi and away from Kozhikode. The National Waterway 3 and Ithikkara river are two important waterways passing through the city. The long Kollam Canal is connecting Paravur Lake ans Ashtamudi Lake. The Kallada river, another river that flows through the suburbs of the city, empties into Ashtamudi Lake, while the Ithikkara river runs to Paravur Kayal. Kattakayal, a freshwater lake in the city, connects another water-body named Vattakkayal with Lake Ashtamudi. In March 2016, &quot;IndiaTimes&quot; selected Kollam as one of the nine least polluted cities on earth to which anybody can relocate. Kollam is one among the top 10 most welcoming places in India for the year 2020, according to Booking.com&#x27;s traveller review awards.

Kollam is an ancient trading town – trading with Romans, Chinese, Arabs, and other Orientals – mentioned in historical citations dating back to Biblical times and the reign of Solomon, connecting with Red Sea ports of the Arabian Sea (supported by a find of ancient Roman coins). There was also internal trade through the Aryankavu Pass in Schenkottah Gap connecting the ancient town to Tamil Nadu. The overland trade in pepper by bullock cart and the trade over the waterways connecting Allepey and Cochin established trade linkages that enabled it to grow into one of the earliest Indian industrial townships. The rail links later established to Tamil Nadu supported still stronger trade links. The factories processing marine exports and the processing and packaging of cashewnuts extended its trade across the globe. It is known for cashew processing and coir manufacturing. Ashtamudi Lake is considered the southern gateway to the backwaters of Kerala and is a prominent tourist destination at Kollam. The Kollam urban area includes suburban towns such as Paravur in the south, Kundara in the east and Karunagapally in the north of the city. Other important towns in the city suburbs are Eravipuram, Kottiyam, Kannanallur, and Chavara.

===Climate===
Kollam experiences a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen &quot;Am&quot;) with little seasonal variation in temperatures. December to March is the dry season with less than of rain in each of those months. April to November is the wet season, with considerably more rain than during December to March, especially in June and July at the height of the Southwest Monsoon.

==Demographics==

=== Population ===
 India census, Kollam city had a population of 349,033 with a density of 5,400 persons per square kilometre. The sex ratio (the number of females per 1,000 males) was 1,112, the highest in the state. The district of Kollam ranked seventh in population in the state while the city of Kollam ranked fourth. Kollam had an average literacy rate of 93.77%, higher than the national average of 74.04%. Male literacy stood at 95.83%, and female at 91.95%. In Kollam, 11% of the population was under six years of age. In May 2015, Government of Kerala have decided to expand City Corporation of Kollam by merging Thrikkadavoor panchayath. So the area will become with a total city population of 384,892.
Malayalam is the most widely spoken language and official language of the city, while Tamil is understood by some sections in the city. There are also small communities of Anglo-Indians, Konkani Brahmins, Telugu Chetty and Bengali migrant labourers settled in the city. For ease of administration, Kollam Municipal Corporation is divided into six zones with local zonal offices for each one.

* Central Zone (&quot;headquartered at Cantonment&quot;), Kollam Municipal Corporation
* Sakthikulangara Zone, Kollam Municipal Corporation
* Vadakkevila Zone, Kollam Municipal Corporation
* Kilikollur Zone, Kollam Municipal Corporation
* Eravipuram Zone, Kollam Municipal Corporation
* Thrikkadavoor Zone, Kollam Municipal Corporation

In 2014, former Kollam Mayor Mrs. Prasanna Earnest was selected as the Best Lady Mayor of South India by the Rotary Club of Trivandrum Royal.

=== Religion ===

The city of Kollam is a microcosm of Kerala state with its residents belonging to varied religious, ethnic and linguistic groups. There are so many ancient temples, centuries-old churches and mosques in the city and its suburbs. Kollam is a Hindu majority city in Kerala. 56.35% of Kollam&#x27;s total population belongs to Hindu community. Moreover, the Kollam Era (also known as &quot;Malayalam Era&quot; or &quot;Kollavarsham&quot; or &quot;Malayalam Calendar&quot; or &quot;Malabar Era&quot;), solar and sidereal Hindu calendar used in Kerala, has been originated on 825 CE (Pothu Varsham) at (Kollam) city.

Muslims account for 22.05% of Kollam&#x27;s total population. As per the Census 2011 data, 80,935 is the total Muslim population in Kollam. The Karbala Maidan and the adjacent Makani mosque serves as the Eid gah for the city. The 300-year-old Juma-&#x27;Ath Palli at Karuva houses the mortal remains of a Sufi saint, Syed Abdur Rahman Jifri.

Christians account for 21.17% of the total population of Kollam city. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon (Kollam) is the first Catholic diocese in India. The diocese was first erected by Pope John XXII on 9 August 1329. It was re-erected on 1 September 1886. The diocese covers an area of and contains a population of 4,879,553, Catholics numbering 235,922 (4.8%). The famous Infant Jesus Cathedral, 400 years old, located in Thangassery, is the co-cathedral of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon. CSI Kollam-Kottarakara Diocese is one of the twenty-four dioceses of the Church of South India. The Headquarters of the Kerala region of The Pentecostal Mission for Kottarakkara, is in Kollam.

==Civic administration==


Kollam City is a Municipal Corporation with elected councillors from its 55 divisions. The mayor, elected from among the councillors, generally represents the political party holding a majority. The corporation secretary heads the office of the corporation.

The present mayor of Kollam Corporation is Adv.V. Rajendrababu of CPI(M).

The police administration of the city falls under the Kollam City Police Commissionerate which is headed by an IPS (Indian Police Service) cadre officer who reports to the Inspector General of Police (IGP) Thiruvananthapuram Range. The police administration comes under the State Home Department of the Government of Kerala. Kollam City is divided into three subdivisions, Karunagappally, Kollam and Chathannoor, each under an Assistant Commissioner of Police.

===Urban structure===

With a total urban population of 1,187,158 and 349,033 as city corporation&#x27;s population, Kollam is the fourth most populous city in the state and 49th on the list of the most populous urban agglomerations in India. the city&#x27;s urban growth rate of 154.59% was the second highest in the state. The Metropolitan area of Kollam includes Uliyakovil, Adichanalloor, Adinad, Ayanivelikulangara, Chavara,Chavara South, Elampalloor, Eravipuram (Part), Kallelibhagom, Karunagappally, Kollam, Kottamkara, Kulasekharapuram, Mayyanad, Meenad, Nedumpana, Neendakara, Oachira, Panayam, Panmana, Paravur, Perinad, Poothakkulam, Thazhuthala, Thodiyoor, Thrikkadavoor, Thrikkaruva, Thrikkovilvattom, and Vadakkumthala.

The Kerala Government has decided to develop the City of Kollam as a &quot;Port City of Kerala&quot;. Regeneration of the Maruthadi-Eravipuram area including construction of facilities for fishing, tourism and entertainment projects will be implemented as part of the project.

==Economy==


The city life of Kollam has changed in the last decade. In terms of economic performance and per capita income, Kollam city is in fifth position from India and third in Kerala. Kollam is famous as a city with excellent export background. 5 star, 4 star and 3 star hotels, multi-storied shopping malls, branded jewellery, textile showrooms and car showrooms have started operations in the city and suburbs. Kollam was the third city in Kerala (after Kozhikode and Kochi) to adopt the shopping mall culture. Kollam district ranks first in livestock wealth in the state. Downtown Kollam is the main CBD of Kollam city.

Dairy farming is fairly well developed. Also there is a chilling plant in the city. Kollam is an important maritime and port city. Fishing has a place in the economy of the district. Neendakara and Sakthikulangara villages in the suburbs of the city have fisheries. An estimated 134,973 persons are engaged in fishing and allied activities. Cheriazheekkal, Alappad, Pandarathuruthu, Puthenthura, Neendakara, Thangasseri, Eravipuram and Paravur are eight of the 26 important fishing villages. There are 24 inland fishing villages. The Government has initiated steps for establishing a fishing harbour at Neendakara. Average fish landing is estimated at 85,275 tonnes per year. One-third of the state&#x27;s fish catch is from Kollam. Nearly 3000 mechanised boats are operating from the fishing harbour. FFDA and VFFDA promote fresh water fish culture and prawn farming respectively. A fishing village with 100 houses is being built at Eravipuram. A prawn farm is being built at Ayiramthengu, and several new hatcheries are planned to cater to the needs of the aquaculturists. Kerala&#x27;s only turkey farm and a regional poultry farm are at Kureepuzha.

There are two Central Government industrial operations in the city, the Indian Rare Earths, Chavara and Parvathi Mills Ltd., Kollam. Kerala Ceramics Ltd. in Kundara, Kerala Electrical and Allied Engineering Company in Kundara, Kerala Premo Pipe factory in Chavara, Kerala Minerals and Metals Limited in Chavara and United Electrical Industries in Kollam are Kerala Government-owned companies. Other major industries in the private/cooperative sector are Aluminium Industries Ltd. in Kundara, Thomas Stephen &amp; Co. in Kollam, Floorco in Paravur and Cooperative Spinning Mill in Chathannoor. The beach sands of the district have concentrations of such heavy minerals as Ilmenite, Rutile, Monosite and Zircon, which offer scope for exploitation for industrial purposes.

Besides large deposits of China clay in Kundara, Mulavana and Chathannoor, there are also lime-shell deposits in Ashtamudi Lake and Bauxite deposits in Adichanallur.

Known as the &quot;Cashew Capital of the World&quot;, Kollam is noted for its traditional cashew business and is home to more than 600 cashew-processing units. Every year, about 800,000 tonnes of raw cashews are imported into the city for processing and an average of 130,000 tonnes of processed cashews are exported to various countries worldwide. The Cashew Export Promotion Council of India (CEPCI) expects a rise in exports to 275,000 tonnes by 2020, an increase of 120 per cent over the current figure. The Kerala State Cashew Development Corporation Limited (KSCDC) is situated at Mundakkal in Kollam city. The company owns 30 cashew factories all across Kerala. Of these, 24 are located in Kollam district.

Kollam is one of many seafood export hubs in India with numerous companies involved in the sector. Most of these are based in the Maruthadi, Sakthikulangara, Kavanad, Neendakara, Asramam, Kilikollur, Thirumullavaram and Uliyakovil areas of the city. Capithans, Kings Marine Exporters, India Food Exports and Oceanic Fisheries are examples of seafood exporters.
Kollam&#x27;s Ashtamudi Lake clam fishery was the first Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) certified fishery in India. The clam fishery supports around 3,000 people involved in the collection, cleaning, processing and trading of clams. Around 90 species of fish and ten species of clams are found in the lake.

==Culture==
Kollam Fest is Kollam&#x27;s own annual festival, attracting mostly Keralites but also hundreds of domestic and foreign tourists to Kollam. The main venue of Kollam Fest is the historic and gigantic Ashramam Maidan. Kollam Fest is the signature event of Kollam. Kollam Fest seeks to showcase Kollam&#x27;s rich culture and heritage, tourism potential and investments in new ventures.

Kollam Pooram, part of the Asramam Sree Krishna Swamy Temple Festival, is usually held on 15 April, but occasionally on 16 April. The pooram is held at the Ashramam maidan.

The President&#x27;s Trophy Boat Race (PTBR) is an annual regatta held in Ashtamudi Lake in Kollam. The event was inaugurated by President Prathibha Patil in September 2011. The event has been rescheduled from 2012.

==Transport==
===Road===
Kollam is well connected with rest of Kerala and India through national highways, state highways, and PWD roads. NH-66, NH 744, NH-183, NH-183A and other state highways and PWD Roads.

The state-owned Kerala State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) and private bus operators operate inter-state and intra-state bus services connecting Kollam. There are mainly 3 bus stations in the city - Kollam KSRTC bus station, Andamukkam city bus station, and Tangasseri Bus Terminal.

The main arterial roads of the city are Asramam Link Road, Coastal Road, Kollam Port Road, QAC Road, Residency Road, and Curzon Road.

===Rail===
 is the second largest railway station in Kerala in terms of area with a total of 6 platforms and 17 rail tracks. The other railway stations in Kollam city are Eravipuram, and Kilikollur. Kollam Junction has world&#x27;s third longest railway platform, measuring 1180.5 meter (3873 ft).

Mainline Electrical Multiple Unit (MEMU) have a car maintenance shed at Kollam Junction. The MEMU train services connects Kollam with Ernakulam (via Alappuzha and Kottayam), Punalur (via Kottarakkara), and Kanniyakumari (via Thiruvananthapuram).

===Water===

The State Water Transport Department operates boat services to West Kallada, Munroe Island, Guhanandapuram, Chavara Thekkumbhagom, Dalavapuram and Alappuzha from Kollam KSWTD Ferry Terminal situated on the banks of the Ashtamudi Lake. Asramam Link Road in the city passes adjacent to the ferry terminal.

Double decker luxury boats run between Kollam and Allepey daily. Luxury boats, operated by the government and private owners, operate from the main boat jetty during the tourist season. The West coast canal system, which starts from Thiruvananthapuram in the south and ends at Hosdurg in the north, passes through Paravur, the city of Kollam and Karunagappally taluk.

Kollam Port is one of the major ports in Kerala. Cargo handling facilities began operation in 2013. Foreign ships arrive in the port regularly with the MV Alina, a vessel registered in Antigua anchored at the port on 4April 2014. Once the Port starts functioning in full-fledged, it will make the transportation activities of Kollam-based cashew companies more easy. Shreyas Shipping Company is now running a regular container service between Kollam Port and Kochi Port.

===Air===

The city corporation of Kollam is served by the Thiruvananthapuram International Airport, which is about 56 kilometers from the city via NH66. Trivandrum International Airport is the first international airport in a non-metro city in India.

==Education==
There are many respected colleges, schools and learning centres in Kollam. The city and suburbs contribute greatly to education by providing the best and latest knowledge to the scholars. The Thangal Kunju Musaliar College of Engineering, the first private school of its kind in the state, is at Kilikollur, about east of Kollam city, and is a source of pride for all Kollamites. The Government of Kerala has granted academic autonomy to Fatima Mata National College, another prestigious institution in the city. Sree Narayana College, Bishop Jerome Institute (an integrated campus providing Architecture, Engineering and Management courses), and Travancore Business Academy are other important colleges in the city. There are two law colleges in the city, Sree Narayana Guru College of Legal Studies under the control of Sree Narayana Trust and N S S Law College managed by the N.S.S. Other schools in Kollam include Trinity Lyceum School, Infant Jesus School, St Aloysius H.S.S., the Oxford School, and Sri Sri Academy.

Kerala State Institute of Design (KSID), a design institute under Department of labour and Skills, Government of Kerala, is located at Chandanathope in Kollam. It was established in 2008 and was one of the first state-owned design institutes in India. KSID currently conducts Post Graduate Diploma Programs in Design developed in association with National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad.

Indian Institute of Infrastructure and Construction (IIIC-Kollam) is an institute of international standards situated at Chavara in Kollam city to support the skill development programmes for construction related occupations. The Institute of Fashion Technology, Kollam, Kerala is a fashion technology institute situated at Vellimon, established in technical collaboration with the National Institute of Fashion Technology and the Ministry of Textiles. In addition, there are two IMK (Institute of Management, Kerala) Extension Centres active in the city. Kerala Maritime Institute is situated at Neendakara in Kollam city to give maritime training for the students in Kerala. More than 5,000 students have been trained at Neendakara maritime institute under the Boat Crew training programme.

Apart from colleges, there are a number of bank coaching centres in Kollam. Kollam is known as India&#x27;s hub for bank test coaching centres with around 40 such institutes in the district. Students from various Indian states such as Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh also come here for coaching.

==Sports==

Cricket is the most popular sport, followed by hockey and football. Kollam is home to a number of local cricket, hockey and football teams participating in district, state-level and zone matches. An International Hockey Stadium with astro-turf facility is there at Asramam in the city, built at a cost of Rs. 13 crore. The land for the construction of the stadium was taken over from the Postal Department at Asramam, Kollam. The city has another stadium named the Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium, Kollam. It is a multipurpose stadium and has repeatedly hosted such sports events as the Ranji Trophy, Santhosh Trophy and National Games. Two open grounds in the city, the Asramam Maidan and Peeranki Maidan, are also used for sports events, practice and warm-up matches.

== Tourist places ==
*Palaruvi Falls
*Munroe Island
*Shenduruny Wildlife Sanctuary
*Ashtamudi
*Paravur
*Jatayu Earth&#x27;s Center Nature Park
*Kollam Beach
*Thenmala
*Thirumullavaram
*Thangassery
*Adventure Park, Kollam
*Thevally Palace
*Punalur
*Aryankavu
*Oachira
*Sasthamcotta lake
*Sambranikodi island
*Puthenkulam
*Polachira
*Kottukal Cave Temple
*Kumbhavurutty Waterfalls
*Azheekal Beach
*Rosemala
===Places of worship===
;Hindus and temples

*Anandavalleeshwaram Sri Mahadevar Temple is a 400 years old ancient Hindu temple in the city. The 400-year-old Sanctum sanctorum of this temple is finished in teak. 
*Ammachiveedu Muhurthi temple is another major temple in the city that have been founded around 600 years ago by the Ammachi Veedu family, aristocrats from Kollam. 
*The Kollam pooram, a major festival of Kollam, is the culmination of a ten-day festival, normally in mid April, of Asramam Sree Krishna Swamy Temple. 
*Kottankulangara Devi Temple is one of the world-famous Hindu temples in Kerala were cross-dressing of men for &quot;Chamayavilakku&quot; ritual is a part of traditional festivities. The men also carry large lamps. The first of the two-day dressing event drew to a close early on Monday. 
*Other famous Hindu worship centres in the Kollam Metropolitan Area are, Kottarakkara Sree Mahaganapathi Kshethram in Kottarakkara, Guhanandapuram Subramanya Temple in Chavara Thekkumbhagom, Puttingal Devi Temple in Paravur, Sooranad north Anayadi Pazhayidam Sree Narasimha Moorthy Temple, Poruvazhy Peruviruthy Malanada Temple in Poruvazhy, Sasthamcotta Sree Dharma Sastha Temple in Sasthamkotta, Sakthikulangara Sree Dharma Sastha temple, Thrikkadavoor Sree Mahadeva Temple in Kadavoor and Kattil Mekkathil Devi Temple in Ponmana Padanayarkulangara mahadeva temple Karunagappally, Ashtamudi Sree Veerabhadra Swamy Temple.

;Christianity and churches

The Infant Jesus Cathedral in Tangasseri is established by Portuguese during 1614. It is now the pro-cathedral of Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon – the ancient and first Catholic diocese of India. The church remains as a memento of the Portuguese rule of old Quilon city. St. Sebastian&#x27;s Church at Neendakara is another important church in the city. The Dutch Church in Munroe Island is built by the Dutch in 1878. Our Lady of Velankanni Shrine in Cutchery is another important Christian worship place in Kollam city. Saint Casimir Church in Kadavoor, Holy Family Church in Kavanad, St.Stephen&#x27;s Church in Thoppu and St.Thomas Church in Kadappakada are some of the other major Christian churches in Kollam.

Muslims and mosques
Kottukadu Juma Masjid in Chavara, Elampalloor Juma-A-Masjid, Valiyapalli in Jonakappuram, Chinnakada Juma Masjid, Juma-&#x27;Ath Palli in Kollurvila, Juma-&#x27;Ath Palli in Thattamala and Koivila Juma Masjid in Chavara are the other major Mosques in Kollam.

==Notable people==
*List of people from Kollam
==See also==
* Downtown Kollam
* Kollam Junction railway station
* Kollam Metropolitan Area
* Kollam District
* Cashew business in Kollam
* Largest Indian cities by GDP

==Notes==
==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai, Keralathinde Eruladanja Edukal, p. 64,112,117
* Travancore Archaeological Series (T.A.S.) Vol. 6 p. 15
* Diaries and writings of Mathai Kathanar, the 24th generation priest of Thulaserry Manapurathu, based on the ancestral documents and Thaliyolagrandha handed down through generations
* Z.M. Paret, Malankara Nazranikal, vol. 1
* L. K. Ananthakrishna Iyer, State Manual, p50,52
* Bernard Thoma Kathanar, Marthoma Christyanikal, lines 23,24
* Narayan, M.G.S, Chera-Pandya conflict in the 8th–9th centuries which led to the birth of Venad: Pandyan History seminar, Madurai University, 1971
* The Viswavijnanakosam (Malayalam) Vol. 3, p. 523,534
* Narayan M.G.S., Cultural Symbiosis p33
* The handwritten diaries of Pulikottil Mar Dionyius (former supreme head of the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church and Chitramezhuthu KM Varghese)

==External links==
* GeoHack - Kollam</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="0" end="6" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717389" start="42" end="61" title="List of cities and towns in Kerala" label="fourth largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="85" end="91" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="128" end="141" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="149" end="160" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605009" start="190" end="204" title="Ashtamudi Lake" label="Ashtamudi Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="251" end="269" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605828" start="289" end="337" title="List of ancient Indian cities" label="ndia&amp;#x27;s oldest continuously inhabited cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="436" end="444" title="entrepôt" label="entrepôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q666519" start="566" end="586" title="Kerala backwaters" label="Backwaters of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="628" end="632" title="coir" label="coir"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="751" end="762" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="800" end="807" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="938" end="949" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="1226" end="1232" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347981" start="1258" end="1275" title="Sulaiman al-Tajir" label="Sulaiman al-Tajir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="1349" end="1359" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="1418" end="1429" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356124" start="1528" end="1534" title="Kollam district" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q24947210" start="1562" end="1576" title="Ezharappallikal" label="seven churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="1602" end="1611" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="St Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081937" start="1634" end="1651" title="Islam in Kerala" label="10 oldest mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110326" start="1676" end="1688" title="Malik Deenar" label="Malik Deenar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="1692" end="1698" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q874794" start="1700" end="1732" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906148" start="1765" end="1778" title="V. Nagam Aiya" label="V. Nagam Aiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807258" start="1849" end="1860" title="East Syriac Rite" label="East Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892185" start="1869" end="1892" title="Mar Sabor and Mar Proth" label="Mar Sabor and Mar Proth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="2062" end="2068" title="Cochin" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067699" start="2070" end="2081" title="Kollam Port" label="Kollam Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682823" start="2110" end="2120" title="Tangasseri" label="Tangasseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16312117" start="2325" end="2343" title="Thambiran Vanakkam" label="Thambiran Vanakkam"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2473" end="2486" title="ISO 9000#Contents of ISO 9001:2015" label="ISO 9001:2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="2579" end="2612" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126896" start="2661" end="2667" title="Kollam Metropolitan Area" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356124" start="2870" end="2885" title="Kollam district" label="Kollam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="3143" end="3148" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera"/>
<link wikidata="Q719744" start="3344" end="3355" title="Kottarakara" label="Kottarakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q742720" start="3357" end="3364" title="Punalur" label="Punalur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939468" start="3366" end="3373" title="Paravur, Kollam" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="3379" end="3392" title="Karunagapally" label="Karunagapally"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="3413" end="3420" title="Kollam" label="Palombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="3424" end="3434" title="John Mandeville" label="Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="3448" end="3455" title="Travels of Sir John Mandeville" label="Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q775332" start="3495" end="3512" title="Fountain of Youth" label="Fountain of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q358207" start="3545" end="3563" title="Malayalam calendar" label="Malayalam calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="4011" end="4025" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532158" start="4108" end="4113" title="Venad" label="Venad"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="4212" end="4220" title="entrepot" label="entrepot"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="4329" end="4337" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="4343" end="4350" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="4510" end="4514" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="4741" end="4754" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="4798" end="4807" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317217" start="4824" end="4833" title="Kasaragod" label="Kasaragod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245982" start="4862" end="4874" title="Palakkad Gap" label="Palakkad Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q9885" start="4876" end="4886" title="Coimbatore" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9863" start="4888" end="4893" title="Salem, Tamil Nadu" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521516" start="4899" end="4910" title="Kolli Hills" label="Kolli Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q9885" start="4930" end="4940" title="Coimbatore" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="4972" end="4985" title="Sangam period" label="Sangam period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="5146" end="5156" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446126" start="5284" end="5294" title="Ay dynasty" label="Ay dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="5324" end="5338" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="5342" end="5349" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="5376" end="5383" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636373" start="5388" end="5394" title="Tyndis" label="Tyndis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="5547" end="5561" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandya dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442830" start="5589" end="5606" title="Kulasekharapatnam" label="Kulasekharapatnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="5707" end="5718" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5723" end="5737" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="5739" end="5754" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5775" end="5780" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652432" start="5811" end="5819" title="Nelcynda" label="Nelcynda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="5858" end="5871" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="5925" end="5930" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="6009" end="6015" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="6071" end="6086" title="Pandyan Kingdom" label="Pandyan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q355633" start="6089" end="6110" title="Cosmas Indicopleustes" label="Cosmas Indicopleustes"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="6120" end="6129" title="Nestorian Christian" label="Nestorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="6622" end="6631" title="Nestorian Church" label="Nestorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="6790" end="6809" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932622" start="6828" end="6855" title="Legend of Cheraman Perumals" label="Legend of Cheraman Perumals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006282" start="6904" end="6915" title="Kodungallur" label="Kodungallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="6981" end="6994" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265354" start="7010" end="7019" title="Dharmadom" label="Dharmadom"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117549" start="7117" end="7141" title="Qissat Shakarwati Farmad" label="Qissat Shakarwati Farmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="7153" end="7172" title="Mosque" label="&amp;quot;Masjids&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006282" start="7176" end="7187" title="Kodungallur" label="Kodungallur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726570" start="7197" end="7203" title="Madayi" label="Madayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635031" start="7205" end="7211" title="Barkur" label="Barkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="7213" end="7222" title="Mangalore" label="Mangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q317217" start="7224" end="7233" title="Kasaragod" label="Kasaragod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="7235" end="7241" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265354" start="7243" end="7252" title="Dharmadam" label="Dharmadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720777" start="7254" end="7266" title="Koyilandy" label="Panthalayini"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208881" start="7272" end="7280" title="Chaliyam" label="Chaliyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110326" start="7311" end="7322" title="Malik Dinar" label="Malik Dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="7377" end="7396" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709517" start="7438" end="7448" title="Thalangara" label="Thalangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q317217" start="7452" end="7461" title="Kasaragod" label="Kasaragod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892185" start="7606" end="7629" title="Mar Sabor and Mar Proth" label="Mar Sabor and Mar Proth"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="7755" end="7760" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="8175" end="8183" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710782" start="8570" end="8589" title="Tharisapalli plates" label="Tharisapalli plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255534" start="9090" end="9094" title="Nair" label="Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="9706" end="9718" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="10166" end="10176" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616086" start="10272" end="10289" title="Sthanu Ravi Varma" label="Sthanu Ravi Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755090" start="10505" end="10536" title="Maravarman Kulasekara Pandyan I" label="Maravarman Kulasekara Pandyan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="10540" end="10546" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356297" start="10632" end="10645" title="Catalan Atlas" label="Catalan Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="11065" end="11086" title="East Syriac Christian" label="East Syriac Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q648601" start="11137" end="11160" title="Saint Thomas Christians" label="Saint Thomas Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="11173" end="11187" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q978884" start="11306" end="11325" title="Jordan Catala" label="Jordan of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="11329" end="11338" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="11976" end="11996" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12076" end="12090" title="Origin theories of Christopher Columbus#Genoese birth - Indian lineage hypothesis" label="Indian lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="12157" end="12166" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="12245" end="12251" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="12265" end="12270" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289099" start="12490" end="12496" title="Kappad" label="Kappad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="12497" end="12506" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="12526" end="12542" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="13006" end="13030" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619147" start="13491" end="13507" title="Battle of Quilon" label="Battle of Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531060" start="13634" end="13652" title="Velu Thampi Dalawa" label="Velu Thampi Dalawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="13661" end="13687" title="East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386544" start="13715" end="13732" title="Cantonment Maidan" label="Cantonment Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835875" start="14117" end="14140" title="Travancore royal family" label="Travancore royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427080" start="14187" end="14198" title="Kolathunadu" label="Kolathunadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="14208" end="14214" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135753" start="14220" end="14230" title="Parappanad" label="Parappanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030918" start="14252" end="14271" title="Malappuram district" label="Malappuram district"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="14325" end="14346" title="Kingdom of Travancore" label="Kingdom of Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596305" start="14367" end="14382" title="Marthanda Varma" label="Marthanda Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="14593" end="14600" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130261957" start="14604" end="14613" title="History of Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260807" start="14631" end="14639" title="Purakkad" label="Purakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283372" start="14775" end="14790" title="Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma" label="Swathi Thirunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067699" start="14860" end="14871" title="Kollam Port" label="Kollam Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143900" start="15242" end="15251" title="Panchayati raj in India" label="panchayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986898" start="15256" end="15266" title="Neendakara" label="Neendakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798159" start="15271" end="15282" title="Thrikkaruva" label="Thrikkaruva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798168" start="15297" end="15305" title="Mayyanad" label="Mayyanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798163" start="15324" end="15340" title="Thrikkovilvattom" label="Thrikkovilvattom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434282" start="15345" end="15355" title="Kottamkara" label="Kottamkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="15529" end="15538" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529970" start="15544" end="15563" title="National Waterway 3" label="National Waterway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533865" start="15568" end="15583" title="Ithikkara River" label="Ithikkara river"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892883" start="15647" end="15659" title="Kollam Canal" label="Kollam Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136286" start="15847" end="15860" title="Paravur Kayal" label="Paravur Kayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035313" start="16201" end="16212" title="Booking.com" label="Booking.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525288" start="16568" end="16582" title="Aryankavu" label="Aryankavu Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674690" start="16586" end="16601" title="Sengottai" label="Schenkottah Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="16734" end="16741" title="Allepey" label="Allepey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="17083" end="17089" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="17105" end="17109" title="coir" label="coir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444299" start="17329" end="17336" title="Kundara" label="Kundara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="17353" end="17366" title="Karunagapally" label="Karunagapally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385069" start="17439" end="17449" title="Eravipuram" label="Eravipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434343" start="17451" end="17459" title="Kottiyam" label="Kottiyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088466" start="17478" end="17485" title="Chavara" label="Chavara"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="17523" end="17547" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="17549" end="17555" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="17645" end="17655" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="17729" end="17739" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="17849" end="17866" title="Southwest Monsoon" label="Southwest Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356124" start="18122" end="18128" title="Kollam district" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="18429" end="18449" title="Government of Kerala" label="Government of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="18473" end="18499" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="City Corporation of Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="18688" end="18693" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q368125" start="18774" end="18786" title="Anglo-Indian" label="Anglo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249914" start="18789" end="18796" title="Konkani people" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q418708" start="18807" end="18813" title="Telugu people" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="18825" end="18832" title="Bengalis" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="18900" end="18928" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619359" start="19034" end="19044" title="Kollam Cantonment" label="Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="19053" end="19081" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403113" start="19084" end="19099" title="Sakthikulangara" label="Sakthikulangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="19106" end="19134" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908121" start="19137" end="19148" title="Vadakkevila" label="Vadakkevila"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="19155" end="19183" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126820" start="19186" end="19196" title="Kilikollur" label="Kilikollur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="19203" end="19231" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385069" start="19234" end="19244" title="Eravipuram" label="Eravipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="19251" end="19279" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="19302" end="19330" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Kollam Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="19422" end="19433" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="19734" end="19739" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="19817" end="19822" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q358207" start="19848" end="19858" title="Kollam Era" label="Kollam Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q210953" start="19991" end="19996" title="Solar calendar" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191747" start="20001" end="20009" title="Sidereal time" label="sidereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="20010" end="20024" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="20106" end="20112" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q874794" start="20523" end="20555" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="20638" end="20652" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619308" start="20827" end="20849" title="Infant Jesus Cathedral" label="Infant Jesus Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q874794" start="20917" end="20949" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906607" start="20951" end="20981" title="Kollam-Kottarakkara Diocese of the Church of South India" label="CSI Kollam-Kottarakara Diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325573" start="21088" end="21111" title="The Pentecostal Mission" label="The Pentecostal Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="21189" end="21210" title="Kollam Municipal Corporation" label="Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126899" start="21478" end="21493" title="V. Rajendrababu" label="V. Rajendrababu"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="21497" end="21503" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="CPI(M)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619361" start="21560" end="21594" title="Kollam City Police" label="Kollam City Police Commissionerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517917" start="21622" end="21643" title="Indian Police Service" label="Indian Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273151" start="21678" end="21705" title="Inspector General of Police" label="Inspector General of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="21879" end="21893" title="Karunagappally" label="Karunagappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087723" start="21906" end="21917" title="Chathannoor" label="Chathannoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142547" start="22154" end="22209" title="List of million-plus urban agglomerations in India" label="list of the most populous urban agglomerations in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682694" start="22346" end="22359" title="Adichanalloor" label="Adichanalloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682883" start="22361" end="22367" title="Adinad" label="Adinad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836257" start="22369" end="22387" title="Ayanivelikulangara" label="Ayanivelikulangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088467" start="22397" end="22410" title="Chavara Thekkumbhagom" label="Chavara South"/>
<link wikidata="Q32785" start="22412" end="22423" title="Elampalloor" label="Elampalloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385069" start="22425" end="22435" title="Eravipuram" label="Eravipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353731" start="22444" end="22457" title="Kallelibhagom" label="Kallelibhagom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="22459" end="22473" title="Karunagappally" label="Karunagappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442831" start="22495" end="22511" title="Kulasekharapuram" label="Kulasekharapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807602" start="22523" end="22529" title="Meenad" label="Meenad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986366" start="22531" end="22540" title="Nedumpana" label="Nedumpana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986898" start="22542" end="22552" title="Neendakara" label="Neendakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073392" start="22554" end="22561" title="Oachira" label="Oachira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130141" start="22563" end="22570" title="Panayam" label="Panayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131338" start="22572" end="22579" title="Panmana" label="Panmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168561" start="22590" end="22597" title="Perinad" label="Perinad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228888" start="22599" end="22611" title="Poothakkulam" label="Poothakkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711597" start="22613" end="22624" title="Thazhuthala" label="Thazhuthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786623" start="22626" end="22635" title="Thodiyoor" label="Thodiyoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798163" start="22665" end="22681" title="Thrikkovilvattom" label="Thrikkovilvattom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908130" start="22687" end="22700" title="Vadakkumthala" label="Vadakkumthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127874" start="22825" end="22834" title="Maruthadi" label="Maruthadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385069" start="22835" end="22845" title="Eravipuram" label="Eravipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="23088" end="23105" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q24943657" start="23155" end="23170" title="List of Kerala cities by GDP" label="third in Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="23444" end="23453" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q18112041" start="23563" end="23578" title="Downtown Kollam" label="Downtown Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="23591" end="23594" title="Central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403113" start="23810" end="23825" title="Sakthikulangara" label="Sakthikulangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986898" start="24008" end="24018" title="Neendakara" label="Neendakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385069" start="24033" end="24043" title="Eravipuram" label="Eravipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q109286296" start="24589" end="24601" title="Ayiramthengu" label="Ayiramthengu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445851" start="24753" end="24763" title="Kureepuazha (Perinad)" label="Kureepuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895121" start="24870" end="24889" title="Parvathy Mills Limited" label="Parvathi Mills Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q6444299" start="24923" end="24930" title="Kundara" label="Kundara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444299" start="24984" end="24991" title="Kundara" label="Kundara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444299" start="25249" end="25256" title="Kundara" label="Kundara"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205859" start="26057" end="26097" title="Cashew Export Promotion Council of India" label="Cashew Export Promotion Council of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387788" start="26216" end="26267" title="Kerala State Cashew Development Corporation Limited" label="Kerala State Cashew Development Corporation Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128302" start="26291" end="26300" title="Mundakkal" label="Mundakkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127874" start="26549" end="26558" title="Maruthadi" label="Maruthadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403113" start="26560" end="26575" title="Sakthikulangara" label="Sakthikulangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q15234660" start="26577" end="26584" title="Kavanad" label="Kavanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986898" start="26586" end="26596" title="Neendakara" label="Neendakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354735" start="26598" end="26605" title="Asramam" label="Asramam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126820" start="26607" end="26617" title="Kilikollur" label="Kilikollur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785368" start="26619" end="26634" title="Thirumullavarum" label="Thirumullavaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899063" start="26639" end="26649" title="Uliyakovil" label="Uliyakovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891246" start="26836" end="26862" title="Marine Stewardship Council" label="Marine Stewardship Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427346" start="27486" end="27499" title="Kollam Pooram" label="Kollam Pooram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805910" start="27513" end="27546" title="Asramam Sree Krishna Swamy Temple" label="Asramam Sree Krishna Swamy Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13113551" start="27664" end="27697" title="President&amp;#x27;s Trophy Boat Race" label="President&amp;#x27;s Trophy Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520609" start="28015" end="28020" title="National Highway 66 (India)" label="NH-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521404" start="28022" end="28028" title="National Highway 744 (India)" label="NH 744"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520622" start="28030" end="28036" title="National Highway 183 (India)" label="NH-183"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128549" start="28038" end="28045" title="National Highway 183A (India)" label="NH-183A"/>
<link wikidata="Q679587" start="28103" end="28150" title="Kerala State Road Transport Corporation" label="Kerala State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343669" start="28291" end="28315" title="Kollam KSRTC bus station" label="Kollam KSRTC bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109660" start="28317" end="28344" title="Andamukkam City bus stand" label="Andamukkam city bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952154" start="28350" end="28373" title="Tangasseri Bus Terminal" label="Tangasseri Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354744" start="28416" end="28433" title="Asramam Link Road" label="Asramam Link Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580879" start="28435" end="28447" title="Kollam-Paravur Coastal Road" label="Coastal Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154352" start="28449" end="28465" title="Port Road, Kollam" label="Kollam Port Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q32304101" start="28467" end="28475" title="QAC Road" label="QAC Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895849" start="28477" end="28491" title="Residency Road" label="Residency Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124639" start="28682" end="28692" title="Eravipuram railway station" label="Eravipuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126822" start="28698" end="28708" title="Kilikollur railway station" label="Kilikollur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595815" start="28845" end="28849" title="MEMU" label="MEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393480" start="29074" end="29106" title="Kerala State Water Transport Department" label="State Water Transport Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985595" start="29133" end="29145" title="West Kallada" label="West Kallada"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892889" start="29232" end="29259" title="Kollam KSWTD Ferry Terminal" label="Kollam KSWTD Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354744" start="29305" end="29322" title="Asramam Link Road" label="Asramam Link Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115271" start="29652" end="29659" title="Hosdurg" label="Hosdurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939468" start="29689" end="29696" title="Paravur, Kollam" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067699" start="29744" end="29755" title="Kollam Port" label="Kollam Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067699" start="30187" end="30198" title="Kollam Port" label="Kollam Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139316" start="30203" end="30213" title="Cochin Port" label="Kochi Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466205" start="30275" end="30315" title="Thiruvananthapuram International Airport" label="Thiruvananthapuram International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070837" start="30675" end="30720" title="T.K.M. College of Engineering" label="Thangal Kunju Musaliar College of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126820" start="30779" end="30789" title="Kilikollur" label="Kilikollur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437861" start="30921" end="30949" title="Fatima Mata National College" label="Fatima Mata National College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378649" start="31019" end="31042" title="Bishop Jerome Institute" label="Bishop Jerome Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585633" start="31240" end="31283" title="Sree Narayana Guru College of Legal Studies" label="Sree Narayana Guru College of Legal Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585633" start="31305" end="31324" title="Sree Narayana Trust" label="Sree Narayana Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815155" start="31506" end="31538" title="Kerala State Institute of Design" label="Kerala State Institute of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="31605" end="31625" title="Government of Kerala" label="Government of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121215" start="31853" end="31881" title="National Institute of Design" label="National Institute of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015745" start="31895" end="31960" title="Indian Institute of Infrastructure and Construction" label="Indian Institute of Infrastructure and Construction (IIIC-Kollam)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080837" start="32121" end="32164" title="Institute of Fashion Technology Kerala" label="The Institute of Fashion Technology, Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346308" start="32277" end="32317" title="National Institute of Fashion Technology" label="National Institute of Fashion Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581778" start="32451" end="32476" title="Kerala Maritime Institute" label="Kerala Maritime Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986898" start="32492" end="32502" title="Neendakara" label="Neendakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="32924" end="32934" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="32936" end="32945" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="32947" end="32961" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="32963" end="32968" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="32973" end="32987" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126040" start="33229" end="33257" title="International Hockey Stadium, Kollam" label="International Hockey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354735" start="33295" end="33302" title="Asramam" label="Asramam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632620" start="33495" end="33530" title="Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium (Kollam)" label="Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium, Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150358" start="33697" end="33711" title="Asramam Maidan" label="Asramam Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386544" start="33716" end="33731" title="Peeranki Maidan" label="Peeranki Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38377" start="33819" end="33833" title="Palaruvi Falls" label="Palaruvi Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494223" start="33850" end="33879" title="Shenduruny Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Shenduruny Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605009" start="33881" end="33890" title="Ashtamudi" label="Ashtamudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939468" start="33892" end="33899" title="Paravur, Kollam" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q24939915" start="33901" end="33939" title="Jatayu Earth&amp;#x27;s Center Nature Park" label="Jatayu Earth&amp;#x27;s Center Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703689" start="33941" end="33953" title="Kollam Beach" label="Kollam Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781389" start="33955" end="33963" title="Thenmala" label="Thenmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785368" start="33965" end="33980" title="Thirumullavaram" label="Thirumullavaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682823" start="33982" end="33993" title="Thangassery" label="Thangassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350329" start="33995" end="34017" title="Adventure Park, Kollam" label="Adventure Park, Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619528" start="34019" end="34034" title="Thevally Palace" label="Thevally Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q742720" start="34036" end="34043" title="Punalur" label="Punalur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525288" start="34045" end="34054" title="Aryankavu" label="Aryankavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073392" start="34056" end="34063" title="Oachira" label="Oachira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34065" end="34082" title="Sasthamcotta lake" label="Sasthamcotta lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34084" end="34103" title="Sambranikodi island" label="Sambranikodi island"/>
<link wikidata="Q101125868" start="34105" end="34116" title="Puthenkulam" label="Puthenkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208847" start="34118" end="34127" title="Polachira" label="Polachira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434361" start="34129" end="34149" title="Kottukal Cave Temple" label="Kottukal Cave Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344053" start="34151" end="34175" title="Kumbhavurutty Waterfalls" label="Kumbhavurutty Waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110004" start="34177" end="34191" title="Azheekal Beach" label="Azheekal Beach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34193" end="34201" title="Rosemala" label="Rosemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751356" start="34248" end="34288" title="Anandavalleeshwaram Sri Mahadevar Temple" label="Anandavalleeshwaram Sri Mahadevar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415734" start="34359" end="34376" title="Sanctum sanctorum" label="Sanctum sanctorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747100" start="34415" end="34443" title="Ammachiveedu Muhurthi" label="Ammachiveedu Muhurthi temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427346" start="34584" end="34597" title="Kollam pooram" label="Kollam pooram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805910" start="34695" end="34728" title="Asramam Sree Krishna Swamy Temple" label="Asramam Sree Krishna Swamy Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240034" start="34732" end="34759" title="Kottankulangara Devi Temple" label="Kottankulangara Devi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434300" start="35093" end="35134" title="Kottarakkara Sree Mahaganapathi Kshethram" label="Kottarakkara Sree Mahaganapathi Kshethram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262495" start="35211" end="35232" title="Puttingal Temple" label="Puttingal Devi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939468" start="35236" end="35243" title="Paravur, Kollam" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232849" start="35310" end="35347" title="Poruvazhy Peruviruthy Malanada Temple" label="Poruvazhy Peruviruthy Malanada Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232848" start="35351" end="35360" title="Poruvazhy" label="Poruvazhy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68078" start="35362" end="35400" title="Sasthamcotta Sree Dharma Sastha Temple" label="Sasthamcotta Sree Dharma Sastha Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425811" start="35404" end="35416" title="Sasthamkotta" label="Sasthamkotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619308" start="35677" end="35699" title="Infant Jesus Cathedral" label="Infant Jesus Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q874794" start="35787" end="35819" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="35933" end="35939" title="Quilon" label="Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986898" start="35977" end="35987" title="Neendakara" label="Neendakara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018895" start="36033" end="36062" title="Dutch Church, Munroe Island" label="Dutch Church in Munroe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="36075" end="36084" title="Dutch People" label="the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891234" start="36127" end="36135" title="Cutchery" label="Cutchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798146" start="36221" end="36229" title="Thrikkadavoor" label="Kadavoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15234660" start="36253" end="36260" title="Kavanad" label="Kavanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151926" start="36321" end="36332" title="Kadappakada" label="Kadappakada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065444" start="36502" end="36512" title="Chinnakada" label="Chinnakada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389070" start="36586" end="36596" title="Thattamala" label="Thattamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q125314082" start="36692" end="36718" title="List of people from Kollam" label="List of people from Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18112041" start="36734" end="36749" title="Downtown Kollam" label="Downtown Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421499" start="36752" end="36783" title="Kollam Junction railway station" label="Kollam Junction railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126896" start="36786" end="36810" title="Kollam Metropolitan Area" label="Kollam Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356124" start="36813" end="36828" title="Kollam District" label="Kollam District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619170" start="36831" end="36856" title="Cashew business in Kollam" label="Cashew business in Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q130724612" start="36859" end="36887" title="Largest Indian cities by GDP" label="Largest Indian cities by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353374" start="36937" end="36960" title="Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai" label="Elamkulam Kunjan Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456529" start="37293" end="37318" title="L. K. Ananthakrishna Iyer" label="L. K. Ananthakrishna Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q532662" start="37728" end="37760" title="Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church" label="Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849267" wikidata="Q4808731" url="?curid=849267" title="Assen Bossev">
<text>Assen Bossev () (22 November 1913 – 24 April 1997) was a prominent Bulgarian author of children&#x27;s literature, as well as a translator from Russian.

He was born in the village of Ruska Bela, Vratsa region. He was educated there as well as in the town of Berkovitsa. Afterwards Bossev was a teacher for a certain period of time. He settled in Sofia, where he graduated in law and diplomacy.

Soviet Russian poet Yelizaveta Tarakhovskaya translated most of Bossev&#x27;s poetry into Russian.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4808731" start="0" end="12" title="Assen Bossev" label="Assen Bossev"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="67" end="75" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654871" start="184" end="194" title="Ruska Bela" label="Ruska Bela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012785" start="196" end="209" title="Vratsa region" label="Vratsa region"/>
<link wikidata="Q407314" start="259" end="269" title="Berkovitsa" label="Berkovitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="347" end="352" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451911" start="416" end="440" title="Yelizaveta Tarakhovskaya" label="Yelizaveta Tarakhovskaya"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849273" wikidata="Q1155446" url="?curid=849273" title="Dream (Japanese group)">
<text>was a Japanese pop girl group. The group was formed as a result of a 1999 talent contest called &quot;Avex Dream 2000&quot;. Originally a three-piece group consisting of Mai Matsumuro, Kana Tachibana, and Yu Hasebe, the group has undergone many changes since its debut in 2000 on the Avex Trax label, and none of the original trio remain. The original trio sold over 950,700 records, and in total the group has sold over 1,100,000 records over the span of 10 years.

On July 7, 2002, the main lyricist Mai Matsumuro left the group to pursue a solo career. After Matsumuro&#x27;s departure, Avex held another audition to replace Matsumuro. Instead of one, six new members won the audition, resulting in an eight-member (Dream) group with the debut single &quot;Music is My Thing&quot;. In March 2004, Risa Ai left to pursue a solo career. They became a 7-member group as performed this way until 2007. During this time, the band&#x27;s name changed from dream to DRM. 

In August 2008, Yu Hasebe left the group to pursue a solo career, leaving Kana Tachibana behind as the only original member of dream. Afterward, DRM became Dream again. 

In August 2010, Dream released their official major re-debut single, &quot;My Way: Ulala&quot; on the Rhythm Zone label. On November 24, 2010, Dream released their first album as a six-member group, titled &quot;Hands Up!&quot; on the Rhythm Zone label.

On November 23, 2010, Tachibana announced that she would leave the group. This marked the departure of the last member of the original three-member group. She officially left the group on February 20, 2011. On March 30, 2012, Sayaka Yamamoto departed to pursue a solo career.

==History==

===Avex Dream 2000===
In 1999, the Avex label organized a talent contest, called &quot;Avex Dream 2000&quot;, looking for the next big hit idol group. Over 120,000 hopefuls auditioned in front of a panel of judges, notably including Kaori Mochida of the popular band, Every Little Thing. Another of the entrants was Kumi Koda, who placed second and is now a popular singer.

The final winners of the competition were Mai Matsumuro, Kana Tachibana, and Yu Hasebe. They formed Avex&#x27;s idol group Dream.

===Debut as 3-member Dream===
On January 1, 2000, Dream debuted with the single &quot;Movin&#x27; On&quot;, which charted within the top 15 on the Oricon charts. Their next few singles all charted in similar territory, failing to break the top 10 until their sixth single, &quot;My Will&quot;, made it to number 6 at the end of 2000. &quot;My will&quot; was the song that gave Dream newfound fame as it was the first ending theme to the popular anime &quot;Inuyasha&quot;. The group&#x27;s next single peaked at number 36.

On February 28, 2001, Dream released their debut album, &quot;Dear...&quot;. The album reached number 5 on the Oricon charts. Also on November 28, 2001, Dream released &quot;Get Over&quot;, the first opening theme to the anime &quot;Hikaru no Go&quot;. It reached number 12 on the Oricon charts. On February 14, 2002, dream released their second album, &quot;Process&quot;, which reached number 8 on the charts. Following the release of &quot;Process&quot;, Matsumuro, who wrote most of the group&#x27;s lyrics, announced that she was to leave in pursuit of a solo career. Dream then released their final single as a 3-member group, &quot;Sincerely: Ever Dream&quot;. On June 26, 2002, Dream released their final release as a three-member group and their first best album, &quot;Eternal Dream&quot;. On July 7, 2002, Matsumuro left Dream.

===8-member Dream===
Following Matsumuro&#x27;s departure, Avex held more auditions for a replacement, and ended up with six new girls. They were Risa Ai, Erie Abe, Aya Takamoto, Ami Nakashima, Shizuka Nishida, and Sayaka Yamamoto.

The new eight-girl group &quot;re-debuted&quot; in 2003 with the single &quot;Music is My Thing&quot;. In February 2003, the group released their third album, &quot;Dream World&quot;. The album reached number 23 on the Oricon charts. Following &quot;Dream World&quot;, Dream&#x27;s popularity once again peaked. They participated in the first a-nation summer concert festival held by Avex. They appeared on popular singer Ayumi Hamasaki&#x27;s TV show, &quot;Ayuready&quot;. Subsequently, dream&#x27;s next single, &quot;I Love Dream World&quot;, became their first single to chart within the Oricon top 10 since &quot;My Will&quot; in 2000. In 2004, following the release of Dream&#x27;s fourth album &quot;ID&quot;, Ai left Dream to pursue a solo career, bringing the group&#x27;s member count down to seven.

===7-member Dream/DRM===
From 2004–2005, Dream released the singles &quot;Pure&quot;, &quot;Love Generation&quot;, and &quot;Soyokaze no Shirabe / Story&quot;. They also released two mini albums, &quot;Natsuiro&quot; and &quot;Boy meets Girl&quot;. In addition, Dream released a best album (&quot;777: Best of Dreams&quot;), an Avex cover album (&quot;Dream Meets Best Hits Avex&quot;), and a self cover album (&quot;777: Another Side Story&quot;).

After a long period without much activity, Dream released &quot;7th Anniversary Best&quot; (a best of album featuring songs from the group&#x27;s debut as a three-member unit up till their latest single) and &quot;Greatest Live Hits&quot; (an album featuring recordings of their live performances) on January 1, 2007 (the group&#x27;s 7th anniversary).

====DRM====
On June 27, 2007, Dream was &quot;reborn&quot; as the dance/chorus group DRM in an attempt to shed their image as idols. The group debuted with the mini album &quot;DRM&quot;.

In 2008, DRM released four digital singles, the first being released in January and the last, in April. The singles were released on the 7th of each month (January 7, February 7, and so on). Like their mini album, the singles were not met with much success.

===LDH and re-debut as Dream===
On August 1, 2008, Yu Hasebe left DRM in pursuit of a solo career, leaving Kana Tachibana behind as the only member of the original Dream. The group changed its name back to Dream and their official fanclub (Live Your Dreams) closed down. Also, the group changed management from Avex to LDH (Love Dream Happiness).

On September 9, 2009, the group released its first single as Dream and its first physical single since 2005&#x27;s &quot;Soyokaze no Shirabe / Story&quot;. The new single was titled &quot;Perfect Girls / To The Top&quot; and was sold exclusively at a series of free shows Dream performed throughout Japan as well as on mu-mo (an online store). As a special release, it did not chart on Oricon. To promote their comeback, Dream embarked on a nationwide tour of Japan, performing at free live appearances in numerous cities.

Dream appeared on their first TV live on December 31, 2009 on CDTV Premium Live 2009»2010, performing Perfect Girls. On March 1, 2010, Dream released their second single as a six-member group, titled &quot;Breakout&quot;, another mu-mo exclusive. In May 2010, having completed their nationwide free performance campaign, Dream held a 3-date live tour titled Dream Live Tour 2010: Road to Dream. Dream also toured as a special guest on labelmate Exile&#x27;s &quot;Exile Live Tour 2010 Fantasy&quot; alongside fellow LDH artists Happiness and Flower.

On August 18, 2010, Dream released their major label debut single, &quot;My Way: Ulala&quot; under the Rhythm Zone label. On October 6, 2010, Dream released their second major label single, &quot;Ev&#x27;rybody Alright!&quot;. On November 24, 2010, Dream released their debut album as a six-member group and fifth studio album overall, &quot;Hands Up!&quot;. To promote the album, Dream went on the tour, titled &quot;Dream Live Tour 2010-2011 &quot;Hands Up!!&quot;&quot;. On November 23, 2010, Kana Tachibana announced that she would leave the group on the group&#x27;s official website. She officially graduated on February 20, 2011.

The 5 member Dream provided the theme song to the drama &quot;Detective Conan&quot;. The new song, titled &quot;To you...&quot; aired on April 15, 2011. However, it was only available via Japanese mobile services.

In 2011, the group became part of LDH&#x27;s collaborative supergroup E-girls (which is the female counterpart of Exile) alongside Happiness and Flower.

Sayaka Yamamoto officially left the group on March 31, 2012.

In late 2016, Erie Abe announced that she would be leaving the entertainment industry by the end of year. Before that, Dream released their first photobook titled &quot;dreamはDreamの夢を見る。(dream wa Dream no yumewomiru。)&quot; after 14 years of the 4 members being together on November 30. The book describes the turbulent history of the group, the number of difficulties they had to face, the twists and turns in their career and the firm bond the members have. On December 31, 2016, Erie Abe officially left the group in hopes of studying abroad.

=== Disbandment ===
It was announced that Dream had disbanded due all members leaving to pursue on their own activities. Aya would be no longer be a vocalist or performer and instead focus on working behind the scenes as the E.G family chief creative manager, Ami would focus on her solo career, and Shizuka will be focusing on her other group Dance Earth Party.

On May 22, 2019, Shizuka made her solo debut as Dream Shizuka with the single &quot;4FEELS&quot;, after Dance Earth Party announced their indefinite hiatus in December 2018.

==Members==
===Original members===
* (Dream 01) (2000–2002)
* (Dream 08) (2000–2008)
* (Dream 07) (2000–2011)
===Second generation members===
* (Dream 02) (2002–2004)
* (Dream 09) (2002–2012)
* (Dream 03) (2002–2016)
* (Dream 04) (2002–2017)
* (Dream 05) (2002–2017)
* (Dream 06) (2002– 2017)

==Discography==
* &quot;Dear...&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Process&quot; (2002)
* &quot;ID&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Hands Up!&quot; (2010)

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="6" end="18" title="Japanese pop" label="Japanese pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186617" start="170" end="183" title="Mai Matsumuro" label="Mai Matsumuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q864356" start="185" end="199" title="Kana Tachibana" label="Kana Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051915" start="205" end="214" title="Yu Hasebe" label="Yu Hasebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186617" start="502" end="515" title="Mai Matsumuro" label="Mai Matsumuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186617" start="562" end="571" title="Mai Matsumuro" label="Matsumuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155446" start="962" end="965" title="Dream (Japanese group)" label="DRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051915" start="985" end="994" title="Yu Hasebe" label="Yu Hasebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q864356" start="1043" end="1057" title="Kana Tachibana" label="Kana Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154245" start="1242" end="1253" title="Rhythm Zone" label="Rhythm Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q864356" start="1417" end="1426" title="Kana Tachibana" label="Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318527" start="1918" end="1931" title="Kaori Mochida" label="Kaori Mochida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137848" start="1953" end="1971" title="Every Little Thing (band)" label="Every Little Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q229732" start="2001" end="2010" title="Kumi Koda" label="Kumi Koda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="2636" end="2641" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q182056" start="2648" end="2656" title="Inuyasha" label="Inuyasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023182" start="2889" end="2897" title="Get Over" label="Get Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q582763" start="2948" end="2960" title="Hikaru no Go" label="Hikaru no Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q38106535" start="3734" end="3747" title="Ami Nakashima" label="Ami Nakashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482408" start="3749" end="3764" title="Dream Shizuka" label="Shizuka Nishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q906085" start="4131" end="4139" title="a-nation" label="a-nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188111" start="4210" end="4224" title="Ayumi Hamasaki" label="Ayumi Hamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266666" start="4247" end="4255" title="Ayuready" label="Ayuready"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051915" start="5903" end="5912" title="Yu Hasebe" label="Yu Hasebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q864356" start="5959" end="5973" title="Kana Tachibana" label="Kana Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q790686" start="6163" end="6167" title="Avex Group" label="Avex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11228881" start="6171" end="6174" title="LDH (company)" label="LDH"/>
<link wikidata="Q655239" start="7169" end="7174" title="Exile (Japanese band)" label="Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850888" start="7252" end="7261" title="Happiness (Japanese band)" label="Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10847122" start="7266" end="7272" title="Flower (Japanese band)" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q864356" start="7771" end="7785" title="Kana Tachibana" label="Kana Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853685" start="7975" end="7990" title="Detective Conan" label="Detective Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331241" start="8198" end="8205" title="E-girls" label="E-girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850888" start="8259" end="8268" title="Happiness (Japanese band)" label="Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10847122" start="8273" end="8279" title="Flower (Japanese band)" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845848" start="9116" end="9126" title="E.G.family" label="E.G family"/>
<link wikidata="Q38106535" start="9151" end="9154" title="Dream Ami" label="Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q11195465" start="9235" end="9252" title="Dance Earth Party" label="Dance Earth Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482408" start="9303" end="9316" title="Dream Shizuka" label="Dream Shizuka"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849275" wikidata="Q3539060" url="?curid=849275" title="Tricontinental">
<text>Tricontinental is a left-wing quarterly magazine founded after the Tricontinental Conference 1966. The magazine is the official publication of the Organization of Solidarity with the People of Asia, Africa and Latin America (OSPAAAL) which also published it until 2019.

== History and overview ==

From the founding of &quot;Tricontinental&quot; in August 1967 until the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which led to a rapid recession in the Cuban economy, propaganda posters were folded up and placed inside copies of the magazine, however, this was stopped, along with publication of &quot;Tricontinental&quot;, due to ink shortages and financial trouble.

&quot;Tricontinental&quot; began to be printed again in 1995. In 2000, the decision was made to begin to reprint posters. Production of these materials ceased with the OSPAAAL&#x27;s closure in 2019.

The magazine is distributed around the world, and at its height, 87 countries received &quot;Tricontinental&quot;, and there were more than 100,000 subscribers, mostly students. At one time, it was very common for posters from issues of &quot;Tricontinental&quot; to be posted on the walls of student community centres.

==See also==
*&quot;Towards the Third Cinema&quot;, a manifesto published in 1969 by &quot;Tricontinental&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
*Anne Garland Mahler, 

==External links==
*Official site (in English)
*Official site (in Spanish)
*WorldCat record</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="20" end="29" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="40" end="48" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q77411367" start="67" end="97" title="Tricontinental Conference 1966" label="Tricontinental Conference 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377245" start="147" end="223" title="Organization of Solidarity with the People of Asia, Africa and Latin America" label="Organization of Solidarity with the People of Asia, Africa and Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="372" end="403" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q751025" start="443" end="456" title="Economy of Cuba" label="Cuban economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="622" end="625" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="640" end="649" title="finance" label="financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="929" end="938" title="country" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="1009" end="1020" title="subscription" label="subscribers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48282" start="1029" end="1036" title="student" label="student"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="1162" end="1171" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259293" start="1202" end="1226" title="Third Cinema" label="Towards the Third Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1331" end="1350" title="Anne Garland Mahler" label="Anne Garland Mahler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849277" wikidata="Q922490" url="?curid=849277" title="Broadcatching">
<text>Broadcatching is the downloading of digital content that has been made available over the Internet using RSS.

The general idea is to use an automated mechanism to aggregate various web feeds and download content for viewing or presentation purposes.

== History ==

A broadcatcher was originally a term created in the 1920s for someone who listened in to radio broadcasts, as the winner in a competition run by The Daily News paper in Britain, published on 16 February 1923.

Fen Labalme describes coining the term &#x27;broadcatch&#x27; in 1983. It refers to an automated agent that aggregates and filters content from multiple sources for presentation to an individual user.

Stewart Brand later used the term independently in his 1987 book &quot;The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at MIT&quot; to describe artificial-intelligence technology (in one application) to assist content selection (&#x27;hunting&#x27;) and viewing (&#x27;grazing&#x27; or &#x27;browsing&#x27;).

===RSS+BitTorrent===
In December 2003 Steve Gillmor described combining RSS and BitTorrent peer-to-peer file sharing as a method for subscribing to an ongoing series of media files, in an article for Ziff-Davis. Scott Raymond described its specific application for gathering scheduled programming in an article entitled &quot;Broadcatching with BitTorrent&quot;. The combination of these technologies allows a computer connected to the Internet to act like a digital video recorder (DVR) such as TiVo connected to cable.

One of the first practical implementations was released in 2004. Programmer Andrew Grumet announced the release of a beta version of an RSS and BitTorrent integration tool for the Radio Userland news aggregator here.

Today, content can be delivered to large groups at low cost through RSS-and-BitTorrent-based broadcatching. Large groups can be notified of new content through RSS, and bulky content can be distributed inexpensively through BitTorrent. Recipients subscribe to an &quot;RSS feed&quot; through which a content provider notifies recipients&#x27; software of new content, and that software uses BitTorrent to retrieve the content. Tags, be they applied by one user or many users, are also used to topically drive syndication of torrents.

== Uses ==
Although broadcatching can be classified as a method independent of technology and implementation, today broadcatching finds much use with Internet television and Internet radio (also called podcasting or IPradio).

Broadcatching is often used in situations where multicasting may be used but is cost prohibitive.

===Broadcatching television broadcasts===
Perhaps the most popular use of broadcatching is using a BitTorrent client with inbuilt RSS support to automatically download television episodes as they are &#x27;released&#x27;—internet users capture the broadcast as it is transmitted, then transcode it (typically after removing advertisements) and send it on to others.

The practice has become quite popular, particularly in countries such as Australia and the United Kingdom where television programs produced in the US tend to be aired more than six months after US broadcasts, if at all.

, there has been no legal action taken against sharers of TV episodes (compared to distribution of copyrighted movies and music which the MPAA and RIAA have taken a strong stance against).

==Measurement Study==
Zhang &quot;et al.&quot; have evaluated Broadcatching using PlanetLab testbed in 2008. About 200 PlanetLab nodes all over the world were used in their study. Their results have demonstrated Broadcatching can greatly improve the performance of
the BitTorrent system. Through this mechanism, every node is able to complete the file downing much faster.

==Clients==
*BitLord
*BitTorrent 6
*Deluge
*KTorrent
*qBittorrent
*Tixati
*Torrent Swapper
*TorrentFlux
*Tribler
*μTorrent
*Vuze
*ZyXEL Network Storage Appliance (NSA) series: NSA210 / NSA310 / NSA-220 PLUS / NSA221 / NSA320

===Players with broadcatching functions===
*Miro
*μTorrent

== See also ==
* Internet television
* Internet radio
* Podcast

==References==
==External links==
*Broadcatching, March 6, 2004
*First broadcatching application
*Broadcatching Audio RSS Feeds</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q922490" start="0" end="13" title="Broadcatching" label="Broadcatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="90" end="98" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="105" end="108" title="RSS" label="RSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q971994" start="679" end="692" title="Stewart Brand" label="Stewart Brand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1015" end="1028" title="Steve Gillmor" label="Steve Gillmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="1049" end="1052" title="RSS (file format)" label="RSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="1057" end="1067" title="BitTorrent (protocol)" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="1068" end="1093" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1886" end="1899" title="bulky content" label="bulky content"/>
<link wikidata="Q658349" start="2144" end="2147" title="Tag (metadata)" label="Tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q494291" start="2181" end="2191" title="folksonomy" label="many users"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="2402" end="2421" title="Internet television" label="Internet television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="2426" end="2440" title="Internet radio" label="Internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="2454" end="2461" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="2468" end="2475" title="IPradio" label="IPradio"/>
<link wikidata="Q899288" start="2527" end="2536" title="multicast" label="multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888734" start="2863" end="2872" title="transcode" label="transcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3018" end="3027" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3036" end="3050" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3093" end="3095" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="3305" end="3309" title="MPAA" label="MPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="3314" end="3318" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q851973" start="3439" end="3448" title="PlanetLab" label="PlanetLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707609" start="3744" end="3751" title="BitLord" label="BitLord"/>
<link wikidata="Q878713" start="3753" end="3765" title="BitTorrent (software)" label="BitTorrent 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185023" start="3767" end="3773" title="Deluge (software)" label="Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q968287" start="3775" end="3783" title="KTorrent" label="KTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q285741" start="3785" end="3796" title="qBittorrent" label="qBittorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051529" start="3798" end="3804" title="Tixati" label="Tixati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3806" end="3821" title="Torrent Swapper" label="Torrent Swapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="3823" end="3834" title="TorrentFlux" label="TorrentFlux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265158" start="3836" end="3843" title="Tribler" label="Tribler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035" start="3845" end="3853" title="μTorrent" label="μTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q324279" start="3855" end="3859" title="Vuze" label="Vuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q245283" start="3861" end="3866" title="ZyXEL" label="ZyXEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141869" start="4001" end="4005" title="Miro (software)" label="Miro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035" start="4007" end="4015" title="μTorrent" label="μTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="4034" end="4053" title="Internet television" label="Internet television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="4056" end="4070" title="Internet radio" label="Internet radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="4073" end="4080" title="Podcast" label="Podcast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849293" wikidata="Q440301" url="?curid=849293" title="Restless">
<text>Restless or The Restless may refer to:
==Film and television==
*&quot;Restless&quot; (1998 film), a Chinese-American romance film
*&quot;Restless&quot; (2000 film), a Finnish romantic film
*&quot;The Restless&quot; (2006 film), a South Korean fantasy film
*&quot;Restless&quot; (2011 film), an American film directed by Gus Van Sant
*&quot;The Restless&quot; (2021 film), a drama film directed by Joachim Lafosse
*&quot;Restless&quot; (2022 film), a French action thriller film
*&quot;Restless&quot; (TV series), a 2012 British adaptation of William Boyd&#x27;s novel (see below)
*&quot;Restless&quot; (&quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;), a 2000 TV episode

==Music==
* Restless (band), a British rockabilly band
* Restless Records, an American record label

===Albums===
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Amy Meredith album), 2010
* &quot;Restless&quot; (The Bellamy Brothers album) or the title song, 1984
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Faye Wong album) (&quot;Fuzao&quot;) or the title song, 1996
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Kasey Lansdale album), 2013
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Murray Head album), 1984
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Sara Evans album) or the title song, 2003
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Shelby Lynne album) or the title song, 1995
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Skydiggers album) or the title song, 1992
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Starpoint album) or the title song, 1985
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Trae album) or the title song, 2006
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Xzibit album) or the title song, 2000
* &quot;&quot;, by Accept, 1982
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Bob James, 1994
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Elaiza, 2016
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Randy California, 1985
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Snowy White &amp; the White Flames, 2002
* &quot;Restless&quot;, an EP by Trevor Daniel, 2019

===Songs===
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Allday song), featuring the Veronicas, 2019
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Carl Perkins song), 1968
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Elton John song), 1984
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Neja song), 1998
* &quot;Restless&quot; (New Order song), 2015
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Switchfoot song), 2011
* &quot;Restless&quot; (Within Temptation song), 1997
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Alison Krauss from &quot;Lonely Runs Both Ways&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by the Damned from &quot;Anything&quot;, 1986
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Evil Nine from &quot;You Can Be Special Too&quot;, 2004
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Gordon Lightfoot from &quot;Waiting for You&quot;, 1993
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by JX (Jake Williams), 2004
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by Kakkmaddafakka from &quot;Hest&quot;, 2011
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by the Servants&#x27; from &quot;Disinterest&quot;, 1990
* &quot;Restless&quot;, by White Dawg, 1999

==Other uses==
* &quot;Restless&quot; (novel), a 2006 novel by William Boyd
* Restless Dance Theatre, an Australian dance company

==See also==
* 
* Psychomotor agitation, restlessness experienced as a result of certain medications or conditions
* Agitation (disambiguation), a synonym for restlessness</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440301" start="0" end="8" title="Restless" label="Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q440301" start="12" end="24" title="Restless" label="The Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316134" start="64" end="96" title="Restless (1998 film)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (1998 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237240" start="131" end="163" title="Restless (2000 film)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (2000 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q562657" start="190" end="226" title="The Restless (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Restless&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782383" start="257" end="289" title="Restless (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107102317" start="334" end="370" title="The Restless (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Restless&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111202959" start="414" end="446" title="Restless (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964632" start="479" end="511" title="Restless (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740175" start="581" end="640" title="Restless (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10651308" start="673" end="688" title="Restless (band)" label="Restless (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933535" start="718" end="734" title="Restless Records" label="Restless Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316136" start="777" end="818" title="Restless (Amy Meredith album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Amy Meredith album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113987285" start="827" end="876" title="Restless (The Bellamy Brothers album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (The Bellamy Brothers album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427974" start="903" end="941" title="Restless (Faye Wong album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Faye Wong album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027779" start="988" end="1031" title="Restless (Kasey Lansdale album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Kasey Lansdale album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316138" start="1040" end="1080" title="Restless (Murray Head album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Murray Head album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316139" start="1089" end="1128" title="Restless (Sara Evans album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Sara Evans album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316140" start="1155" end="1196" title="Restless (Shelby Lynne album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Shelby Lynne album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316141" start="1223" end="1262" title="Restless (Skydiggers album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Skydiggers album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316143" start="1289" end="1327" title="Restless (Starpoint album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Starpoint album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316145" start="1354" end="1387" title="Restless (Trae album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Trae album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717900" start="1414" end="1449" title="Restless (Xzibit album)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Xzibit album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q888012" start="1533" end="1542" title="Bob James (musician)" label="Bob James"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906261" start="1576" end="1582" title="Elaiza" label="Elaiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344185" start="1616" end="1632" title="Randy California" label="Randy California"/>
<link wikidata="Q450815" start="1666" end="1677" title="Snowy White" label="Snowy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738417" start="1740" end="1753" title="Trevor Daniel (singer)" label="Trevor Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044495" start="1775" end="1809" title="Restless (Allday song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Allday song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316137" start="1843" end="1883" title="Restless (Carl Perkins song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Carl Perkins song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933530" start="1892" end="1930" title="Restless (Elton John song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Elton John song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601821" start="1939" end="1971" title="Restless (Neja song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Neja song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899552" start="1980" end="2017" title="Restless (New Order song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (New Order song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316144" start="2026" end="2064" title="Restless (Switchfoot song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Switchfoot song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579887" start="2073" end="2118" title="Restless (Within Temptation song)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (Within Temptation song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671661" start="2177" end="2198" title="Lonely Runs Both Ways" label="Lonely Runs Both Ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620508" start="2260" end="2268" title="Anything (The Damned album)" label="Anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057077" start="2329" end="2351" title="You Can Be Special Too" label="You Can Be Special Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960584" start="2419" end="2434" title="Waiting for You (Gordon Lightfoot album)" label="Waiting for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147099" start="2478" end="2491" title="Jake Williams" label="Jake Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q108558990" start="2552" end="2556" title="Hest (album)" label="Hest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282249" start="2626" end="2637" title="Disinterest (album)" label="Disinterest"/>
<link wikidata="Q350897" start="2677" end="2687" title="White Dawg" label="White Dawg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213584" start="2712" end="2740" title="Restless (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Restless&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316148" start="2773" end="2795" title="Restless Dance Theatre" label="Restless Dance Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q394129" start="2844" end="2865" title="Psychomotor agitation" label="Psychomotor agitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q342695" start="2943" end="2969" title="Agitation (disambiguation)" label="Agitation (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849299" wikidata="Q2321266" url="?curid=849299" title="Sandbach">
<text>Sandbach (pronounced ) is a market town and civil parish in the Cheshire East borough of Cheshire, England. The civil parish contains four settlements: Sandbach, Elworth, Ettiley Heath and Wheelock.

==History==

Known as Sanbec in 1086, Sondbache (also Sondebache) in 1260, and Sandbitch in the 17th–18th centuries, Sandbach derives its name from the Anglo-Saxon &quot;sand bæce&quot;, which can mean &quot;sand stream&quot; or &quot;sand valley&quot;. The modern German word &quot;Bach&quot;, with a similar origin as &quot;bæce&quot;, means &quot;brook&quot;; thus, the meaning of Sandbach can be understood correctly in German. In Germany, there are two places and several small waterways of that name (see German disambiguation page &quot;Sandbach&quot;).

Traces of settlement are found in Sandbach from Saxon times, when the town was called Sanbec. Little is known about the town during this period, except that it was subjected to frequent Welsh and Danish raids. The town&#x27;s inhabitants were converted to Christianity in the 7th century by four priests: Cedda, Adda, Betti and Diuma. The town has an entry in the Domesday Book from 1086, at which time it was sufficiently large to need a priest and a church. The entry states:
Sanbec: Bigot de Loges. 1 hide and 1½ virgates pay tax. Land for 2 ploughs. 1 Frenchman has ½ plough, 3 slaves. 2 villagers have ½ plough. Church. Woodland. Value TRE 4s; now 8s.

By the 13th century, during the reign of King John, much of the land around the township of Sandbach was owned by Richard de Sandbach who was the High Sheriff of Cheshire in 1230. Richard de Sandbach specifically owned a manor; he claimed an interest in the living of Sandbach. This claim against Earl Randle de Blundeville was unsuccessful. His son, John, however, was slightly more successful as he won an &#x27;interest&#x27; temporarily against the Abbot of Dieulacres, only for it to be lost when it went to the King&#x27;s Bench.
The manor in Sandbach passed through numerous families, including the Leghs and Radclyffes. It was eventually bought by Sir Randulph (or Randle) Crewe, who became the Lord of the Manor.

Sandbach has been a market town since 1579, when it was granted a Royal Charter by Elizabeth I due to the petitioning of Sir John Radclyffe of Ordsall who, as the largest landowner in Sandbach and the owner of the Sandbach Old Hall, encouraged the farmers of the area to hold a market in the town on Thursdays. The charter also allowed for right to establish a Court-leet and a Court of Pied-powder. The original charter is still preserved, and can be found in Chester. The charter also granted the town the right to hold two annual fairs, which lasted for two days, and were held around Easter and early September. The Thursday market is still held outdoors on Scotch Common, and in and around the town hall.

===17th century to present day===

During the 17th century, the town used to be famous for its ale:

And about 1621 William Webb writes that &quot;Our ale here at Sandbach being no less famous than that [at Derby] of a true nappe&quot;.

During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, a Scottish army swept down into England before being forced to retreat at the Battle of Worcester. On 3 September 1651, the Sandbach summer fair was being held, and a Scottish army of around 1,000 exhausted cavalry men passed through the town under the command of David Leslie on their way back to Scotland. The town proved to be a difficult retreat route, however, as the people of Sandbach and the market stallholders attacked the Scottish army. A newspaper of the time said:

The dispute was very hot for two or three houres, and there were some townsmen hurt and two or three slaine, the Townesman slew about nine or ten and tooke 100 prisoners.
This was the only notable event of the Civil War to have happened in Sandbach. As the fair and the fight took place on the common of the town, after this event the common gained the name Scotch Common.

In 1836 Sandbach silk mills employed 554 people, including 98 boys and girls under 12 years old.
In 1801 the population was 1,844; by 1851 this had reached 4,659. The town centre is shown on an 1840 map. Sandbach became a civil parish in 1866. The records from 1901 show a population of 5,568. The Sandbach Corn Mill was a three-story brick building built in the late 19th century, on what is now Mill Hill Lane.

In 1933 the ERF lorry company was founded. In 1936 parts of the area of Bradwall, all of Elton and Wheelock were added, significantly increasing the size of the parish. The hamlets transferred from Bradwall were Boothlane Head, Brickhouses, Ettiley Heath, Forge Fields, Hindheath, Elworth and Marsh Green. By 1951 the population had reached 9,253.

During the Second World War, in Warship Week in December 1941 Sandbach adopted HMS &quot;Vimiera&quot; as its affiliated ship. The &quot;Vimiera&quot; was lost on 9 January 1942 when it was sunk by a mine in the Thames Estuary off East Spile Buoy with the loss of 96 hands.

==Governance==
Sandbach hosts the administrative headquarters for Cheshire East Council. For the Cheshire East unitary authority elections the town is divided into two wards.

From 1875 until 1894 Sandbach was governed by Sandbach Urban Sanitary District. Between 1894 and 1974 the town was governed by Sandbach Urban District Council. In 1974, it was merged with other urban and rural councils to form Congleton Borough Council, which was later dissolved on 31 March 2009. The new authority Cheshire East took over its responsibilities and those of Cheshire County Council on 1 April 2009.

Sandbach Town Council has jurisdiction over the parish of Sandbach, not just the town. All meetings are held in the Town Hall.

For the purposes of the town council and borough council elections Sandbach is divided into four wards: Elworth, Ettiley Heath and Wheelock, Sandbach Heath and East, and Town Ward, and town councillors are elected for terms of four years.

A partnership of groups forms the Sandbach Partnership, which is part of the South East Cheshire Enterprise (SECE).

===Constituencies===
The town is in the Congleton constituency whose MP is Sarah Russell of the Labour Party. Before the 2024 General Election the MP was Fiona Bruce of the Conservative Party. Before its current constituency, Sandbach has been part of five other constituencies: South Cheshire from 1832 to 1867, Mid Cheshire from 1868 to 1885, Crewe from 1885 to 1948, Knutsford from 1949 to 1954 and Crewe from 1955 to 1974.

==Geography==

The land area of Sandbach has a total coverage of 10.7 square kilometres (4.1 sq mi). The distance from London to Sandbach is . Crewe is 6 miles (10 km) to the south-west and Stoke-on-Trent in the neighbouring Staffordshire is .

==Landmarks==
The Sandbach Crosses are an important historical feature on the cobbled market square: the two Saxon crosses, reportedly built in the 7th, 8th or 9th century, constitute a Scheduled Ancient Monument. A plaque near the crosses reads:

Sandbach is also home to many listed buildings, including Sandbach School, St Mary&#x27;s Church and the Old Hall Hotel. Many of the local public houses, which were formerly stage coach stops, are listed, for example the Lower Chequer. Many of the buildings of the town were designed by the renowned architect Sir George Gilbert Scott; he designed Sandbach Literary Institute, Sandbach School, St John&#x27;s, Sandbach Heath and the Almshouses. He also restored St Mary&#x27;s Church. The town has Methodist, Baptist, Anglican and Catholic churches.

Natural England has designated Sandbach Flashes, a group of 14 separate waterbodies, as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), described as:

At least 225 species of bird have been recorded on the Flashes.

==Economy==

Sandbach has been a market town since 1579 when it was granted a Royal Charter by Elizabeth I. Today the Thursday market is still held outdoors on Scotch Common, and in and around Sandbach Town Hall.

Sandbach is probably best known as the original home of both Foden and ERF lorries, both companies founded by members of the Foden family. Neither company now exists in Sandbach, having been taken over and production moved elsewhere. As of 2007 there is no trace of Fodens within Sandbach, with the former mansion home of the Foden family at Westfields being demolished to make way for a new council building. However, Foden&#x27;s Brass Band, originally created for employees, is still based in Sandbach.

There is also a farmers&#x27; market which takes place on the second Saturday of each calendar month. 

Sandbach lies close to the conurbations of Greater Manchester, Merseyside and The Potteries.

==Transport==

===Rail===
The town is served by Sandbach railway station, on the Crewe to Manchester Line, which is located to the west of the town in Elworth. Services are operated by Northern Trains between Crewe, Manchester Piccadilly and Liverpool Lime Street. Trains operate generally twice an hour in both directions; northbound services alternate between trains to Manchester (via Stockport) and to Liverpool (via Styal and Manchester). 

There is a branch line north of the station leading to Northwich, which is mainly used by goods traffic and express passenger trains heading to Chester. Some organisations have been campaigning to restore a local passenger service between Northwich and Crewe. 

===Road===
Pressure of road traffic going from Greater Manchester to Crewe has forced the building of a bypass for Sandbach, Wheelock, Wheelock Heath, Winterley and Haslington for the A534. This is largely due to the M6 motorway which has a junction (J17) at Sandbach, which is close to the RoadChef service station.

===Buses===
Local bus services are provided by Arriva North West and D&amp;G Bus (Monday to Saturday only).

==Public services==

In Sandbach water services are provided by United Utilities. Healthcare is provided at Ashfields Primary Care Centre. The primary care centre is overseen by Central and Eastern Cheshire Primary Care Trust. The nearest local hospital is Leighton Hospital in Crewe. Sandbach is served by the North West Ambulance Service. Policing is provided by Cheshire Constabulary. Cheshire Fire &amp; Rescue Service runs the fire station in the town.

==Education==

===Primary schools===
The following primary schools are in Sandbach Town and Civil Parish.
*Sandbach Community Primary School
*Offley Primary School
*Sandbach Heath St John&#x27;s CE Primary School
*Wheelock Primary School
*Elworth Church of England Primary School
*Elworth Hall Primary School

===Secondary schools===
Sandbach School was founded as a parish charity school for boys in 1677. The school became a grammar school for boys after 1955. In 1979 the school became an independent comprehensive boys school, with charitable status, funded by Cheshire Local Education Authority but controlled by a board of governors. In September 2011, Sandbach School became a free school, one of the first free schools to be established in England. The school also contains a sixth form which is open to both boys and girls.

Within Sandbach there is also a girls comprehensive school, Sandbach High. It was originally the town&#x27;s mixed secondary modern when Sandbach School served as the boys&#x27; grammar school, but has been a single-sex comprehensive since 1979. It now has a college attached to it, which accepts boys as well as girls and offers a more vocational side of education along with A levels.

===Cadets===
1873 (Sandbach) Squadron is the local squadron of the Air Training Corps. Founded in 1952, it is part of Greater Manchester Wing, having formerly been a part of both Cheshire and Staffordshire Wings. Cadets here parade twice a week; Wednesdays and Fridays from 19:15 to 21:30. The squadron usually parades about 30–40 cadets per parade night.

24 Sandbach Detachment, Cheshire Army Cadet Force is based in the Army Cadet Centre behind the police station.

Sandbach Fire Station Cadets consists of around 20 young people and meet every Tuesday evening.

The Combined Cadet Force (CCF) is based at Sandbach School.

==Culture==

Sandbach has an annual transport festival which usually takes place during April. It originally started in 1992 as ‘Transport Through the Ages Parade&#x27;, and was such a success that it became an annual event; since its inception it has been run alongside the National Town Criers&#x27; competition. The Festival is run by an organising committee made up of local councils and volunteers.

Foden&#x27;s Brass Band is still based in the town, despite the truck manufacturer from which it derives its name no longer having a presence. In 2008 Foden&#x27;s became British Open Brass Band Champions. The Lions Youth Brass Band and Roberts Bakery Band are also based in the town.

Sandbach Choral Society, formerly Sandbach Voices, is a local choir that was founded in 1947 and is a registered charity. The choir&#x27;s mission is to bring choral music into the community, and it regularly stages concerts, often in Sandbach Town Hall or at St Mary&#x27;s Church.

Sandbach Concert Series features classical, jazz and brass music.

At the end of November every year the Christmas lights are turned on by the chairman of the town council.

===Media===

Local newspapers distributed in Sandbach include &quot;The Chronicle&quot; (Sandbach &amp; Middlewich edition), published on Wednesdays (and now incorporated into the &quot;Crewe Chronicle&quot;); the Chronicle Series paper &quot;Sandbach Chronicle&quot;, published on Thursdays; &quot;Crewe Guardian&quot; on Thursdays; the &quot;South Cheshire Advertiser&quot;; and the daily &quot;Sentinel&quot; (Cheshire edition). &quot;The Saxon&quot; is a free 8-page bimonthly delivered to 7,000 homes, and the &quot;Sandbach &amp; District Talking Newspaper&quot; is a weekly local talking newspaper aimed at assisting the visually impaired, with over 1000 issues since the first in December 1986.

Local TV coverage is provided by BBC North West and ITV Granada. Television signals are received from the Winter Hill TV transmitter. 

South Cheshire is served by BBC Radio Stoke. It is also in the broadcast area of Cheshire FM, Macclesfield based Cheshire&#x27;s Silk Radio and Stoke-on-Trent-based Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp; Cheshire and Greatest Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp; Cheshire.

==Sport==

The local football clubs are Sandbach United, an &quot;FA Charter Standard Club&quot; which has over 40 teams and 600 players aged from 5 through to veteran. The club was founded in 2004 when Sandbach Albion and Sandbach Ramblers merged. In 2009 it completed work with the borough council in developing its new sports facility. The first team turned semi-professional and were promoted to the North West Counties League within the English non-league football pyramid at step 6 in 2016, reaching the league cup final and a play-off position in their first season. Sandbach Town an &quot;FA charter standard club&quot; who play in The Cheshire league and Sandbach curshaws who play in the Crewe &amp; District Football League.

The local rugby union club is Sandbach RUFC. The club is the largest sports club in the area. Sandbach 1st XV play in the RFU National 3 Midlands; many levels higher than other local rivals. Currently at Level 5, they are one of the few truly amateur clubs in the RFU National League structure. Many old boys have gone on to play Premiership and International Rugby. Sandbach Rugby Club offers playing opportunities for both sexes of all ages. Every Tuesday evening at 7.00pm the club offers Social Touch (a non-contact game) to all adults. Touch rugby is open to the public and is free of charge.

The local cricket club is Sandbach Cricket Club. In 2008 the First XI won the Cheshire Cricket Alliance League – Division 1 on the last day of the season to gain promotion to the Meller Braggins League – Division 3. Another local side is Elworth Cricket Club which plays in the North Staffs &amp; South Cheshire Cricket League – Championship Division 1. The Club operates 5 senior teams, a midweek team and 9 junior teams at U9, U11, U13, U15 and U17 levels. Sandbach Squash Club enters two teams in the North West Counties League.

There are two golf clubs in Sandbach. Sandbach Golf Club is located on Middlewich Road, approximately ½ a mile west of the town centre. It was founded in 1895 and is a challenging 9-hole parkland course (with 16 tees) welcoming both members and visitors during the week and at weekends. Malkins Bank Golf Course is an 18-hole course formerly operated by Cheshire East Council. Sandbach also has a thriving darts league – with both men&#x27;s and ladies&#x27; leagues playing in most of the many pubs in the area.

Sandbach Leisure Centre is on Middlewich Road and is run by Cheshire East Council. Sandbach School offers community sports facilities.

==Notable people==

*John M. Allegro (1923–1988), English archaeologist and Dead Sea Scrolls scholar, lived and died in Sandbach
* Sir John Barlow, 1st Baronet (1857–1932), Liberal Party politician.
* Alfred Barratt (1844–1881), philosophical writer, went to school in Sandbach
* Derek Macintosh &quot;Blaster&quot; Bates (1923–2006), demolition expert
* Karl Beattie (born 1963), English television director, producer and cameraman, lives near Sandbach
* John Brereton, 4th Baron Brereton (1659–1718), English baron in the Peerage of Ireland, lived at Brereton Hall
* Denise Coates (born 1967), English billionaire businesswoman, founder and joint chief executive of Bet365, lives in Betchton
* David Eastwood (b. 1959), Vice-Chancellor of the University of Birmingham, educated at Sandbach School
* Yvette Fielding (b. 1968), TV presenter, lives near Sandbach
* Edwin Foden (1841–1911), vehicle manufacturer
* Neil and Rob Gibbons (b. 1976 or 77), screenwriters
* Samuel Henshall (1764/65–1807), philologist, baptised in Sandbach
* Reverend William James (1542 in Sandbach – 1617), English academic and bishop
* Charles Latham (1816–1907), physician, recognised by public memorial statue
* George William Latham (1827–1886), English landowner and barrister
* John Latham (1761–1843), physician, bought an estate in Sandbach
* John Latham (1787–1853), magistrate and poet, buried at Sandbach
* Peter Mere Latham (1789–1875), physician, son of John Latham (1761–1843), educated at Sandbach School
* Sir Charles Lidbury (1880–1978), president Institute of Bankers (1939–46), worked in Sandbach
* Fred Mortimer (1880–1953), brass band conductor, Foden&#x27;s Brass Band
* Harry Mortimer (1902–1992), brass band conductor, Foden Brass Band musician, Professor of trumpet at RNCM
* Henry Newcome (1627–1695), clergyman, ordained as Presbyterian minister in Sandbach
* Wally Oakes (1932–1965), BR train driver who died from fatal burns after staying in his cab to stop his damaged train, lived at Wheelock Heath
* Anthony Palmer (1819 Brereton Green – 1892), English recipient of the Victoria Cross
* Ivor Armstrong Richards (1893–1979), English literary critic
* George Roper (1934–2003), comedian, lived in the town at the time of his death
* William Steele (1610–1680), Lord Chancellor of Ireland, born in Sandbach

=== Sport ===
* Matt Beesley (born 1992 in Sandbach), English rugby union player, played for Northampton Saints
* Mia Brookes (b. 19 January 2007), British snowboarder
* Philip Dunkley (b. 1951), English cricketer
* Thomas Hilditch (1885 in Sandbach – 1957), English first-class cricketer
* Charles Kelly (1894–1969), footballer for Tranmere Rovers and Stoke
* Frank Roberts (1893–1961), Manchester City footballer
* Bert Sproston (1914–2000), former England footballer, signed by Leeds United from Sandbach Ramblers
* Barrie Wheatley (born 1938), former English footballer, played for Sandbach Ramblers, Liverpool, Crewe Alexandra, and Rochdale

==See also==

*Listed buildings in Sandbach

==References==
;Bibliography
*

*Cheshire Historic Towns Survey: Sandbach Archaeological Assessment, 2003, Cheshire County Council
*Cheshire Historic Towns Survey: Sandbach Archaeological Strategy , 2003, Cheshire County Council

==External links==

* Sandbach Town Council 
* Sandbach – Ancient Market Town
* Cheshire Market Towns
* Sandbach United Football Club
* Sandbach United Community Football Centre
* Sandbach Community Hub
* Sandbach Town Guide at Sandbach Town Council
* &quot;Sandbach&quot; Pigot &amp; Co.&#x27;s Directory of Cheshire (1828–29)
* &quot;Sandbach&quot; Kelly&#x27;s Directory of Cheshire, 1902
* Portable Antiquities Scheme Database: Sandbach
* Sandbach in Welsh Newspapers online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2321266" start="0" end="8" title="Sandbach" label="Sandbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070590" start="64" end="77" title="Cheshire East" label="Cheshire East"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="89" end="97" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368359" start="162" end="169" title="Elworth" label="Elworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11117363" start="171" end="184" title="Ettiley Heath" label="Ettiley Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992324" start="189" end="197" title="Wheelock, Cheshire" label="Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="352" end="363" title="Old English language" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="711" end="758" title=":de:Sandbach" label="German disambiguation page &amp;quot;Sandbach&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="948" end="953" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="958" end="964" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1126" end="1139" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1461" end="1470" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q984430" start="1717" end="1743" title="Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester" label="Earl Randle de Blundeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q178117" start="1882" end="1892" title="Dieulacres Abbey" label="Dieulacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="1937" end="1954" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293589" start="2076" end="2106" title="Ranulph Crewe" label="Sir Randulph (or Randle) Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="2209" end="2222" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="2226" end="2237" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100933" start="2286" end="2293" title="Ordsall Hall" label="Ordsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084164" start="2357" end="2374" title="Old Hall Hotel, Sandbach" label="Sandbach Old Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512540" start="2504" end="2514" title="Court-leet" label="Court-leet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="2604" end="2611" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="2731" end="2737" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="3103" end="3129" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="3209" end="3228" title="Battle of Worcester" label="Battle of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="3904" end="3910" title="Common land" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q473611" start="4410" end="4413" title="ERF (truck manufacturer)" label="ERF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328214" start="4470" end="4478" title="Bradwall" label="Bradwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4758" end="4774" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480176" start="4826" end="4849" title="HMS Vimiera (1917)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Vimiera&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="4947" end="4951" title="naval mine" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059075" start="4959" end="4973" title="Thames Estuary" label="Thames Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829355" start="5088" end="5109" title="Cheshire East Council" label="Cheshire East Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q612333" start="5425" end="5450" title="Congleton Borough Council" label="Congleton Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092945" start="5572" end="5595" title="Cheshire County Council" label="Cheshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993460" start="5614" end="5635" title="Sandbach Town Council" label="Sandbach Town Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335586" start="6139" end="6161" title="Congleton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Congleton constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q56748081" start="6174" end="6187" title="Sarah Russell (politician)" label="Sarah Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="6195" end="6207" title="Labour (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q266078" start="6253" end="6264" title="Fiona Bruce (politician)" label="Fiona Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="6272" end="6290" title="Conservative (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6646" end="6652" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q648810" start="6670" end="6675" title="Crewe" label="Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="6717" end="6731" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="6752" end="6765" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003400" start="6790" end="6806" title="Sandbach Crosses" label="Sandbach Crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="6958" end="6984" title="Scheduled Ancient Monument" label="Scheduled Ancient Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="7050" end="7065" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416007" start="7078" end="7093" title="Sandbach School" label="Sandbach School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594417" start="7095" end="7116" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Sandbach" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084164" start="7125" end="7139" title="Old Hall Hotel, Sandbach" label="Old Hall Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="7330" end="7354" title="Sir George Gilbert Scott" label="Sir George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423458" start="7368" end="7395" title="Sandbach Literary Institute" label="Sandbach Literary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979381" start="7414" end="7444" title="St John the Evangelist&amp;#x27;s Church, Sandbach Heath" label="St John&amp;#x27;s, Sandbach Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="7518" end="7527" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="7529" end="7536" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="7538" end="7546" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7551" end="7559" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699627" start="7571" end="7586" title="Natural England" label="Natural England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416003" start="7602" end="7618" title="Sandbach Flashes" label="Sandbach Flashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="7661" end="7696" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="7863" end="7876" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="7880" end="7891" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423459" start="7978" end="7996" title="Sandbach Town Hall" label="Sandbach Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435112" start="8060" end="8065" title="Edwin Foden Sons &amp;amp; Co" label="Foden"/>
<link wikidata="Q473611" start="8070" end="8073" title="ERF (truck manufacturer)" label="ERF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463975" start="8418" end="8441" title="Foden&amp;#x27;s Band" label="Foden&amp;#x27;s Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="8653" end="8671" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="8673" end="8683" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402926" start="8688" end="8701" title="The Potteries" label="The Potteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829957" start="8752" end="8776" title="Sandbach railway station" label="Sandbach railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184844" start="8785" end="8809" title="Crewe to Manchester Line" label="Crewe to Manchester Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368359" start="8855" end="8862" title="Elworth" label="Elworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789775" start="8889" end="8904" title="Northern Trains" label="Northern Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397336" start="8913" end="8918" title="Crewe railway station" label="Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q600367" start="8920" end="8941" title="Manchester Piccadilly railway station" label="Manchester Piccadilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q801113" start="8946" end="8967" title="Liverpool Lime Street railway station" label="Liverpool Lime Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914443" start="9205" end="9214" title="Northwich railway station" label="Northwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478175" start="9294" end="9301" title="Chester railway station" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="9459" end="9477" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q648810" start="9481" end="9486" title="Crewe" label="Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779930" start="9516" end="9522" title="Bypass (road)" label="bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992324" start="9537" end="9545" title="Wheelock (Cheshire)" label="Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026496" start="9547" end="9561" title="Wheelock Heath" label="Wheelock Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660972" start="9596" end="9600" title="A534 road" label="A534"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="9629" end="9640" title="M6 motorway" label="M6 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339582" start="9703" end="9711" title="RoadChef" label="RoadChef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416008" start="9712" end="9727" title="Sandbach services" label="service station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796012" start="9777" end="9794" title="Arriva North West" label="Arriva North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988440" start="9799" end="9810" title="D&amp;amp;G Bus" label="D&amp;amp;G Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q503038" start="9903" end="9919" title="United Utilities" label="United Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519761" start="10096" end="10113" title="Leighton Hospital" label="Leighton Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057220" start="10150" end="10178" title="North West Ambulance Service" label="North West Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092942" start="10204" end="10225" title="Cheshire Constabulary" label="Cheshire Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092954" start="10227" end="10261" title="Cheshire Fire &amp;amp; Rescue Service" label="Cheshire Fire &amp;amp; Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341006" start="10405" end="10438" title="Sandbach Community Primary School" label="Sandbach Community Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341006" start="10440" end="10461" title="Offley Primary School" label="Offley Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341006" start="10463" end="10510" title="Sandbach Heath St John&amp;#x27;s CE Primary School" label="Sandbach Heath St John&amp;#x27;s CE Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416007" start="10632" end="10647" title="Sandbach School" label="Sandbach School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576531" start="10672" end="10686" title="charity school" label="charity school"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="10725" end="10739" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500295" start="10982" end="10993" title="Free school (England)" label="free school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416002" start="11192" end="11205" title="Sandbach High School &amp;amp; Sixth Form College" label="Sandbach High"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443856" start="11247" end="11263" title="secondary modern" label="secondary modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416007" start="11269" end="11284" title="Sandbach School" label="Sandbach School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="11587" end="11605" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781646" start="11910" end="11926" title="Army Cadet Force" label="Army Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q731977" start="12090" end="12110" title="Combined Cadet Force" label="Combined Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463975" start="12552" end="12575" title="Foden&amp;#x27;s Band" label="Foden&amp;#x27;s Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555913" start="12762" end="12784" title="Lions Youth Brass Band" label="Lions Youth Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594417" start="13098" end="13119" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Sandbach" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q26366776" start="13122" end="13145" title="Sandbach Concert Series" label="Sandbach Concert Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952684" start="13482" end="13497" title="Crewe Chronicle" label="Crewe Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834879" start="14033" end="14047" title="BBC North West" label="BBC North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="14052" end="14063" title="ITV Granada" label="ITV Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026260" start="14106" end="14117" title="Winter Hill transmitting station" label="Winter Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834930" start="14164" end="14179" title="BBC Radio Stoke" label="BBC Radio Stoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q868637" start="14230" end="14242" title="Macclesfield" label="Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515168" start="14249" end="14275" title="Silk 106.9" label="Cheshire&amp;#x27;s Silk Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="14280" end="14294" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512630" start="14301" end="14340" title="Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp;amp; Cheshire" label="Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp;amp; Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512631" start="14345" end="14393" title="Greatest Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp;amp; Cheshire" label="Greatest Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp;amp; Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185290" start="14436" end="14451" title="Sandbach United F.C." label="Sandbach United"/>
<link wikidata="Q612333" start="14680" end="14695" title="Congleton Borough Council" label="borough council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416005" start="15163" end="15176" title="Sandbach RUFC" label="Sandbach RUFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416007" start="16862" end="16877" title="Sandbach School" label="Sandbach School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346779" start="16936" end="16951" title="John M. Allegro" label="John M. Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029286" start="17046" end="17074" title="Sir John Barlow, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Barlow, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722298" start="17116" end="17130" title="Alfred Barratt" label="Alfred Barratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925409" start="17195" end="17236" title="Blaster Bates" label="Derek Macintosh &amp;quot;Blaster&amp;quot; Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371609" start="17270" end="17282" title="Karl Beattie" label="Karl Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223081" start="17371" end="17404" title="John Brereton, 4th Baron Brereton" label="John Brereton, 4th Baron Brereton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16736696" start="17484" end="17497" title="Denise Coates" label="Denise Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233243" start="17611" end="17625" title="David Eastwood" label="David Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062368" start="17716" end="17731" title="Yvette Fielding" label="Yvette Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435112" start="17779" end="17790" title="Edwin Foden Sons &amp;amp; Co" label="Edwin Foden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33036545" start="17827" end="17847" title="Gibbons brothers" label="Neil and Rob Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672288" start="17881" end="17896" title="Samuel Henshall" label="Samuel Henshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="17913" end="17924" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013419" start="17958" end="17971" title="William James (bishop)" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18029" end="18043" title="Latham of Bradwell#Charles Latham (1816–1907)" label="Charles Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546329" start="18107" end="18128" title="George William Latham" label="George William Latham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18176" end="18187" title="Latham of Bradwell#John Latham (1761–1843)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18243" end="18254" title="Latham of Bradwell#John Latham (1787–1853)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546770" start="18310" end="18327" title="Peter Mere Latham" label="Peter Mere Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846445" start="18457" end="18477" title="Institute of Bankers" label="Institute of Bankers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18510" end="18523" title="Foden&amp;#x27;s Band#Fred and Harry Mortimer years" label="Fred Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463975" start="18559" end="18582" title="Foden&amp;#x27;s Band" label="Foden&amp;#x27;s Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q322835" start="18585" end="18599" title="Harry Mortimer" label="Harry Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463975" start="18635" end="18651" title="Foden&amp;#x27;s Band" label="Foden Brass Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544384" start="18686" end="18690" title="RNCM" label="RNCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726294" start="18693" end="18706" title="Henry Newcome" label="Henry Newcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963451" start="18779" end="18790" title="Wally Oakes" label="Wally Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773242" start="18924" end="18938" title="Anthony Palmer (VC)" label="Anthony Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="18994" end="19008" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="19011" end="19034" title="Ivor Armstrong Richards" label="Ivor Armstrong Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544030" start="19074" end="19086" title="George Roper" label="George Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="19100" end="19108" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018765" start="19155" end="19169" title="William Steele (Lord Chancellor of Ireland)" label="William Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q27861855" start="19245" end="19257" title="Matt Beesley" label="Matt Beesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q116390825" start="19343" end="19354" title="Mia Brookes" label="Mia Brookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183480" start="19399" end="19413" title="Philip Dunkley" label="Philip Dunkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790675" start="19445" end="19460" title="Thomas Hilditch" label="Thomas Hilditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079729" start="19520" end="19533" title="Charles Kelly (footballer)" label="Charles Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="19562" end="19577" title="Tranmere Rovers F.C." label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="19582" end="19587" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178871" start="19590" end="19603" title="Frank Roberts (footballer, born 1893)" label="Frank Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="19617" end="19632" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895318" start="19646" end="19659" title="Bert Sproston" label="Bert Sproston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="19710" end="19722" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258691" start="19748" end="19763" title="Barrie Wheatley" label="Barrie Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="19834" end="19843" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q48949" start="19866" end="19874" title="Rochdale A.F.C." label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162157" start="19891" end="19919" title="Listed buildings in Sandbach" label="Listed buildings in Sandbach"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849305" wikidata="Q6181992" url="?curid=849305" title="Jeremy Vine">
<text>Jeremy Guy Vine (born 17 May 1965) is an English television and radio presenter and journalist. He is best known as the host of his BBC Radio 2 lunchtime programme which presents news, views, interviews with live guests, consumer issues and popular music.

Vine is also the host of the Channel 5 (formerly BBC Two) quiz programme &quot;Eggheads&quot;, taking over from former host Dermot Murnaghan full-time in 2014. In 2015, he was a contestant on the 13th series of &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;. Since September 2018, he has presented a Channel 5 weekday current-affairs show, &quot;Jeremy Vine&quot;.

==Early life and education ==
Vine was born at Epsom Hospital in Epsom, Surrey. He grew up in Cheam, and is the elder son of Guy Vine (1937–2018), lecturer in civil engineering at North East Surrey College of Technology, and Diana (née Tillett), who was a housewife and later a doctor&#x27;s receptionist. Vine has two siblings; a sister called Sonya and a brother, the comedian Tim Vine.

Vine was privately educated: at Lynton Preparatory School in Ewell, then Aberdour School in Burgh Heath, and then Epsom College.&lt;ref name=&quot;P/S&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; 

He played the drums in a band called The Flared Generation, of which his brother Tim was also a member; &quot;Smash Hits&quot; magazine described them as &quot;the most unfashionable punk band in the country&quot;. 

At Durham University (Hatfield College), he graduated with a 2:2 undergraduate degree in English. He was a member of the sketch comedy group, The Durham Revue, and was an editor of the student newspaper, &quot;Palatinate&quot;. 

Following a short stint on Metro Radio, Vine enrolled in a journalism training course with the &quot;Coventry Evening Telegraph&quot;, before joining the BBC in 1987.

== Broadcasting career ==

Vine&#x27;s career at the BBC included reading the news on the radio in Northern Ireland and working as a researcher on the BBC1 series &quot;Heart of the Matter&quot;. In 1989, he became a regular reporter on the BBC Radio 4 programme &quot;Today&quot;, filing reports from across Europe.

While working for &quot;Today&quot;, he published two comic novels set amidst the modern Church of England, including &quot;Forget Heaven, Just Kiss Me&quot; (1992) and &quot;The Whole World in My Hands&quot; (1993). Vine now regards them as juvenilia.

In the mid-1990s, Vine became familiar to BBC TV viewers as a political reporter, which included reporting on the ascent of New Labour under Tony Blair. He later made his mark offering irreverent reports on the 1997 General Election.

Following the 1997 election, Vine became the Africa Correspondent based in Johannesburg, travelling across Africa. Reporting assignments took him to the war front to report on the Eritrean–Ethiopian War, the Angolan Civil War, the violence in Lesotho after South African troops went in and hoisted a South African flag over the Royal Palace, following leadership disputes. He also travelled to Algiers and Kenya, to report during political elections.

Vine was successful in gaining interviews with key leaders in various African nations, including the President of Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe, and the leader of the Islamist regime in Khartoum, Sudan. Other areas of Africa from which he has reported include Mali, Zambia, Sierra Leone and the Niger Delta (to report on the Nigerian villagers&#x27; unrest over the work of the oil companies).

In April 1999, Vine presented an exclusive report on South African police brutality for BBC Two&#x27;s &quot;Newsnight&quot;. The film won the Silver Nymph at the Monte Carlo Television Festival and resulted in the suspension of 22 police officers. In July 1999, the BBC announced that Vine was joining &quot;Newsnight&quot; full-time as a co-presenter, having stood in for Jeremy Paxman over the two previous summers. Paxman was reported to have called Vine &quot;mini-me&quot;, a reference to the diminutive associate of Dr. Evil in the Austin Powers film series.

Vine was one of the original presenters of &quot;Broadcasting House&quot; on BBC Radio 4 and presented &quot;The Politics Show&quot; on BBC One from its launch in 2003 until Jon Sopel took over in 2005.

In May 2006, Vine was announced as Peter Snow&#x27;s replacement for presenting the BBC election graphics, including the famous Swingometer. His performance on the night of the council elections in England and Wales on 30 April 2008 was widely criticised.

From 2007 until 2009, Vine co-presented the Teaching Awards with Kate Thornton (2007), Myleene Klass (2008) and Christine Lampard (2009).

Between 2007 and 2010, Vine was the presenter of the BBC&#x27;s flagship and the world&#x27;s oldest current affairs programme, &quot;Panorama&quot;, which coincided with the show&#x27;s move back to a Monday peak-time slot.

From 2008 to 2018, Vine presented &quot;Points of View&quot;, taking over from Sir Terry Wogan. On 6 October 2008, he started hosting the former BBC Two quiz show &quot;Eggheads&quot; while the spin-off show, &quot;Are You an Egghead?&quot;, was presented by the regular host, Dermot Murnaghan. Once the spin-off show had finished, Vine continued to host the second half of each series, with Murnaghan hosting the first half. In Series 16, it was announced that Vine had become the sole presenter. As of 2014, Vine also hosted the spin-off series &quot;Revenge of the Egghead&quot;. The series ran for a 6-week period, between 24 February and 4 April 2014. On 12 March 2021, it was announced that after 18 years at the BBC, the programme would be moving to Channel 5, and Vine was to continue as host of the show. From 2016 to 2017, Vine co-presented &quot;Crimewatch&quot; with Tina Daheley.

In September 2018, Vine replaced Matthew Wright as the presenter of Channel 5&#x27;s weekday morning current affairs show, formerly called &quot;The Wright Stuff&quot;. The show&#x27;s name has now changed to &quot;Jeremy Vine&quot;. Vine said he would continue to present his Radio 2 weekday lunchtime programme. In March 2021, it was announced that &quot;Eggheads&quot; would be joining his morning current affairs/phone-in show as a programme broadcast on Channel 5, after the BBC put the quiz on hiatus.

===BBC Radio 2===

On 6 January 2003, after several stints as a stand-in for Jimmy Young on BBC Radio 2, Vine took over the weekday lunchtime show on a regular basis. The show consists of a mix of news-based discussions, including views from listeners, interspersed with popular music. After Vine took over the hosting duties, the show was revamped. While the regular Thursday food slot was dropped, the Monday health and Friday legal advice slots were retooled.

Monday&#x27;s &quot;The Health and Wellbeing Hour&quot; included either general practitioner Sarah Jarvis or Rabbi Julia Neuberger, while Friday&#x27;s &quot;Your Money and Your Life&quot;, involves a variety of contributors, most frequently Martin Lewis. Since 2003, Friday&#x27;s shows have frequently included a link-up to Rhondda gardener Terry Walton. For four years, until October 2006, Lucy Berry served as the show&#x27;s in-house poet.

===&quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;===
On 10 August 2015, Vine was the first celebrity to be announced as taking part in the thirteenth series of the popular BBC One competition &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot;. Vine was partnered with professional, Karen Clifton. On the fourth week of the contest, after Vine danced a jive to Bobby Darin’s &quot;Splish Splash&quot;, Bruno Tonioli described him as a &quot;Peculiar, off-the-wall artist like Tracey Emin&quot;, and Craig Revel Horwood compared him to &quot;a stork that had been struck by lightning.&quot;

In week eight of the show he was in the dance-off, alongside Jamelia, and voted out of the show; finishing in ninth place. He also took part in the 2017 Christmas special with the same partner.

== Controversies ==
It was revealed on 4 February 2015 that Vine received a five-figure sum for a post-dinner speech at a £250-a-head banquet organised by ADS Group, the trade organisation that represents defence and security industries in the UK, and attended by global arms manufacturers. Campaign Against Arms Trade lodged a formal complaint with the BBC, claiming a conflict for the organisation appearing to support an industry which &quot;profits from dictatorships which silence and suppress debate&quot;. This prompted a BBC response saying: &quot;Jeremy is a freelance presenter and so can make personal appearances without speaking on behalf of the BBC, as he did here.&quot;

In January 2018, Vine was one of six male BBC presenters who voluntarily took a pay cut when the gap between men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s pay at the BBC was revealed.

In December 2018, Vine apologised after a tweet suggested people in Wales should speak English. The tweet was deleted after Vine said that the tweet had been taken out of context and that he was talking about a caller to his show who had complained about Welsh people not talking in English in the pubs.

In October 2019, the journalist Samira Ahmed brought legal proceedings against the BBC under the Equal Pay Act. Key evidence cited in the case revealed that Vine had initially been paid £3,000 (later reduced to £1,300) per episode for presenting &quot;Points of View&quot; at a time when Ahmed had been paid £440 an episode for presenting &quot;Newswatch&quot;, a similarly formatted show. The differential was defended in part by a BBC executive referring to Vine having had a &quot;glint in his eye&quot; and a &quot;cheeky&quot; and light-hearted presentation style. The London Central Employment Tribunal unanimously found in Ahmed&#x27;s favour on 10 January 2020. There was no suggestion that Vine was involved in Ahmed being underpaid.

On 25 May 2023, a post from the &quot;Jeremy Vine on 5&quot; Twitter account asked if it was &quot;time to crack down&quot; on sick people claiming out-of-work benefits. The tweet was criticised by disability campaigners who accused it of &quot;trolling&quot; and &quot;demonising&quot; sick people. The tweet was later deleted.

==Personal life==
Vine was married to an American banker, Janelle Muntz, for seven years, which ended in 2000. Vine stated that it was &quot;very sad&quot;, but their jobs and travel meant they had &quot;seen very little&quot; of each other in three years. He married Rachel Schofield, a journalist and news presenter, on 14 September 2002 in Tipton St John, Devon. The couple live in Chiswick, London, and have two daughters. They had previously lived in Brackenbury Village.

Vine is the patron of Radio St Helier, a UK‐registered charity providing radio programmes to patients at St Helier Hospital in Carshalton. 

Vine is a practising Anglican and attends church. He has deplored what he sees as the marginalisation of Christians in British society, saying that &quot;You can&#x27;t express views that were common currency 30 or 40 years ago&quot;.

In August 2016, a car driver threatened and was abusive to Vine while he was cycling along Hornton Street in Kensington, London. Vine captured the encounter on his helmet camera, later broadcasting it on YouTube where it was viewed several million times. Vine also reported it to the police. On 18 April 2017, the car driver was jailed for nine months for threatening behaviour. At the time of the incident, she was subject to a suspended sentence for various other offences.

In October 2021, anti-vaccine campaigners protested outside Vine&#x27;s home, objecting to the BBC&#x27;s coverage of COVID-19 vaccines. As Vine was not at home at the time, they presented their &quot;anti-vaxx writ&quot;, a document without legal authority, to his wife. He later posted videos of the incident online. Vine has said he contracted COVID-19 and commented on receiving the vaccine.

In February 2022, Vine was &quot;knocked out cold for a minute or two&quot; after falling , onto grass, from his penny-farthing bicycle. He was taken to Charing Cross Hospital where doctors told him he was &quot;lucky to have just a black eye and some aches from the fall&quot;.

In August 2022, Alex Belfield, a former BBC Radio Leeds presenter and the host of YouTube channel &quot;Alex Belfield - The Voice of Reason&quot;, was convicted at Nottingham Crown Court of stalking Vine and three others. Vine described Belfield as &quot;the Jimmy Savile of trolling&quot;, and said he had been subjected to an &quot;avalanche of hatred&quot; and a &quot;constant bombardment&quot; of harassing tweets and YouTube videos. Vine also told the court that he feared Belfield or one of his followers would go to his home, which led him to putting a picture up of Belfield so that his family could recognise him. Vine also sued Belfield for defamation. The next month, on 16 September, Belfield was sentenced. The &quot;simple stalking&quot; element relating to the case involving Vine resulted in a sentence of thirteen weeks; this was added to the other sentences to provide an overall sentence of five-and-a-half years.

In May 2024, judge Mrs Justice Steyn in the High Court ruled in favour of Vine, who had sued former footballer Joey Barton for libel over posts on Twitter; 11 of the 14 cited tweets were found to be defamatory. Barton had repeatedly called Vine a &quot;bike &quot;, a vulgar British term for a paedophile, and had falsely associated Vine with paedophiles including Jimmy Savile and Jeffrey Epstein.

== Filmography ==
=== Television ===
=== Radio ===
== Awards and honours ==
Vine was named Speech Broadcaster of the Year at the 2005 and 2011 Sony Awards. At the latter, the 2010 election interview with Gordon Brown, in which the then-Prime Minister put his head in his hands as he was played the recording of him calling a voter a bigot, won Vine the Sony Award for Interview of the Year.

== Bibliography ==
* &quot;Forget Heaven, Just Kiss Me&quot;. Hodder &amp; Stoughton. 1993. 
* &quot;The Whole World in My Hands&quot;. Hodder &amp; Stoughton. 1994. 
* &quot;It&#x27;s All News to Me&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster. 2013. 
* &quot;What I Learnt: What My Listeners Say – and Why We Should Take Notice.&quot; W&amp;N. 2017. 
* &quot;The Diver and The Lover&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Murder on Line One&quot; (2025)

==References==
==External links==
* Jeremy Vine – Agent
* &quot;Jeremy Vine&quot; (BBC Radio 2)
* Jeremy Vine at Channel 5
* Jeremy Vine to present Points Of View BBC Press Office, 7 April 2008
* Biography – Jeremy Vine BBC Press Office
* Vine and his wife at the Sony Awards
* Strictly Come Dancing Lineup announced</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6181992" start="0" end="15" title="Jeremy Vine" label="Jeremy Guy Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="132" end="143" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="286" end="295" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="306" end="313" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297666" start="336" end="344" title="Eggheads (game show)" label="Eggheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262832" start="381" end="397" title="Dermot Murnaghan" label="Dermot Murnaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647864" start="453" end="464" title="Strictly Come Dancing (series 13)" label="13th series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="474" end="495" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="544" end="553" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279877" start="590" end="601" title="Jeremy Vine (TV programme)" label="Jeremy Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692584" start="657" end="671" title="Epsom Hospital" label="Epsom Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q993164" start="675" end="680" title="Epsom" label="Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240615" start="704" end="709" title="Cheam" label="Cheam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262510" start="790" end="829" title="North East Surrey College of Technology" label="North East Surrey College of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804427" start="989" end="997" title="Tim Vine" label="Tim Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q963723" start="1061" end="1066" title="Ewell" label="Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667045" start="1073" end="1088" title="Aberdour School" label="Aberdour School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998623" start="1092" end="1103" title="Burgh Heath" label="Burgh Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383987" start="1114" end="1127" title="Epsom College" label="Epsom College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="1285" end="1295" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="1395" end="1412" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681373" start="1414" end="1430" title="Hatfield College" label="Hatfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="1453" end="1470" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="2:2 undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1534" end="1550" title="List of social activities at Durham University#Durham Revue" label="The Durham Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126799" start="1602" end="1612" title="Palatinate (newspaper)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997678" start="1649" end="1660" title="Metro Radio" label="Metro Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179118" start="1723" end="1749" title="Coventry Telegraph" label="Coventry Evening Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1889" end="1905" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="1941" end="1945" title="BBC One" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692434" start="1959" end="1978" title="Heart of the Matter (TV series)" label="Heart of the Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="2031" end="2042" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353208" start="2059" end="2064" title="Today (BBC Radio 4)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2197" end="2214" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832895" start="2350" end="2359" title="juvenilia" label="juvenilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="2486" end="2496" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="2503" end="2513" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="2573" end="2594" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="2672" end="2684" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q832273" start="2777" end="2799" title="Eritrean–Ethiopian War" label="Eritrean–Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055176" start="2805" end="2822" title="Angolan Civil War" label="Angolan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="2840" end="2847" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335258" start="2854" end="2937" title="Southern African Development Community intervention in Lesotho" label="South African troops went in and hoisted a South African flag over the Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="2991" end="2998" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="3003" end="3008" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="3163" end="3171" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="3173" end="3186" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="3229" end="3237" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="3239" end="3244" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="3303" end="3307" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="3309" end="3315" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="3317" end="3329" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="3338" end="3349" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="3368" end="3375" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3491" end="3503" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="3526" end="3533" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q25869" start="3547" end="3556" title="Newsnight" label="Newsnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249934" start="3601" end="3632" title="Monte-Carlo Television Festival" label="Monte Carlo Television Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942003" start="3812" end="3825" title="Jeremy Paxman" label="Jeremy Paxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284314" start="3903" end="3910" title="mini-me" label="mini-me"/>
<link wikidata="Q430599" start="3961" end="3969" title="Dr. Evil" label="Dr. Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500001" start="3977" end="3990" title="Austin Powers" label="Austin Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972144" start="4054" end="4072" title="Broadcasting House (radio programme)" label="Broadcasting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225177" start="4114" end="4131" title="Politics Show" label="The Politics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="4141" end="4148" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271603" start="4179" end="4188" title="Jon Sopel" label="Jon Sopel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177015" start="4244" end="4254" title="Peter Snow" label="Peter Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658716" start="4337" end="4348" title="Swingometer" label="Swingometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691270" start="4510" end="4525" title="Teaching Awards" label="Teaching Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507541" start="4531" end="4544" title="Kate Thornton" label="Kate Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48737" start="4553" end="4566" title="Myleene Klass" label="Myleene Klass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110936" start="4578" end="4595" title="Christine Lampard" label="Christine Lampard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4739" end="4747" title="Panorama (British TV programme)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4871" end="4885" title="Points of View (TV programme)" label="Points of View"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="4914" end="4925" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5000" end="5008" title="Eggheads (game show)" label="Eggheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788488" start="5046" end="5065" title="Are You an Egghead?" label="Are You an Egghead?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262832" start="5108" end="5124" title="Dermot Murnaghan" label="Dermot Murnaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="5588" end="5597" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185516" start="5688" end="5698" title="Crimewatch" label="Crimewatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977801" start="5710" end="5722" title="Tina Daheley" label="Tina Daheley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791449" start="5758" end="5772" title="Matthew Wright (presenter)" label="Matthew Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="5793" end="5802" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776313" start="5870" end="5886" title="The Wright Stuff" label="The Wright Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279877" start="5940" end="5951" title="Jeremy Vine (TV programme)" label="Jeremy Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689479" start="6311" end="6322" title="Jimmy Young (broadcaster)" label="Jimmy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="6326" end="6337" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793831" start="6791" end="6803" title="Sarah Jarvis" label="Sarah Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q260272" start="6813" end="6828" title="Julia Neuberger" label="Julia Neuberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776003" start="6940" end="6952" title="Martin Lewis (financial journalist)" label="Martin Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859627" start="7024" end="7031" title="Rhondda" label="Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647864" start="7270" end="7287" title="Strictly Come Dancing (series 13)" label="thirteenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="7303" end="7310" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="7329" end="7350" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369691" start="7396" end="7409" title="Karen Clifton" label="Karen Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17237" start="7466" end="7470" title="Jive (dance)" label="jive"/>
<link wikidata="Q311267" start="7474" end="7485" title="Bobby Darin" label="Bobby Darin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030663" start="7494" end="7507" title="Splish Splash (song)" label="Splish Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979416" start="7515" end="7528" title="Bruno Tonioli" label="Bruno Tonioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181359" start="7612" end="7631" title="Craig Revel Horwood" label="Craig Revel Horwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q234199" start="7765" end="7772" title="Jamelia" label="Jamelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651201" start="8054" end="8063" title="ADS Group" label="ADS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027733" start="8190" end="8217" title="Campaign Against Arms Trade" label="Campaign Against Arms Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409552" start="9090" end="9102" title="Samira Ahmed" label="Samira Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281138" start="9304" end="9330" title="Points of View (TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;Points of View&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019886" start="9403" end="9412" title="Newswatch (British TV programme)" label="Newswatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279392" start="10400" end="10416" title="Rachel Schofield" label="Rachel Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809012" start="10475" end="10489" title="Tipton St John" label="Tipton St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="10517" end="10525" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953661" start="10588" end="10607" title="Brackenbury Village" label="Brackenbury Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593367" start="10715" end="10733" title="St Helier Hospital" label="St Helier Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220276" start="10737" end="10747" title="Carshalton" label="Carshalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="10772" end="10780" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="11096" end="11106" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709318" start="11151" end="11164" title="helmet camera" label="helmet camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="11191" end="11198" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="11582" end="11598" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="11811" end="11819" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554036" start="11974" end="11988" title="penny-farthing" label="penny-farthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982607" start="12014" end="12036" title="Charing Cross Hospital" label="Charing Cross Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716678" start="12157" end="12170" title="Alex Belfield" label="Alex Belfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834918" start="12181" end="12196" title="BBC Radio Leeds" label="BBC Radio Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="12223" end="12230" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="12331" end="12339" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q713479" start="12400" end="12412" title="Jimmy Savile" label="Jimmy Savile"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="12793" end="12803" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76346271" start="13095" end="13112" title="Karen Steyn" label="Mrs Justice Steyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q202329" start="13187" end="13198" title="Joey Barton" label="Joey Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="13203" end="13208" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q713479" start="13441" end="13453" title="Jimmy Savile" label="Jimmy Savile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904131" start="13458" end="13473" title="Jeffrey Epstein" label="Jeffrey Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562517" start="13619" end="13630" title="Radio Academy Awards" label="Sony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="13680" end="13692" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13770" end="13783" title="2010 United Kingdom general election#Bigotgate" label="the recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="13809" end="13814" title="Prejudice" label="bigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="14403" end="14412" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849306" wikidata="Q1207082" url="?curid=849306" title="Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka">
<text>Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka (, Jawi: ), abbreviated DBP, is the government body responsible for coordinating the use of the Malay language and Malay-language literature in Malaysia.

==History==

DBP Malaysia was established as Balai Pustaka in Johor Bahru on 22 June 1956, It was placed under the purview of the then Malayan Ministry of Education.

During the &quot;Kongres Bahasa dan Persuratan Melayu III&quot; (The Third Malay Literary and Language Congress) which was held between 16 and 21 September 1956 in both Singapore and Johor Bahru, Balai Pustaka was renamed Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. Royal Prof Ungku Abdul Aziz Ungku Abdul Hamid was instrumental in setting up the institution.

In 1957, DBP moved from Johor Bahru to Kuala Lumpur. Through &quot;Ordinan Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka 1959&quot;, DBP was granted a charter with its own Board of Governors. With the charter, DBP has the power to form policies regarding the Malay language, responsible to spread the language and is able to go into book publishing business.

On 31 January 1962, DBP moved to its own building at Jalan Lapangan Terbang Lama (now Jalan Dewan Bahasa). The building&#x27;s architect was Lee Yoon Thim and the prominent mural was by Ismail Mustam. Three other offices were established in Bukit Mertajam (1999), Kota Bharu (1999) and Johor Bahru (2003). The institution celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2006.

=== Takeover of Borneo Literature Bureau ===

Not long after the World War II 1940s to late 1960s, Crown officials of Sarawak founded the Borneo Literature Bureau (BLB) responsible for collecting and writing down the oral literature of many indigenous Bornean languages, Iban especially. Such efforts bolstered a sense of pride as it also lead to explorations of native philosophy and epistemology.

DBP opened offices in Kota Kinabalu and Kuching in 1977, taking over the role of BLB. Soon after that, there were witness accounts of DBP burying all BLB published books; however, some books were found and rescued. It was later alleged that all the books were burnt. Initially, DBP officials insisted on publishing works in national language (Malay language) or other vernaculars. However, soon after that DBP stated that they cannot publish books in regional languages because this would be against its own policy and is not economically sound in a small market of readers. Regarding the allegation that books of BLB were burnt, former Sarawak state DBP deputy director said that old books were written off or given away when it was expired, no longer needed, or there were overstocks. In 2024, DBP denied that the books were burnt by the agency. It maintained that all the 1,077 BLB books were still preserved in storage. Meanwhile, the Sarawak DBP Director maintained that more than 1,000 BLB books are preserved in Sarawak branch of DBP and is available to the public.

==Dictionary and other publications==

DBP publishes the Kamus Dewan, for many years the prestigious dictionary of the Malaysian national language. The dictionary is not only descriptive, but rather it is also prescriptive, as it represents the results of the efforts of DBP to adapt the Malay language to accommodate the challenges of technology and science. DBP&#x27;s role in developing and regulating the language may be likened to that of similar government bodies in other countries, for example the Académie Française.

It also processes many books, mainly work books and novels.

==References==
== External links ==

* DBP Malaysia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1207082" start="0" end="24" title="Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka" label="Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q83942" start="28" end="32" title="Jawi alphabet" label="Jawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207082" start="49" end="52" title="Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka" label="DBP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="121" end="135" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016762" start="140" end="165" title="Malaysian literature" label="Malay-language literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="169" end="177" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="242" end="253" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549916" start="606" end="640" title="Ungku Abdul Aziz Ungku Abdul Hamid" label="Ungku Abdul Aziz Ungku Abdul Hamid"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="714" end="725" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="729" end="741" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345751" start="1170" end="1183" title="Lee Yoon Thim" label="Lee Yoon Thim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158697" start="1270" end="1284" title="Bukit Mertajam" label="Bukit Mertajam"/>
<link wikidata="Q651131" start="1293" end="1303" title="Kota Bharu" label="Kota Bharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="1492" end="1518" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Crown officials of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q85113914" start="1531" end="1555" title="Borneo Literature Bureau" label="Borneo Literature Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424" start="1664" end="1668" title="Iban language" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="1815" end="1828" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="1833" end="1840" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="2136" end="2150" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358424" start="2924" end="2935" title="Kamus Dewan" label="Kamus Dewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="3155" end="3169" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="3373" end="3391" title="Académie Française" label="Académie Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034663" start="3431" end="3441" title="workbook" label="work books"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="3446" end="3451" title="novel" label="novel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849312" wikidata="Q7681207" url="?curid=849312" title="Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research">
<text>Tami Steinmetz Center For Peace Research was an academic research institution of Tel Aviv University was founded in 1992 and closed down in 2020 as the subject of peace was considered no longer relevant. The center was funded by Daniela and Daniel Steinmetz, who established it in memory of their daughter. It surveyed public opinion regarding the Israeli–Palestinian peace process, the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, and the Arab–Israeli conflict.

The center published monthly surveys about the current state of public opinion. It was most famous for the &quot;Peace Index&quot;, a numerical measure of Israeli public support for the peace process. The Peace Index was divided into 4 sub-indices:
# General Peace Index
# Oslo Index
# Syrian Index
# Negotiation Index

Each index was computed according to the number and percent of supporters for each peace negotiation and the number of people believing that the negotiation will actually achieve peace.

==See also==
* Al Mezan Center for Human Rights
* American Israel Public Affairs Committee
* Amnesty International
* Human Rights Watch
* Madrid Conference of 1991
* Oslo Accords (1993)
* Israel–Jordan peace treaty (1994)
* Camp David 2000 Summit
* Projects working for peace among Israelis and Arabs
* List of Middle East peace proposals
* International law and the Arab–Israeli conflict

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7681207" start="0" end="40" title="Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research" label="Tami Steinmetz Center For Peace Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="81" end="100" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141816" start="348" end="381" title="Israeli–Palestinian peace process" label="Israeli–Palestinian peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="387" end="415" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="425" end="446" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704443" start="971" end="1003" title="Al Mezan Center for Human Rights" label="Al Mezan Center for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q465328" start="1006" end="1046" title="American Israel Public Affairs Committee" label="American Israel Public Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="1049" end="1070" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="1073" end="1091" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343802" start="1094" end="1119" title="Madrid Conference of 1991" label="Madrid Conference of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="1122" end="1134" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q620988" start="1144" end="1170" title="Israel–Jordan peace treaty" label="Israel–Jordan peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029825" start="1180" end="1202" title="Camp David 2000 Summit" label="Camp David 2000 Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783126" start="1205" end="1256" title="Projects working for peace among Israelis and Arabs" label="Projects working for peace among Israelis and Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799901" start="1259" end="1294" title="List of Middle East peace proposals" label="List of Middle East peace proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054728" start="1297" end="1344" title="International law and the Arab–Israeli conflict" label="International law and the Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849313" wikidata="Q720129" url="?curid=849313" title="Dunash ben Labrat">
<text>Dunash ha-Levi ben Labrat (920/925 – after 985) (; ) was a medieval Jewish commentator, poet, and grammarian of the Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain. He is known for his philological commentary, &quot;Teshuvot Dunash&quot;, and for his liturgical poems D&#x27;ror Yiqra and D&#x27;vai Haser.

==Life==

Dunash was, according to Moses ibn Ezra, born in Fes, the name &quot;Dunash&quot; being of Berber origin. In his youth he travelled to Baghdad to study with Saadia Gaon. On returning to Morocco he wrote many poems and became famous, and there were even poems written about him. He taught grammar and poetry.

Hasdai ibn Shaprut, who lived in Córdoba, invited Dunash to Spain. Córdoba was then the center of culture and poetry in the Islamic world, and Hasdai endeavored to bring the best minds there. In Córdoba, Dunash met Menahem ben Saruq, also an important grammarian, though the two did not get along because of their many grammatical disputes as well as Menahem&#x27;s tough criticism of Saadia Gaon, Dunash&#x27;s mentor. Their dispute turned into personal rivalry, which included many polemic compositions and exchanges of accusations to Hasdai ibn Shaprut.

Dunash died in Córdoba in 990.

==Work==

Dunash is called the founder of Andalusian Hebrew poetry. He first introduced Arabic meter into Hebrew poetry. Traditional Arabic poetry was built on patterns of long and short syllables. Dunash&#x27;s innovation came in drawing a parallel between the &quot;šəwâ&quot; (ə) and &quot;ḥāṭēp̄&quot; (ĕ/ă/ŏ) and the Arabic short vowels (i/a/u), so as to create a new Hebrew meter. This meter formed the basis for all subsequent medieval Hebrew poetry. At the time, however, it opened him up to severe criticism, particularly among the students of Menahem ben Saruq, that he was corrupting the Hebrew language by introducing Arabic forms, and changing traditional Biblical styles to conform to Arabic meter and rhyming schemes. For instance, in his classic poem &quot;D&#x27;ror Yikra&quot;, he begins the second line: &quot;Ne&#x27;im shim&#x27;chem&quot; (&quot;pleasant [is] your name&quot;), with a modified form of the adjective &quot;pleasant,&quot; which properly should be &quot;na&#x27;im&quot;.

This body of poetry includes the riddles of Dunash ben Labrat, among the first known Hebrew riddles.

In the field of grammar, Dunash&#x27;s major work was a book attacking Menahem ben Saruq and his &quot;Mahberet&quot; (&quot;Notebook&quot;) for violating religious standards and opposing the teachings of the sages. He dedicated his work to the leader of the Jews of Spain at the time, Hasdai ibn Shaprut. In his book, he was the first Hebrew grammarian to distinguish between transitive and intransitive verbs, the first to list verbs by their three-letter roots in the &quot;Paal&quot; construction, and the first to distinguish between &quot;light&quot; and &quot;heavy&quot; roots. He also condemned Menahem ben Saruq for failing to see the relationship between Hebrew and Arabic. Dunash also wrote a book containing two hundred reservations about the teachings of his old mentor, Saadia Gaon.

The students of Menahem ben Saruq responded with a scathing attack on Dunash, condemning him for using Arabic meter and grammar in studying the Hebrew language, as well as on issues of Jewish philosophy about which they were at odds. Rabbi Abraham Ibn Ezra also wrote a response to Dunash&#x27;s work, in defense of Saadia Gaon. These challenges were met by Yehudi ben Sheshet, one of Dunash&#x27;s students, who wrote a work in defense of his master that strongly opposed all of his detractors.

The debates between Dunash and others were finally decided in the centuries after his death by Rabbeinu Tam, a grandson of Rashi, who attempted to judge between the two schools of thought, and by Rabbi Joseph Kimhi, father of the noted grammarian Rabbi David Kimhi (&quot;RaDaK&quot;), who supported Dunash&#x27;s positions. Nevertheless, many of the issues raised by Dunash have yet to be resolved today. Dunash is remembered as a poet and a grammarian who uncovered many of the major problems of Hebrew grammar.

== Poetry of Dunash&#x27;s wife ==
Though her name is unknown, Dunash&#x27;s wife is held to be the author of a poem on the subject of Dunash&#x27;s exile. This makes it the only known medieval Hebrew verse by a woman (and the only known medieval verse by a Jewish woman apart from those of Qasmuna and, if she was Jewish, Sarah of Yemen). Giving both verse and prose translations, it reads:

An incomplete text of the poem was discovered and published in the 1940s in two fragments from one eleventh-century manuscript, Mosseri IV.387 and Mosseri VIII.202.2. At that time, the poem was assumed to be by Dunash. But a manuscript declaring the poem to be by Dunash&#x27;s wife came to light in the 1980s, in the form of a probably eleventh-century fragment from the Cairo Geniza (where it is now catalogued as Cambridge, Cambridge University Library, T-S NS 143.46), and first edited by Ezra Fleischer. This manuscript includes an incomplete reply from Dunash to his wife:

The circumstances of this separation are unclear; it is thought that Dunash&#x27;s wife composed her poem shortly after Dunash&#x27;s departure, around 950. A further poem, found in 1985 written on the corner of a letter composed by Hasdai ibn Shaprut (T-S J2.71, f. 2v), identified as being a complaint from Dunash about his service under Hasdai, seems further to describe his feelings on leaving his wife. Following two illegible lines, the text reads:
==Editions and translations==
===Poetry===
*Aluny, Nehemya (ed.), &#x27;Ten Dunash Ben Labrat&#x27;s Riddles&#x27;, &quot;The Jewish Quarterly Review&quot;, New Series, 36 (1945), 141-46.
*Cole, Peter (trans.), &quot;The Dream of the Poem: Hebrew poetry from Muslim and Christian Spain, 950-1492&quot; (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007), p. 23-27 (&quot;Dunash Ben Labrat&quot; and &quot;The wife of Dunash&quot;).
*Del Valle Rodríguez, Carlos (trans.), &quot;El diván poético de Dunash ben Labraṭ: la introducción de la métrica árabe&quot; (Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigciones Cinetí cas, 1988).

===Shirim===
*Allony, Nehemiah (ed.), &quot;Dunash ben Labraṭ: Shirim&quot; (Jerusalem: Mosad Harav Kook, 1947).

===Teshuvot===
*Filipowski, H. (ed.), &quot;Teshuvot Dunash ben Labraṭ&quot; (London and Edinburgh: Meorere Yeshenim, 1855).
*Sáenz-Badillos, Angel (ed. and trans.), &quot;Tešuḇot de Dunaš BenLabraṭ&quot; (Granada: Univ. de Granada, 1980).
*Schröter, Robert (ed.), &quot;Tešuḇot Dunaš ha-Levi ben Labraṭ ʻal R.Seʻadyah Gaʾon&quot; (Breslau, 1866).

===Manuscript facsimiles===
*Cambridge, Cambridge University Library, T-S NS 143.46 (the poem of Dunash&#x27;s wife, and his reply)
*Cambridge, Cambridge University Library, Mosseri IV.387.2, Mosseri VIII.202.2 (another manuscript of Dunash&#x27;s wife&#x27;s poem)
*University of Pennsylvania Center for Advanced Judaic Studies Library Halper 317, fol. 2v (lines 21 to the end are a set of ten verse riddles attributed to Dunash ben Labrat)

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
*Maman, Aaron. &quot;Comparative Semitic philology in the Middle Ages&quot;, Brill, 2004, p. 289-295 (Chapter 11, &quot;Dunash ben Labrat&quot;).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720129" start="0" end="25" title="Dunash ben Labrat" label="Dunash ha-Levi ben Labrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="68" end="71" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="116" end="153" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405897" start="258" end="274" title="D&amp;#x27;ror Yikra" label="D&amp;#x27;ror Yiqra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55649628" start="279" end="295" title="Devai Haser" label="D&amp;#x27;vai Haser"/>
<link wikidata="Q719393" start="333" end="347" title="Moses ibn Ezra" label="Moses ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="357" end="360" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="399" end="405" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="443" end="450" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="465" end="476" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182498" start="617" end="635" title="Hasdai ibn Shaprut" label="Hasdai ibn Shaprut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="650" end="657" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370661" start="832" end="849" title="Menahem ben Saruq" label="Menahem ben Saruq"/>
<link wikidata="Q371249" start="1295" end="1307" title="Arabic prosody" label="Arabic meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="1340" end="1353" title="Arabic poetry" label="Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122491" start="1475" end="1479" title="Shva" label="šəwâ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777790" start="1500" end="1506" title="Hataf" label="ḥāṭēp̄"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370661" start="1760" end="1777" title="Menahem ben Saruq" label="Menahem ben Saruq"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1876" end="1884" title="Tanakh" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q178715" start="1923" end="1938" title="rhyme" label="rhyming schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405897" start="1980" end="1996" title="D&amp;#x27;ror Yikra" label="D&amp;#x27;ror Yikra"/>
<link wikidata="Q96401967" start="2251" end="2279" title="riddles of Dunash ben Labrat" label="riddles of Dunash ben Labrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370661" start="2391" end="2408" title="Menahem ben Saruq" label="Menahem ben Saruq"/>
<link wikidata="Q182498" start="2606" end="2624" title="Hasdai ibn Shaprut" label="Hasdai ibn Shaprut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="2697" end="2707" title="transitive verb" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="2712" end="2729" title="intransitive verb" label="intransitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="3304" end="3321" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="3359" end="3375" title="Abraham Ibn Ezra" label="Abraham Ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="3435" end="3446" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3477" end="3495" title="Yehudi ben Sheshet" label="Yehudi ben Sheshet"/>
<link wikidata="Q944289" start="3711" end="3723" title="Rabbeinu Tam" label="Rabbeinu Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26456" start="3739" end="3744" title="Rashi" label="Rashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371519" start="3818" end="3830" title="Joseph Kimhi" label="Joseph Kimhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733619" start="3869" end="3880" title="David Kimhi" label="David Kimhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4114" end="4128" title="Hebrew grammar" label="Hebrew grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094011" start="4422" end="4429" title="Qasmuna" label="Qasmuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12215023" start="4454" end="4468" title="Sarah of Yemen" label="Sarah of Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q742963" start="4896" end="4908" title="Cairo Geniza" label="Cairo Geniza"/>
<link wikidata="Q182498" start="5337" end="5355" title="Hasdai ibn Shaprut" label="Hasdai ibn Shaprut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849315" wikidata="Q3055700" url="?curid=849315" title="Ephel Duath">
<text>Ephel Duath may refer to:

* Ephel Dúath, mountain range in Middle-earth
* Ephel Duath (band), Italian band</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="29" end="40" title="Mordor#Geography" label="Ephel Dúath"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="60" end="72" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q942128" start="75" end="93" title="Ephel Duath (band)" label="Ephel Duath (band)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849317" wikidata="Q272053" url="?curid=849317" title="Brigitte Lahaie">
<text>Brigitte Lahaie (born Brigitte Lucie Jeanine Van Meerhaeghe; 12 October 1955) is a French radio talk show host, mainstream film actress and former pornographic actress. She performed in erotic films from 1976 through 1980 and is a member of the XRCO Hall of Fame.

== Early life and background ==
Brigitte Lucie Jeanine Van Meerhaeghe was born in Tourcoing, France. She left home for Paris when 18 years old, where she started working as a shoe salesgirl. Soon, she was noticed for her physique and accepted a proposal to pose in the nude for erotic magazines.

== Cinema ==
=== Porn ===
She started working in the adult film industry in 1976, one year after the legalization of hardcore pornography in France, as &quot;Brigitte Lahaie&quot; and various other stage names. In her first film she was a body double for some of another actress&#x27; scenes.

Lahaie eventually played in more than one hundred erotic films, most of them hardcore, directed by among many others, Claude Mulot, José Bénazéraf, , , and .

She chose to be listed as &quot;Brigitte Lahaie&quot; in most of them, her surname a transfer to French of her Flemish name &quot;vanmeerhaeghe&quot;, in which &quot;haeghe&quot; means &quot;hedge&quot;, since &quot;la haie&quot; is &quot;the hedge&quot; in French.

=== Horror ===
While she was still working in the adult-movie industry, Jean Rollin, who had directed her in the porn film &quot;Vibrations Sensuelles&quot; (&quot;Sensual Vibrations&quot;) in 1976, noticed Lahaie&#x27;s &quot;distinctly different personality,&quot; as he later recalled, and thought she had &quot;incredible charisma.&quot; He offered her a role in his 1978 mainstream film, &quot;Les Raisins de la Mort&quot; (&quot;The Grapes of Death&quot;), the first gore film produced in France, with Marie-Georges Pascal in the leading role. He then made her the protagonist of his next film, &quot;Fascination&quot;, in 1979.

=== Mainstream ===
Lahaie appeared in &quot;I as in Icarus&quot; (1980), which starred Yves Montand, playing a stripper, in &quot;For a Cop&#x27;s Hide&quot; (1981), which starred Alain Delon, in the role of a nurse. She continued to also make softcore and Nazi exploitation movies as well as &quot;video nasties&quot; during this time. In 1987, she played a singer in Michel Denisot&#x27;s television special &quot;La Plus Belle Nuit du Cinéma&quot; (&quot;The Most Beautiful Night of the Cinema&quot;), transmitted from the Zénith.

The same year, she recorded and released the single &quot;Caresse tendresse&quot; (&quot;Caress tenderness&quot;).

According to a 2018 article in &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; about Jean Rollin, Lahaie plays in his &quot;La Nuit des Traquées&quot; (&quot;Night of the Hunted&quot;, 1980) the woman suffering from amnesia with &quot;devastating effect,&quot; while she is credited with &quot;lovely, open, untutored performances&quot; for her work in &quot;Les Raisins&quot; and &quot;Fascination&quot;.

Lahaie acted in several other mainstream films, including &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot; (1990) and &quot;Calvaire&quot; (2004).

== Books and radio ==
Throughout her career, Lahaie published several books, mostly autobiographical, as well as some novels. In the 2000s, she was often featured on the &quot;Les Grosses Têtes&quot; radio program, broadcast on RTL, while she was also, from 2001, the host of &quot;Lahaie, l&#x27;Amour et Vous&quot; on Radio Monte Carlo, a daily talk show from 14:00 to 16:00 that dealt mostly with love and sex. The show ended in 2016, with the station praising her work on the subject of sexuality as &quot;unique&quot; in terms of success and longevity.

== Personal life ==
Lahaie has no children.

She is a fan of equestrianism, an interest reportedly first inspired when she saw the film &quot;White Mane&quot; as a teenager. She commentated live on the equestrian events at the 2012 London Olympics for RMC.
== Sexual violence and consent ==
In the aftermath of the Harvey Weinstein scandal and the subsequent Me Too movement, one hundred women in France signed, on 9 January 2018, a public declaration in which they denounced what they claimed was a return to &quot;puritanism&quot; that &quot;actually serves the interests of the enemies of sexual freedom, the religious extremists, the worst reactionaries.&quot; Lahaie was a co-signatory of that declaration, along with other celebrities such as Catherine Deneuve, Ingrid Caven, and Catherine Millet. Lahaie went on a TV debate the same evening, where she stated that women could have an orgasm when being raped. A few months later, in May, Lahaie stated, in interviews and on television, that her comment was &quot;taken out of context,&quot; that she &quot;does not regret [it]&quot;, and that she never supported non-consensual sex or violence of any kind against women.

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===

=== Television ===

=== Short films ===

== Bibliography ==
*
*
*

== See also ==
* Golden Age of Porn
* List of porn stars who appeared in mainstream films

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q272053" start="0" end="15" title="Brigitte Lahaie" label="Brigitte Lahaie"/>
<link wikidata="Q272053" start="22" end="59" title="Brigitte Lahaie" label="Brigitte Lucie Jeanine Van Meerhaeghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="90" end="105" title="radio talk show" label="radio talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q488111" start="147" end="167" title="Pornographic actor" label="pornographic actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649893" start="186" end="198" title="sex in film" label="erotic films"/>
<link wikidata="Q947606" start="245" end="262" title="XRCO Hall of Fame" label="XRCO Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q182481" start="347" end="356" title="Tourcoing" label="Tourcoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244962" start="543" end="558" title="erotic magazine" label="erotic magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="615" end="634" title="adult film industry" label="adult film industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="679" end="709" title="Pornography by region#France" label="hardcore pornography in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="760" end="770" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q704948" start="801" end="812" title="body double" label="body double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777448" start="933" end="941" title="Hardcore pornography" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145240" start="974" end="986" title="Claude Mulot" label="Claude Mulot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108323" start="988" end="1002" title="José Bénazéraf" label="José Bénazéraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1112" end="1118" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="1126" end="1133" title="Flemish language" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q579712" start="1354" end="1365" title="Jean Rollin" label="Jean Rollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q750339" start="1681" end="1703" title="Les Raisins de la Mort" label="Les Raisins de la Mort"/>
<link wikidata="Q909586" start="1755" end="1764" title="gore film" label="gore film"/>
<link wikidata="Q453766" start="1790" end="1810" title="Marie-Georges Pascal" label="Marie-Georges Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067056" start="1889" end="1900" title="Fascination (1979 film)" label="Fascination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411541" start="1962" end="1976" title="I as in Icarus" label="I as in Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106057" start="2005" end="2017" title="Yves Montand" label="Yves Montand"/>
<link wikidata="Q152213" start="2029" end="2037" title="striptease" label="stripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513821" start="2048" end="2069" title="For a Cop&amp;#x27;s Hide" label="For a Cop&amp;#x27;s Hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q106529" start="2098" end="2109" title="Alain Delon" label="Alain Delon"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="2128" end="2133" title="nurse" label="nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000136" start="2162" end="2170" title="Softcore pornography" label="softcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q535518" start="2175" end="2192" title="Nazi exploitation" label="Nazi exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028529" start="2217" end="2230" title="video nasty" label="video nasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309450" start="2287" end="2301" title="Michel Denisot" label="Michel Denisot"/>
<link wikidata="Q247566" start="2444" end="2450" title="Zénith Paris" label="Zénith"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="2498" end="2504" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="2606" end="2623" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211237" start="2675" end="2695" title="La Nuit des Traquées" label="La Nuit des Traquées"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072" start="2767" end="2774" title="amnesia" label="amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q582138" start="3022" end="3038" title="Henry &amp;amp; June" label="Henry &amp;amp; June"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333043" start="3062" end="3070" title="Calvaire (film)" label="Calvaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="3170" end="3186" title="autobiography" label="autobiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233096" start="3262" end="3279" title="Les Grosses Têtes" label="Les Grosses Têtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351173" start="3314" end="3317" title="RTL (French radio)" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085190" start="3406" end="3423" title="Radio Monte Carlo" label="Radio Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="3706" end="3719" title="equestrianism" label="equestrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199820" start="3787" end="3797" title="White Mane" label="White Mane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="3872" end="3892" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q686375" start="3897" end="3900" title="RMC (France)" label="RMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41832063" start="3960" end="3984" title="Harvey Weinstein scandal" label="Harvey Weinstein scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42133786" start="4004" end="4019" title="Me Too movement" label="Me Too movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4042" end="4048" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688262" start="4237" end="4251" title="sexual freedom" label="sexual freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="4257" end="4277" title="religious fundamentalism" label="religious extremists"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="4289" end="4302" title="reactionary" label="reactionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q106418" start="4394" end="4411" title="Catherine Deneuve" label="Catherine Deneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q70294" start="4413" end="4425" title="Ingrid Caven" label="Ingrid Caven"/>
<link wikidata="Q292463" start="4431" end="4447" title="Catherine Millet" label="Catherine Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="4536" end="4542" title="orgasm" label="orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="4554" end="4558" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476435" start="4939" end="4957" title="Golden Age of Porn" label="Golden Age of Porn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245641" start="4960" end="5011" title="List of porn stars who appeared in mainstream films" label="List of porn stars who appeared in mainstream films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849318" wikidata="Q58981" url="?curid=849318" title="Howard Beach">
<text>Howard Beach is a neighborhood in the southwestern portion of the New York City borough of Queens. It is bordered to the north by the Belt Parkway and Conduit Avenue in Ozone Park, to the south by Jamaica Bay in Broad Channel, to the east by 102nd–104th Streets in South Ozone Park, and to the west by 75th Street in East New York, Brooklyn. The area consists mostly of low-rise single-family detached houses.

Howard Beach is located in Queens Community District 10 and its ZIP Code is 11414. It is patrolled by the New York City Police Department&#x27;s 106th Precinct. Politically, Howard Beach is represented by the New York City Council&#x27;s 32nd District.

==History==


===Early development===
Howard Beach was established in 1897 by William J. Howard, a Brooklyn glove manufacturer who operated a goat farm on meadow land near Aqueduct Racetrack as a source of skin for kid gloves. In 1897, he bought more land and filled it in and the following year, built 18 cottages and opened a hotel near the water, which he operated until it was destroyed by fire in October 1907. He gradually bought more land and formed the Howard Estates Development Company in 1909. He dredged and filled the land until he was able to accumulate by 1914. He laid out several streets, water mains and gas mains, and built 35 houses that were priced in the $2,500–$5,000 range.

The Long Island Rail Road established a station named Ramblersville in 1905 and a Post Office by the same name opened soon thereafter. A casino, beach, and fishing pier were added in 1915 and the name of the neighborhood was changed to Howard Beach on April 6, 1916. Development continued and ownership was expanded to a group of investors who sold lots for about $690 each starting in 1922. Development, however, was limited to the areas east of Cross Bay Boulevard near the LIRR station now known as Bernard Coleman Memorial Square (then Lilly Place). The rest of Howard Beach consisted of empty marsh land except for the area to the south of Coleman Square, centered around Russell and 102nd Streets, which consisted of many small fishing bungalows that dotted alongside Hawtree Creek and Jamaica Bay. This area of Howard Beach retained the name Ramblersville. In 1919, the LIRR established opened the Hamilton Beach station, located about a quarter-mile south of the Howard Beach station at Coleman Square.

After World War II, Queens and Long Island experienced a significant suburban building boom. The marshland west of Cross Bay Boulevard was filled in, paving the way for the construction of numerous Cape Cod and High Ranch-style homes on and lots. This area was developed as Rockwood Park to the north and Spring Park to the south, together comprising what would be known as New Howard Beach, while the area east of the boulevard became known as Old Howard Beach.

In the early 1950s, farmland north of Rockwood Park was transformed with the addition of red-brick, two-story garden-style cooperative apartments, six-story co-op and condo buildings, and private two-family homes. This new neighborhood was named Lindenwood. Development continued through the 1960s and 1970s, with Cross Bay Boulevard emerging as the primary shopping district for the area.

In the 1990s and 2000s, many older homes in the neighborhood were demolished and replaced with McMansions.

===Post-1980s===
====Hate crimes====
In 1986 and 2005, Howard Beach became the site of two widely publicized anti-Black hate crimes.

On December 20, 1986, Michael Griffith, a 23-year-old Black man, was killed in Howard Beach following a racist attack. Griffith, along with Cedric Sandiford and Timothy Grimes, sought assistance in Howard Beach after their car broke down on Cross Bay Boulevard. They were attacked by a group of white youths at New Park Pizza, severely beating Griffith and Sandiford. Fleeing the assault, Griffith ran onto the Belt Parkway and was struck and killed by a car. New York City Mayor Ed Koch compared the attack to a lynching.

Black civil rights activists organized protests in Howard Beach and surrounding neighborhoods, calling for boycotts of white-owned businesses. During protests, mostly Black marchers carried signs comparing Howard Beach to apartheid-era South Africa, while white residents displayed racist signs. Three local teenagers—Jon Lester, Scott Kern, and Jason Ladone—were convicted of manslaughter, while another assailant was acquitted.

On June 29, 2005, a group of local white men in Howard Beach attacked three Black men with baseball bats, resulting in one victim being hospitalized with serious injuries. Police arrested two of the attackers, including Nicholas Minucci, who claimed the victims had attempted to rob him. Minucci, 20, was found guilty on June 10, 2006 of robbery and the racist attack of Glenn Moore, during which he used a racial slur. On July 17, 2006, Minucci was sentenced to 15 years in prison.

====Hurricane Sandy====
As Hurricane Sandy approached New York on October 28, 2012, city officials ordered the evacuation of residents in Zone A neighborhoods, including the Hamilton Beach section of Howard Beach, due to the threat of severe storm surges. Most of Howard Beach was in Zone B, where evacuation was voluntary. Many residents chose to remain, influenced by the relatively minor impact of Hurricane Irene the previous year.

On October 29, Sandy made landfall, bringing a ten-foot storm surge from Jamaica Bay that flooded Old Howard Beach, New Howard Beach, Broad Channel, the Rockaways, parts of Lindenwood, and sections of Ozone Park. The storm caused widespread destruction, including extensive damage to homes, businesses along Cross Bay Boulevard, the Howard Beach–JFK Airport subway station, and the IND Rockaway Line trestle over Jamaica Bay. Power outages lasted upwards three weeks.

After Sandy, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the New York City Office of Emergency Management provisionally re-classified Howard Beach, along with the Brooklyn neighborhoods of Gerritsen Beach and Red Hook, as Zone A neighborhoods. The Howard Beach post office, heavily damaged during the storm, reopened on April 5, 2013, following significant repairs.

==Geography==
Like many New York City neighborhoods, Howard Beach is composed of several smaller neighborhoods including Howard Beach, Old Howard Beach, Hamilton Beach, Ramblersville, Spring Park, Rockwood Park, Lindenwood, and Howard Park. Often, Old Howard Beach, Ramblersville, Howard Park, and Hamilton Beach are collectively referred to as &quot;Old Howard Beach.&quot; The main section of Howard Beach is a small peninsula bordered by the Belt Parkway and Conduit Avenue to the north, Jamaica Bay to the south, Hawtree Creek to the east (separating it from Hamilton Beach), and Shellbank Basin to the west, which separates it from Cross Bay Boulevard.

Cross Bay Boulevard serves as Howard Beach&#x27;s primary commercial hub. In the 1970s and 1980s, it was lined predominantly with locally owned shops and restaurants. Since the 1990s, chain stores and franchises have become more prominent along the boulevard. Former entertainment landmarks included Kiddie-Park and Cross-Bay Lanes. The Joseph P. Addabbo Memorial Bridge, named after a former U.S. Representative from the district, carries Cross Bay Boulevard over Jamaica Bay, linking mainland Queens to Broad Channel.

Bernard Coleman Memorial Square, near the Howard Beach – JFK Airport station, is a small plaza featuring a memorial honoring soldiers from Howard Beach who died in World War I, World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War.

===Hamilton Beach===
Hamilton Beach is bordered by the 102nd Street Creek to the north, the IND Rockaway Line tracks and JFK Airport to the east, Hawtree Creek to the west, and Jamaica Bay to the south. Before incorporation, Hamilton Beach was characterized by dirt roads, bungalow-style homes, and the absence of a sewer system. Often referred to as West Hamilton Beach, it is one of the few New York City communities with its own volunteer fire department. East Hamilton Beach, once located on the east side of the Long Island Rail Road tracks, was demolished in the 1940s to allow for the expansion of Idlewild Airport (now JFK Airport). The neighborhood has no connection to Hamilton Beach Brands.

Until June 27, 1955, Hamilton Beach had a station on the LIRR&#x27;s Rockaway Beach Branch. The station was closed when much of the branch was sold to the New York City Transit Authority. The community consists of one main road, 104th Street, with ten dead-end blocks connected to it, surrounded mostly by water. There is a single vehicular entrance and two pedestrian access points: a boardwalk linking the Howard Beach-JFK Airport station at Coleman Square to 104th Street, and the Hawtree Basin pedestrian bridge, which connects Hamilton Beach to Old Howard Beach.

Hamilton Beach features a small park at its southern end, including a 200-foot baseball field, a handball court, a jungle gym, and a beach. Gateways Hamilton Beach Park, located south of 165th Avenue, serves as the final stop for the Q11 bus. Since the early 21st century, housing development in the area has increased.

===Lindenwood===
Lindenwood, a section of Howard Beach, was developed in the 1950s and 1960s on landfill property and is considered part of New Howard Beach. The neighborhood features six-story orange- and red-brick apartment buildings constructed in the early to mid-1960s, smaller red-brick &quot;garden apartments&quot; built in the 1950s (visible from the Belt Parkway), and two-family homes, some attached, built in the 1960s. High-rise apartment buildings are primarily co-ops (red brick) or condominiums (orange brick), including Heritage House East and West, among the first condominium apartments in New York State. Additional townhouses near the Brooklyn border have been constructed since the 1970s. Many former playgrounds around apartment buildings have since been converted into sitting areas, with restrictions such as no dogs allowed.

At the heart of Lindenwood is P.S. 232, now known as the Walter Ward School, named after a longtime local City Councilman. The Lindenwood Shopping Center features a supermarket and about 20 stores. A second supermarket, &quot;The Village,&quot; opened in the early 1970s but later housed a mall, flea market, bingo hall, private school, and ultimately became a walk-in medical center. Another small strip mall is located on Linden Boulevard, next to the Lindenwood Diner.

Historically, Lindenwood&#x27;s population was predominantly Jewish, Italian, and Hispanic. When the Jewish population was larger, Temple Judea on 153rd Avenue and 80th Street served the community. The building was later converted into apartments after the synagogue merged with the Howard Beach Jewish Center in Rockwood Park. The neighborhood once had two pool clubs, later replaced by walk-up apartments and townhouses, including one near P.S. 232 that was redeveloped in 1980. A tennis bubble at 153rd Avenue and 79th Street was built around 1980.

===Old Howard Beach===
Old Howard Beach is a section of Howard Beach that lies between Shellbank Basin and Hawtree Creek to the east of Cross Bay Boulevard. Coleman Square, Wetzel Triangle and Frank M. Charles Park are located in Old Howard Beach. The area is locally referred to as &quot;Old Howard Beach&quot; since it was the original place in which founder William Howard built his famous hotel, and later the area&#x27;s first houses in the 1920s. The current housing in Old Howard Beach consists of several different types of houses. Those located near the former Howard Beach General Hospital (built in 1962) are mainly 1950s and 1960s detached two-family homes, while the areas near Coleman Square, Frank M. Charles Park, and Shellbank Basin contain primarily single-family homes. The Q11 bus serves the neighborhood.

===Ramblersville===

Ramblersville is a small neighborhood of about a dozen blocks between Hawtree Creek and JFK Airport. It is nearly surrounded by waterways leading into Jamaica Bay. The neighborhood is bordered by 160th Avenue to the north, Hawtree Creek to the west (across which lies Old Howard Beach), the IND Rockaway Line to the east (beyond which are Bergen Basin and JFK Airport), and 102nd Street Creek to the south. 102nd Street crosses the creek to connect to Hamilton Beach at Russell Street. The neighborhood spans approximately on each side, and lacks the rectangular street grid of the surrounding neighborhoods.

Ramblersville is purportedly the oldest neighborhood in what later became Howard Beach and once considered itself independent of New York City when the city was unified. A 1905 &quot;Washington Post&quot; article described the neighborhood as having houses built on stilts, with a population of 1,000 in the summer and a dozen in the winter. In 1962, the city replaced the neighborhood’s private water mains; at that time, the population consisted of approximately 130 families.

Fishing was a significant industry in the neighborhood. In 2001, &quot;The New York Times&quot; compared Ramblersville to a fishing village, having pebbled streets and wooden bungalows built on pilings, surrounded by tall grass and marshy fields.

North of Ramblersville is 159th Drive, also called Remsen Place, named after Jeromus Remsen, an American Revolutionary War officer. This area was historically known as &quot;Remsen&#x27;s Landing.&quot; Before 1916, the entire area now known as Howard Beach was commonly referred to as Ramblersville, including Hamilton Beach to the south and Old Howard Beach to the west. The Howard Beach – JFK Airport station was originally the Ramblersville Station of the Long Island Rail Road.

Ramblersville is the smallest neighborhood in New York City in terms of real estate per square foot.

===Rockwood Park===
Rockwood Park primarily consists of single-family detached houses. Often referred to as part of &quot;New Howard&quot; by local residents, it is bounded by 78th and 92nd Streets (running north-south) and 156th and 165th Avenues (running east-west). Public transportation in the area is provided by the Q41 and Q21 bus routes. To the west of 78th Street, the neighborhood&#x27;s westernmost boundary, lies Spring Creek Park, marking the border between Brooklyn and Queens.

The area remained undeveloped through the first half of the 1900s. After World War II, marshland west of Cross Bay Boulevard was filled in, leading to the construction of Cape Cod-style houses. In the 1960s and 1970s, high ranch-style houses were built. The area became associated with upscale living and was home to notable figures, including Gambino crime family boss John Gotti, who lived on 85th Street. Starting in the late 1980s and continuing through the 2000s, many original Cape Cod-style homes were replaced with McMansions.

Folk singer Woody Guthrie also lived in the neighborhood, at 159-13 85th Street, after moving from Coney Island.

==Demographics==
Based on data from the 2010 United States census, the population of Howard Beach was 26,148, a change of -1,973 (-7.5%) from the 28,121 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of . The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 76.8% (20,069) White, 1.6% (413) African American, 0.1% (28) Native American, 3.5% (923) Asian, 0% (5) Pacific Islander, 0.2% (62) from other races, and 1% (249) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 16.8% (4,399) of the population. , half of the population is Italian or of Italian descent.

The entirety of Community Board 10, which comprises Howard Beach, southern Ozone Park, and South Ozone Park, had 125,603 inhabitants as of NYC Health&#x27;s 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 81.7 years. This is higher than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. Most inhabitants are youth and middle-aged adults: 22% are between the ages of 0 and 17, 28% between 25 and 44, and 28% between 45 and 64. The ratio of college-aged and elderly residents was lower, at 9% and 13% respectively.

As of 2017, the median household income in Community Board 10 was $73,891. In 2018, an estimated 19% of Howard Beach and South Ozone Park residents lived in poverty, compared to 19% in all of Queens and 20% in all of New York City. One in ten residents (10%) were unemployed, compared to 8% in Queens and 9% in New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 56% in Howard Beach and South Ozone Park, higher than the boroughwide and citywide rates of 53% and 51% respectively. Based on this calculation, , Howard Beach and South Ozone Park are considered to be high-income relative to the rest of the city and not gentrifying.

==Politics==
Howard Beach is part of the 15th State Senate district, represented by Joseph Addabbo Jr., and the 23rd State Assembly district, represented by Stacey Pheffer Amato. It is part of District 32 in the New York City Council, represented by Joann Ariola.

Following redistricting in 2012, the neighborhood was split between the 5th and 8th congressional districts. The 5th District covered the parts of Howard Beach east of 104th Street and the 8th District covered the rest of the neighborhood west of 104th Street. These districts were represented by Gregory Meeks and Hakeem Jeffries respectively, .

==Police and crime==
Howard Beach, southern Ozone Park, and South Ozone Park are patrolled by the 106th Precinct of the NYPD, located at 103-53 101st Street. The 106th Precinct ranked 26th safest out of 69 patrol areas for per-capita crime in 2010. The rate of car thefts is high because of the area&#x27;s proximity to the Belt Parkway. , with a non-fatal assault rate of 32 per 100,000 people, Howard Beach and South Ozone Park&#x27;s rate of violent crimes per capita is less than that of the city as a whole. The incarceration rate of 381 per 100,000 people is lower than that of the city as a whole.

The 106th Precinct has a lower crime rate than in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 81.3% between 1990 and 2018. In 2018, there were 6 murders, 16 rapes, 183 robberies, 246 felony assaults, 133 burglaries, 502 grand larcenies, and 97 grand larcenies auto recorded in the precinct.

== Fire safety ==
Howard Beach contains a New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire station, Engine Co. 331/Ladder Co. 173, at 158-99 Cross Bay Boulevard.

Hamilton Beach is served by the West Hamilton Beach Volunteer Fire Department, which has Engine 2 (Brush Unit), Engine 4, Engine 6, Ambulance 947 &amp; 947-1, and two Chiefs vehicles, as well as a water pump.

==Health==
, preterm births are more common in Howard Beach and South Ozone Park than in other places citywide, though births to teenage mothers are less common. In Howard Beach and South Ozone Park, there were 97 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 14.2 births to teenage mothers per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide). Howard Beach and South Ozone Park have a low population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 8%, lower than the citywide rate of 12%.

The concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Howard Beach and South Ozone Park is , less than the city average. Twelve percent of Howard Beach and South Ozone Park residents are smokers, which is lower than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In Howard Beach and South Ozone Park, 27% of residents are obese, 19% are diabetic, and 34% have high blood pressure—compared to the citywide averages of 22%, 8%, and 23% respectively. In addition, 21% of children are obese, compared to the citywide average of 20%.

Eighty-three percent of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is less than the city&#x27;s average of 87%. In 2018, 77% of residents described their health as &quot;good&quot;, &quot;very good&quot;, or &quot;excellent&quot;, about equal to the city&#x27;s average of 78%. For every supermarket in Howard Beach and South Ozone Park, there are eight bodegas.

The nearest major hospitals are Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center in Brooklyn and Jamaica Hospital in Jamaica.

==Post offices and ZIP Code==
Howard Beach is covered by the ZIP Code 11414. The United States Postal Service operates two post offices nearby: the Station A post office at 160-50 Cross Bay Boulevard and the Station B post office at 102-12 159th Avenue.

== Education ==

Howard Beach and South Ozone Park generally have a lower rate of college-educated residents than the rest of the city . While 28% of residents age 25 and older have a college education or higher, 23% have less than a high school education and 49% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 39% of Queens residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of Howard Beach and South Ozone Park students excelling in math rose from 33% in 2000 to 61% in 2011, and reading achievement rose from 37% to 48% during the same time period.

Howard Beach and South Ozone Park&#x27;s rate of elementary school student absenteeism is less than the rest of New York City. In Howard Beach and South Ozone Park, 18% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, lower than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 82% of high school students in Howard Beach and South Ozone Park graduate on time, more than the citywide average of 75%.

===Schools===
* PS 146 The Howard Beach School
* PS 207 The Rockwood Park School
* PS 232 The Walter Ward School
* St. Helens Catholic School K–8 (Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn)

Before the public elementary schools changed to K-8 schools, residents of Howard Beach that attended PS 207, PS 232 or PS 146 then went to Junior High School 202 (Robert H. Goddard Junior High School) for grades 7–8. It is located on the northwest corner of Conduit Boulevard and Lafayette Place, and a footbridge crosses over Conduit Boulevard, allowing students from southern Howard Beach to attend the school. Some 9th graders also attended JHS 202.

For grades 9–12, residents could attend their zoned school which is John Adams High School in nearby Ozone Park. Others attended specialty high schools such as Beach Channel High School in Rockaway Park, or Catholic high schools such as Christ the King, St. Francis Prep, Stella Maris or Archbishop Molloy.

In July 2020, Our Lady of Grace Catholic School made the announcement that it would no longer be operating, as the Diocese took over the property and decided to close the educational component due to financial strain as an indirect result of the COVID-19 pandemic.

===Library===
The Queens Public Library operates the Howard Beach branch at 92-06 156th Avenue.

== Transportation ==

The New York City Subway&#x27;s Howard Beach–JFK Airport station, on the IND Rockaway Line () was formerly a Long Island Rail Road station on the Rockaway Beach Branch. Frequent fires on the trestle to Broad Channel forced the LIRR to file Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the 1950s, which allowed New York City Transit to purchase the line in 1956. The station provides a connection between the and Howard Beach JFK AirTrain route. Prior to the AirTrain JFK&#x27;s opening, the Port Authority provided a free shuttle bus to the terminals at JFK Airport.

Local bus service in the neighborhood is provided on the . All of these routes are operated by MTA Bus Company. There are also the express buses.

==Notable people==
Notable current and former residents of Howard Beach include:

* Vito Antuofermo (born 1953), former boxer and actor
* Marco Battaglia (born 1973), former American football tight end in the National Football League.
* Gene Borrello (born 1984), author, motivational speaker, podcaster, former Bonanno crime family associate, led a crew out of Howard Beach.
* DJ Skribble (born 1968), DJ, producer, remixer, radio personality and TV actor.
* Vitas Gerulaitis (1954–1994), professional tennis player
* Keith Gottfried (born 1966), former General Counsel and Chief Legal Officer of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and senior member of the administration of President George W. Bush, spent much of his childhood as a resident of Howard Beach.
* John Gotti (1940–2002), Gambino crime family head, was a resident of 85th Street in Howard Beach.
* Victoria Gotti (born 1962), John&#x27;s daughter, who starred in &quot;Growing Up Gotti&quot;
* Woody Guthrie (1912–1967), folk music legend (son Arlo Guthrie&#x27;s music is frequently copyrighted to &quot;Howard Beach Music, Inc.&quot;)
* Rick Hearst (born 1965), soap-opera actor
* James Maritato (born 1972), professional wrestler
* George Martin (born 1953), defensive end who played in the NFL for the New York Giants
* Joseph Massino (1943–2023), Bonanno crime family boss and known as the &quot;Last Godfather&quot;
* Joey Ramone (1951–2001) and his brother Mickey Leigh (born 1954) lived in Howard Beach as children.
* Pia Toscano (born 1988), top 10 contestant on &quot;American Idol&quot; Season 10.
* Karina Vetrano (1986–2016), Howard Beach resident who was murdered in Spring Creek Park.

==In popular culture==
* A 1989 TV movie was made based on the 1986 racial incident entitled &quot;Howard Beach: Making a Case for Murder&quot;.
* In the 1989 Spike Lee movie &quot;Do the Right Thing&quot;, in a riot scene near the end of the film, a chant rises up: &quot;Howard Beach! Howard Beach! Howard Beach!&quot; This immediately follows a scene wherein a young Black man is killed by police using excessive force to break up a fight.
* On &quot;The Chris Rock Show&quot;, comedian Chris Rock proposed renaming Cross Bay Boulevard after Tupac Shakur, asking the predominantly white residents of the neighborhood to sign a petition.

== See also ==
* The Hole, New York

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58981" start="0" end="12" title="Howard Beach" label="Howard Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="66" end="79" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="80" end="87" title="Borough (New York City)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="91" end="97" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487811" start="134" end="146" title="Belt Parkway" label="Belt Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159412" start="151" end="165" title="Conduit Avenue" label="Conduit Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q59030" start="169" end="179" title="Ozone Park, Queens" label="Ozone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="197" end="208" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q62484" start="212" end="225" title="Broad Channel, Queens" label="Broad Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q58987" start="265" end="281" title="South Ozone Park, Queens" label="South Ozone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294366" start="317" end="340" title="East New York, Brooklyn" label="East New York, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="379" end="408" title="Single-family detached home" label="single-family detached houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270739" start="438" end="466" title="Queens Community Board 10" label="Queens Community District 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="517" end="548" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="620" end="641" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="764" end="772" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782852" start="837" end="855" title="Aqueduct Racetrack" label="Aqueduct Racetrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="1368" end="1389" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="1418" end="1431" title="Ramblersville (LIRR station)" label="Ramblersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644847" start="2269" end="2291" title="Hamilton Beach station" label="Hamilton Beach station"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2382" end="2394" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034667" start="2574" end="2582" title="Cape Cod (house)" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254160" start="3326" end="3336" title="McMansion" label="McMansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071541" start="3448" end="3458" title="Anti-Black racism" label="anti-Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="3459" end="3470" title="Hate crime" label="hate crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108501816" start="3784" end="3798" title="New Park Pizza" label="New Park Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="3953" end="3960" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="3986" end="3994" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="4219" end="4228" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4233" end="4245" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="4939" end="4954" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="5313" end="5328" title="Hurricane Irene" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="5405" end="5416" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="5422" end="5433" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q62569" start="5502" end="5511" title="Rockaway, Queens" label="Rockaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q59030" start="5550" end="5560" title="Ozone Park, Queens" label="Ozone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="5682" end="5706" title="Howard Beach–JFK Airport station" label="Howard Beach–JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="5731" end="5748" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="5835" end="5870" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015755" start="5879" end="5923" title="New York City Office of Emergency Management" label="New York City Office of Emergency Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137507" start="6007" end="6022" title="Gerritsen Beach, Brooklyn" label="Gerritsen Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781122" start="6027" end="6035" title="Red Hook, Brooklyn" label="Red Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487811" start="6630" end="6642" title="Belt Parkway" label="Belt Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="6676" end="6687" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685678" start="6702" end="6715" title="Hawtree Creek" label="Hawtree Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487871" start="6844" end="6863" title="Woodhaven and Cross Bay Boulevards" label="Cross Bay Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101595" start="7181" end="7214" title="Joseph P. Addabbo Memorial Bridge" label="Joseph P. Addabbo Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286109" start="7230" end="7256" title="Joseph P. Addabbo" label="former U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q62484" start="7349" end="7362" title="Broad Channel, Queens" label="Broad Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7529" end="7540" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="7560" end="7570" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7580" end="7591" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="7686" end="7703" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="7715" end="7726" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685678" start="7740" end="7753" title="Hawtree Creek" label="Hawtree Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="7771" end="7782" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644848" start="8273" end="8294" title="Hamilton Beach Brands" label="Hamilton Beach Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644847" start="8339" end="8346" title="Hamilton Beach station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="8354" end="8358" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="LIRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="8366" end="8387" title="Rockaway Beach Branch" label="Rockaway Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="8452" end="8483" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="New York City Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="8705" end="8737" title="Howard Beach–JFK Airport station" label="Howard Beach-JFK Airport station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091329" start="9100" end="9103" title="Woodhaven and Cross Bay Boulevards buses" label="Q11"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="9403" end="9412" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487811" start="9547" end="9559" title="Belt Parkway" label="Belt Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="9843" end="9851" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966378" start="10096" end="10107" title="Walter Ward (politician)" label="Walter Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552286" start="10463" end="10479" title="Linden Boulevard" label="Linden Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="10573" end="10579" title="American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151376" start="10581" end="10588" title="Italians in New York City" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20310840" start="10594" end="10602" title="Hispanics and Latinos in New York" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11152" end="11167" title="Shellbank Basin" label="Shellbank Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685678" start="11172" end="11185" title="Hawtree Creek" label="Hawtree Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487871" start="11201" end="11220" title="Cross Bay Boulevard" label="Cross Bay Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468928" start="11238" end="11253" title="Walter J. Wetzel Triangle" label="Wetzel Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="12001" end="12012" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679819" start="12064" end="12075" title="Jamaica Bay" label="Jamaica Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="12204" end="12221" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="12706" end="12721" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="13003" end="13010" title="Fishing" label="Fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317251" start="13127" end="13142" title="fishing village" label="fishing village"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="13347" end="13373" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="13628" end="13662" title="Howard Beach–JFK Airport station" label="Howard Beach – JFK Airport station"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="13711" end="13732" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="13893" end="13922" title="Single-family detached home" label="single-family detached houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091329" start="14167" end="14170" title="Woodhaven and Cross Bay Boulevards buses" label="Q21"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876340" start="14262" end="14279" title="Spring Creek Park" label="Spring Creek Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="14308" end="14316" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034714" start="14501" end="14515" title="Cape Cod style" label="Cape Cod-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="14674" end="14694" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q301646" start="14700" end="14710" title="John Gotti" label="John Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254160" start="14853" end="14863" title="McMansion" label="McMansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="15020" end="15045" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="15144" end="15148" title="2000 United States census" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15276" end="15281" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15294" end="15310" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15322" end="15337" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15350" end="15355" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15364" end="15380" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15397" end="15408" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15447" end="15455" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15459" end="15465" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="15715" end="15725" title="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene" label="NYC Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591167" start="16153" end="16169" title="household income" label="household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="16797" end="16808" title="gentrification" label="gentrifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="16857" end="16869" title="New York State Senate" label="State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6280908" start="16895" end="16913" title="Joseph Addabbo Jr." label="Joseph Addabbo Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="16928" end="16942" title="New York State Assembly" label="State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370236" start="16968" end="16988" title="Stacey Pheffer Amato" label="Stacey Pheffer Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="17023" end="17044" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q109373922" start="17061" end="17073" title="Joann Ariola" label="Joann Ariola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305983" start="17086" end="17099" title="redistricting" label="redistricting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13858947" start="17148" end="17151" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district" label="5th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012913" start="17156" end="17182" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district" label="8th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545391" start="17373" end="17386" title="Gregory Meeks" label="Gregory Meeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640425" start="17391" end="17406" title="Hakeem Jeffries" label="Hakeem Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="17544" end="17548" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="17869" end="17882" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="18385" end="18414" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="18722" end="18735" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691094" start="19170" end="19179" title="Health insurance coverage in the United States" label="uninsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="19312" end="19335" title="particulates" label="fine particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="19359" end="19372" title="air pollution" label="air pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="19510" end="19517" title="Smoking" label="smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="19650" end="19655" title="Obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="19665" end="19673" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="19688" end="19707" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="20227" end="20234" title="convenience store" label="bodegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974388" start="20269" end="20317" title="Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center" label="Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="20321" end="20329" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354861" start="20334" end="20350" title="Jamaica Hospital" label="Jamaica Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="20354" end="20361" title="Jamaica, Queens" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="20425" end="20433" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="20445" end="20473" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="21462" end="21473" title="school year" label="school year"/>
<link wikidata="Q867353" start="21799" end="21833" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218210" start="22358" end="22380" title="John Adams High School (Queens)" label="John Adams High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875691" start="22450" end="22475" title="Beach Channel High School" label="Beach Channel High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q62296" start="22479" end="22492" title="Rockaway Park, Queens" label="Rockaway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108989" start="22527" end="22542" title="Christ the King Regional High School" label="Christ the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587981" start="22544" end="22560" title="St. Francis Prep" label="St. Francis Prep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607094" start="22562" end="22574" title="Stella Maris High School" label="Stella Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706159" start="22578" end="22595" title="Archbishop Molloy" label="Archbishop Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337750" start="22882" end="22903" title="Queens Public Library" label="Queens Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="22987" end="23007" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="23015" end="23039" title="Howard Beach–JFK Airport (IND Rockaway Line)" label="Howard Beach–JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972266" start="23056" end="23073" title="IND Rockaway Line" label="IND Rockaway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="23092" end="23113" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354947" start="23129" end="23150" title="Rockaway Beach Branch" label="Rockaway Beach Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q653401" start="23174" end="23181" title="Trestle bridge" label="trestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="23284" end="23305" title="New York City Transit" label="New York City Transit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23386" end="23417" title="AirTrain JFK#Routes" label="Howard Beach JFK AirTrain route"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="23465" end="23479" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="23528" end="23539" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="23637" end="23652" title="MTA Bus Company" label="MTA Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q961548" start="23773" end="23788" title="Vito Antuofermo" label="Vito Antuofermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757467" start="23827" end="23842" title="Marco Battaglia" label="Marco Battaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="23863" end="23880" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153176" start="23881" end="23890" title="tight end" label="tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="23898" end="23922" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q108449042" start="23926" end="23939" title="Gene Borrello" label="Gene Borrello"/>
<link wikidata="Q892085" start="24001" end="24021" title="Bonanno crime family" label="Bonanno crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205455" start="24067" end="24078" title="DJ Skribble" label="DJ Skribble"/>
<link wikidata="Q53547" start="24149" end="24165" title="Vitas Gerulaitis" label="Vitas Gerulaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384418" start="24208" end="24223" title="Keith Gottfried" label="Keith Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="24291" end="24339" title="U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="24393" end="24407" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q301646" start="24470" end="24480" title="John Gotti" label="John Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="24494" end="24514" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926735" start="24570" end="24584" title="Victoria Gotti" label="Victoria Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611662" start="24641" end="24657" title="Growing Up Gotti" label="Growing Up Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="24666" end="24679" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="24693" end="24703" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q552925" start="24716" end="24728" title="Arlo Guthrie" label="Arlo Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q364805" start="24811" end="24822" title="Rick Hearst" label="Rick Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260305" start="24855" end="24869" title="James Maritato" label="James Maritato"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="24883" end="24904" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542170" start="24907" end="24920" title="George Martin (American football)" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="24978" end="24993" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094605" start="24996" end="25010" title="Joseph Massino" label="Joseph Massino"/>
<link wikidata="Q892085" start="25024" end="25044" title="Bonanno crime family" label="Bonanno crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q312387" start="25096" end="25107" title="Joey Ramone" label="Joey Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311856" start="25136" end="25148" title="Mickey Leigh" label="Mickey Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132136" start="25198" end="25209" title="Pia Toscano" label="Pia Toscano"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="25250" end="25263" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q29469876" start="25283" end="25297" title="Murder of Karina Vetrano" label="Karina Vetrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876340" start="25353" end="25370" title="Spring Creek Park (New York City)" label="Spring Creek Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="25405" end="25413" title="TV movie" label="TV movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="25532" end="25541" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141252" start="25554" end="25572" title="Do the Right Thing" label="Do the Right Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722700" start="25827" end="25846" title="The Chris Rock Show" label="The Chris Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109" start="25863" end="25873" title="Chris Rock" label="Chris Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107" start="25918" end="25930" title="Tupac Shakur" label="Tupac Shakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739936" start="26031" end="26049" title="The Hole, New York" label="The Hole, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849321" wikidata="Q1196527" url="?curid=849321" title="Suburban Commando">
<text>Suburban Commando is a 1991 American science fiction action comedy film directed by Burt Kennedy, produced by Howard Gottfried, and written by Frank Cappello. The film stars Hulk Hogan, Christopher Lloyd, Shelley Duvall, and Larry Miller. Additionally, a young Elisabeth Moss briefly appears in her film debut.

The film was originally titled &quot;Urban Commando&quot;, and was intended for Danny DeVito and Arnold Schwarzenegger. When these two opted to make &quot;Twins&quot; (1988), the script was bought by New Line Cinema as the follow-up to another Hulk Hogan film, &quot;No Holds Barred&quot;.

In the film, an extraterrestrial warrior botches a part of his mission. He is subsequently instructed to take a vacation, and causes damages to his own control systems while reacting in frustration. He crash-lands on planet Earth, and finds himself stranded there until his spaceship recharges itself. He unintentionally gets his new landlords involved in conflicts with his foes.

==Plot==
Interstellar warrior Shep Ramsey (Hulk Hogan) is on a mission to capture intergalactic despot General Suitor (William Ball). The general has kidnapped planetary ruler President Hashina. Shep boards Suitor&#x27;s flagship but is unable to rescue Hashina, who is killed by Suitor. Wounded by Hashina in the process, Suitor transforms into a berserk reptilian creature (Frank Welker). Shep barely escapes, but is able to blow up the ship as he does so.

Due to his failure to save the President, Shep&#x27;s superior officer suggests that he is &quot;stressed out&quot; and should take a vacation. Annoyed, Shep accidentally smashes his control systems and is forced to crash-land on Earth, where he will have to stay until his spaceship has repaired itself. Shep has little knowledge of Earth&#x27;s customs, and his temper and sense of justice cause problems with the people he meets, especially a mime artist he tries to help in various comical fashions.

Charlie Wilcox (Christopher Lloyd) is a weak-willed architect working for the fawning and hypocritical Adrian Beltz (Larry Miller). His wife Jenny (Shelley Duvall) unsuccessfully encourages him to stand up for himself and unsuccessfully tells Charlie to ask Beltz for a raise. In order to help out financially, she rents out Charlie&#x27;s hobby shed as a vacation cabin, which Shep leases. Shep&#x27;s appearance and behavior make Charlie nervous, and he begins to spy on his guest. He soon discovers Shep&#x27;s advanced equipment and begins experimenting with it, not knowing that the power sources are traceable. Its whereabouts are tracked by Suitor&#x27;s men, who send a pair of intergalactic bounty hunters Knuckles and Hutch after Shep. Shep also requires several rare crystals to fix his ship, the closest samples of which can be found in Beltz&#x27;s office. Charlie helps Shep get into his boss&#x27;s office during a company party before the bounty hunters corner them. After winning a furious fight, Shep and Charlie head home to repair the ship.

After the bounty hunters&#x27; defeat, Suitor, who has escaped the destruction of his ship, arrives on Earth. He takes Charlie&#x27;s family hostage, forcing Charlie to lead him to Shep. To protect Charlie and his family, Shep decides to use a &quot;lose to win&quot; tactic by setting his ship to self-destruct and surrendering to Suitor, in exchange for releasing the Wilcox family. Suitor then begins torturing Shep, enjoying himself before he intends to kill the warrior. Finding his courage, Charlie returns to help Shep and injures Suitor, who then turns into his monstrous form. Physically outmatched, Shep stuns Suitor with some electrical wires, and he and Charlie manage to escape the ship&#x27;s explosion, which destroys Suitor for good.

Shep leaves Earth using the bounty hunters&#x27; ship. He takes Beltz&#x27;s secretary, Margie, with him, hoping for a quiet family life. Charlie in turn has become bolder from his experiences; he appears in Beltz&#x27;s office the following morning, shouting at his boss in front of witnesses, and finally quits his thankless job. Later, Charlie solves his final problem by using one of Shep&#x27;s weapons to destroy an annoying set of traffic lights that never changed at the right time, receiving cheers from the other motorists.

==Cast==

* Hulk Hogan as Shep Ramsey
* Christopher Lloyd as Charlie Wilcox
* Shelley Duvall as Jenny Wilcox
* Michael Faustino as Mark Wilcox
* Laura Mooney as Theresa Wilcox
* Larry Miller as Adrian Beltz
* Dennis Burkley as Deak
* Branscombe Richmond as Biker
* William Ball as General Suitor; his mutant form is played by Vincent Hammond; Frank Welker provided the uncredited vocals for Suitor&#x27;s true form as aforementioned
* Jack Elam as Colonel Dustin &quot;Dusty&quot; McHowell
* Elisabeth Moss as Little Girl
* Tom Morga as Mime
* Jo Ann Dearing as Margie Tanen
* Roy Dotrice as Zanuck
* Tony Longo as Knuckles
* Mark Calaway as Hutch
==Reception==

===Box office===
The film opened with $1.9 million. Overall, the film grossed a total of $8,002,361 in the United States. With a budget of $11 million, the film was a commercial failure.

===Critical response===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 15% based on 13 reviews.

Roger Ebert noted, &quot;This is the second feature starring Hulk Hogan, the man who looks like a comic strip hero. Hogan&#x27;s range is limited, but not as limited as the movies he&#x27;s appeared in. Despite the fact that his public image is often aimed at children - there&#x27;s a whole line of Hulk Hogan toys - his first film, &quot;No Holds Barred&quot; (1989) was surprisingly violent, sexist and blood-soaked. Now here&#x27;s &#x27;Suburban Commando&#x27;, which is at least innocuous, but which gives the Hulkster so little to do that his fans may wonder why he bothered.&quot; Michael Wilmington opened his review for it in the Los Angeles Times by saying that all the main personnel were &quot;likeable&quot; but that &quot;all that likability combined, or even cubed, doesn&#x27;t create any pressing reason to pay admission to &quot;Suburban Commando&quot; - unless you&#x27;re an obsessed movie completist or a sudden cloudburst drives you to shelter.&quot; Stephen Holden of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, noted that despite the fact that it &quot;has little narrative continuity, it is well paced and has an amusingly sour performance by Larry Miller as the kind of boss you love to hate.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Suburban Commando&quot; review on the When Wrestlers Act podcast. Archived from the original on 2015-03-07.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="37" end="52" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53" end="71" title="action film#Action-comedy" label="action comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q786712" start="84" end="96" title="Burt Kennedy" label="Burt Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15816057" start="110" end="126" title="Howard Gottfried" label="Howard Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485667" start="143" end="157" title="Frank Cappello" label="Frank Cappello"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="174" end="184" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="186" end="203" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q235478" start="205" end="219" title="Shelley Duvall" label="Shelley Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q943028" start="225" end="237" title="Larry Miller (comedian)" label="Larry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q233466" start="261" end="275" title="Elisabeth Moss" label="Elisabeth Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="392" end="404" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="409" end="430" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q785157" start="467" end="472" title="Twins (1988 film)" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="512" end="527" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194108" start="579" end="594" title="No Holds Barred (1989 film)" label="No Holds Barred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307329" start="619" end="635" title="Extraterrestrials in fiction" label="extraterrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250916" start="636" end="643" title="warrior" label="warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074121" start="805" end="816" title="crash-lands" label="crash-lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="827" end="832" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="1028" end="1038" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004990" start="1104" end="1116" title="William Ball (director)" label="William Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q296577" start="1361" end="1373" title="Frank Welker" label="Frank Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q674067" start="1891" end="1902" title="mime artist" label="mime artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="1966" end="1983" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="2002" end="2011" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="2040" end="2052" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocritical"/>
<link wikidata="Q943028" start="2067" end="2079" title="Larry Miller (comedian)" label="Larry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q235478" start="2098" end="2112" title="Shelley Duvall" label="Shelley Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q621613" start="2650" end="2663" title="bounty hunter" label="bounty hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="4310" end="4320" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="4338" end="4355" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q235478" start="4376" end="4390" title="Shelley Duvall" label="Shelley Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q943028" start="4476" end="4488" title="Larry Miller (comedian)" label="Larry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189009" start="4507" end="4521" title="Dennis Burkley" label="Dennis Burkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131866" start="4532" end="4551" title="Branscombe Richmond" label="Branscombe Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004990" start="4563" end="4575" title="William Ball (director)" label="William Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q296577" start="4641" end="4653" title="Frank Welker" label="Frank Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q500155" start="4733" end="4742" title="Jack Elam" label="Jack Elam"/>
<link wikidata="Q233466" start="4790" end="4804" title="Elisabeth Moss" label="Elisabeth Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816937" start="4822" end="4831" title="Tom Morga" label="Tom Morga"/>
<link wikidata="Q929933" start="4875" end="4886" title="Roy Dotrice" label="Roy Dotrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531810" start="4899" end="4909" title="Tony Longo" label="Tony Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="4924" end="4936" title="The Undertaker" label="Mark Calaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="5176" end="5191" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="5253" end="5264" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194108" start="5593" end="5608" title="No Holds Barred (1989 film)" label="No Holds Barred"/>
<link wikidata="Q551993" start="6227" end="6241" title="Stephen Holden" label="Stephen Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6251" end="6269" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849322" wikidata="Q2901355" url="?curid=849322" title="Chetham's Library">
<text>Chetham&#x27;s Library in Manchester, England, is the oldest free public reference library in the English-speaking world. Chetham&#x27;s Hospital, which contains both the library and Chetham&#x27;s School of Music, was established in 1653 under the will of Humphrey Chetham (1580–1653), for the education of &quot;the sons of honest, industrious and painful parents&quot;, and a library for the use of scholars. The library has been in continuous use since 1653. It operates as an independent charity. 

The library holds more than 100,000 volumes of printed books, of which 60,000 were published before 1851 including a copy of the Nuremberg Chronicle annotated by Thomas Gudlawe. Collections include 16th- and 17th-century printed works, periodicals and journals, local history sources, broadsides and ephemera. In addition to print materials, the library holds a collection of over 1,000 manuscripts, including 41 medieval texts.

Chetham&#x27;s Library is an Accredited Museum under the Arts Council England Accreditation scheme. The whole of its collections are Designated as a collection of national and international importance under the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council Designation scheme, now administered by Arts Council England.

Paintings featured as a part of the library&#x27;s fine arts collection include portraits of William Whitaker, the Reverend John Radcliffe, Robert Thyer, the Reverend Francis Robert Raines, and Elizabeth Leigh. The collection includes &quot;An Allegory with Putti and Satyrs&quot;, oil on canvas, attributed to 16th-century artist and Netherlander Vincent Sellaer.

One of the most substantial collections pertains to Belle Vue Zoo and Gardens, Manchester&#x27;s most renowned entertainment attraction and zoological centre, in operation from the 1830s to the 1980s. The collection contains thousands of posters, programmes and photographs, as well as the financial and business papers of the owner, John Jennison; large numbers of items in this collection are available in digitised form online. A 2014 grant of £45,000 obtained by Chetham&#x27;s Library allowed curators to make the collection available to online users, via digitization projects.

==Access==
The library is open to readers free of charge, Monday-Friday 09.00-12.30 and 13.30-16.30 by prior appointment. Tours of the library for visitors are bookable online via the library website.

==Catalogues and finding aids==
Catalogues of printed items and of archives and manuscripts held at Chetham&#x27;s Library are provided online.

==History==

The manor house of the Lord of the Manor, in the centre of the medieval town of Manchester, stood on a sandstone bluff, at the confluence of the River Irwell and the River Irk. In 1421 the rector of the parish church, Thomas de la Warre (Lord of the manor of Manchester), obtained a licence from Henry V to refound the church as a collegiate foundation. He donated his manor house for use as the college of priests&#x27; buildings for the collegiate church (later to be the cathedral). There was accommodation for the warden, eight fellows, four clerks, and six choristers.

The Manchester Free Grammar School for Lancashire Boys was built between the church and the college buildings between 1515 and 1518. The college was dissolved in 1547 by the Chantries Act and sold to the Earl of Derby. It was re-founded as a catholic foundation by Queen Mary and again disbanded by Protestant Queen Elizabeth I. In 1578 the collegiate church was re-founded by charter as Christ&#x27;s College and re-occupied by the warden and fellows. In the Civil War it was used as a prison and arsenal.

In 1653 the college buildings were bought with the bequest of Humphrey Chetham, for use as a free library and blue coat charity school. At that time there was no facility for independent study in the north of England and Chetham&#x27;s will of 1651 had stipulated that the Library should be &quot;for the use of schollars and others well affected&quot;, and instructed the librarian &quot;to require nothing of any man that cometh into the library&quot;. The 24 feoffees appointed by Humphrey Chetham set out to acquire a major collection of books and manuscripts that would cover the whole range of available knowledge and would rival the college libraries of Oxford and Cambridge. In order to protect the newly acquired books from rising damp the Library was housed on the first floor and, in accordance with the provisions of Chetham&#x27;s will, the books were chained to the presses (bookcases). Twenty-four carved oak stools with S-shaped hand-holds (which are still in use) were provided as seats for readers.

In 1718 the feoffees offered the Manchester poet and inventor of a system of shorthand, John Byrom, the post of Library Keeper. Byrom, who was an avid collector of books, declined the offer but after his good friend, Robert Thyer, became Librarian in 1732, frequently acted as an agent for the library, purchasing books at London auctions. Byrom&#x27;s library, which included the manuscript of his poem &quot;Christmas Day&quot; (which became the Christmas carol, &quot;Christians Awake&quot;) and some 2,800 printed books, was presented to the library by his descendant, Eleanora Atherton, in 1870.

The books were originally uncatalogued and placed in the presses in size order. The first catalogue wasn&#x27;t produced until 1791, and then was written in Latin and only listed the size and subject of each book. The practice of chaining the books was abandoned in the mid eighteenth century when gates were erected to prevent theft. 

Chetham&#x27;s was the meeting place of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels when Marx visited Manchester in the summer of 1845. Facsimiles of the economics books they studied can be seen on a table in the window alcove where they would meet. The research they undertook during this series of visits to the library led ultimately to their work, &quot;The Communist Manifesto&quot;. Therefore, the library acts as a site of historical importance for visiting communists.

Additions were made to the buildings by J. E. Gregan (1850s), Alfred Waterhouse (1878) (grade II listed), and J. Medland Taylor (1883–95). Manchester Grammar School was extended along Long Millgate in 1870. Manchester Grammar School moved to Fallowfield in the 1930s, and after standing empty for many years the original building was destroyed during the Second World War, leaving only its new block. This became part of Chetham&#x27;s School of Music in 1978. The old college building, which became the music school in 1969, still incorporates Chetham&#x27;s Library and is Grade I listed. A fragment of a 17th century cross was relocated to the library&#x27;s gardens in 1913, and is listed at Grade II.

===Librarians===
Past librarians include Robert Thyer (1709–1781), who became Librarian in 1732. Peter Hordern (died 1836) was librarian and also the minister of St Clement&#x27;s Chapel, Chorlton. Thomas Jones held the position from 1845 to 1875; during his time, the size of the library more than doubled (from 19,000 volumes to 40,000 volumes). He also produced a two-volume catalogue of the library&#x27;s collection in 1862 and 1863.

==See also==

*Francis Trigge Chained Library

==References==
==Sources==

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*Chetham&#x27;s Library website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2901355" start="0" end="22" title="Chetham&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Chetham&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="26" end="36" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577898" start="183" end="213" title="Chetham&amp;#x27;s School of Music" label="Chetham&amp;#x27;s School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941334" start="257" end="273" title="Humphrey Chetham" label="Humphrey Chetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q907934" start="633" end="652" title="Nuremberg Chronicle" label="Nuremberg Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433985" start="789" end="798" title="broadside (printing)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523267" start="804" end="812" title="ephemera" label="ephemera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400795" start="991" end="1011" title="Arts Council England" label="Arts Council England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941133" start="1145" end="1184" title="Museums, Libraries and Archives Council" label="Museums, Libraries and Archives Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400795" start="1225" end="1245" title="Arts Council England" label="Arts Council England"/>
<link wikidata="Q17485721" start="1388" end="1400" title="Robert Thyer" label="Robert Thyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482317" start="1415" end="1436" title="Francis Robert Raines" label="Francis Robert Raines"/>
<link wikidata="Q939699" start="1596" end="1611" title="Vincent Sellaer" label="Vincent Sellaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883720" start="1666" end="1679" title="Belle Vue Zoo" label="Belle Vue Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="2582" end="2599" title="Lord of the Manor" label="Lord of the Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="2662" end="2671" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="2672" end="2677" title="Cliff" label="bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q47901" start="2704" end="2716" title="River Irwell" label="River Irwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154474" start="2725" end="2734" title="River Irk" label="River Irk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795508" start="2777" end="2795" title="Thomas la Warr, 5th Baron De La Warr" label="Thomas de la Warre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="2855" end="2862" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="2998" end="3015" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q971811" start="3033" end="3042" title="Manchester Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747415" start="3138" end="3188" title="Manchester Grammar School" label="Manchester Free Grammar School for Lancashire Boys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3308" end="3321" title="Chantry#Abolition of Chantries Acts, 1545 and 1547" label="Chantries Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277265" start="3338" end="3351" title="Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="3399" end="3409" title="Mary I of England" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3444" end="3461" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3594" end="3603" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576531" start="3752" end="3776" title="charity school" label="blue coat charity school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443723" start="4104" end="4112" title="feoffees" label="feoffees"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="4737" end="4746" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360179" start="4748" end="4758" title="John Byrom" label="John Byrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17485721" start="4877" end="4889" title="Robert Thyer" label="Robert Thyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576110" start="5233" end="5250" title="Eleanora Atherton" label="Eleanora Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="5639" end="5648" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="5653" end="5669" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q40591" start="5944" end="5967" title="The Communist Manifesto" label="The Communist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q339830" start="6126" end="6143" title="Alfred Waterhouse" label="Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q637582" start="6306" end="6317" title="Fallowfield" label="Fallowfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="6639" end="6653" title="Grade I listed" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="6684" end="6689" title="Christian cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="6959" end="6967" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791381" start="6969" end="6981" title="Thomas Jones (librarian)" label="Thomas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482622" start="7226" end="7256" title="Francis Trigge Chained Library" label="Francis Trigge Chained Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849323" wikidata="Q1003178" url="?curid=849323" title="Roscrea">
<text>Roscrea () is a market town in County Tipperary, Ireland. In 2022 it had a population of 5,542. Roscrea is one of the oldest towns in Ireland, having developed around the 7th century monastery of Saint Crónán of Roscrea, parts of which remain preserved today. The town is in a civil parish of the same name.

Roscrea is a designated &quot;Irish Heritage Town&quot; due to the extent of important historical buildings that are preserved in the town. Amongst the most notable buildings of interest are the 13th century Roscrea Castle and Damer House on Castle Street. Within the town are the remains of the ancient Romanesque doorway and gable-end of St Cronan&#x27;s church. The Round Tower and the 12the century High cross of the ancient monastery are also located nearby. Also of interest in the town are the remains of the 15th century Franciscan Friary and Monaincha and Sean Ross Abbeys. One of the most famous books produced by the monastery is the 8th-century Book of Dimma currently on display at Trinity College, Dublin.

==Location and access==
Roscrea is located in North Tipperary, situated very close to the border with County Offaly. It is located in Ireland&#x27;s Mid-West Region in a valley between Devil&#x27;s Bit mountain to the south west and the Slieve Bloom mountains to the north east. It is from Limerick City in the west and from Dublin City in the east. It is at the crossroads of the R445 regional road and the N62 between Athlone and Horse and Jockey.

The Slieve Bloom Mountains reach as far as Roscrea.

Historically, Roscrea was noted as being on one of the ancient highways of Ireland known as the &#x27;Slighe Dala&#x27; (meaning parliament way) which stretched from Tara in the east to the city and port of Limerick and the port of Tarbert. It is possible the route formed much of the old N7 route now the R445 which originally passed through the town.

==Transport==
Roscrea is well connected by bus routes. Bus Éireann route 12 links Dublin and Limerick with connections available hourly. A private bus contractor, JJ Kavanagh and Sons, provides extra bus services to Dublin and Limerick.

Local Link Tipperary operates bus service 854 between Roscrea railway station and Nenagh with intermediate stops in Shinrone, Cloughjordan, Moneygall and Toomevara. The service operates three times a day in each direction seven days a week.

Roscrea railway station is on the Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line between Ballybrophy and Cloughjordan. At Ballybrophy it joins the main Cork-Dublin line. At one time there was a branch from Roscrea to nearby Birr in County Offaly. Roscrea railway station opened on 19 October 1857.

A January 2012 national newspaper article suggested that Iarnród Éireann was expected to seek permission from the National Transport Authority to close the Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line. An enhanced timetable was operated between February 2012 and January 2013 before services were downgraded again.

==Features==
 from the town is a Cistercian monastery, Mount St. Joseph Abbey, and a boarding school for boys, Cistercian College.

==Buildings of note==
The Round Tower in Church Street is a national monument in state ownership. In addition there are several other buildings and structures in Roscrea listed on the National Inventory of Architectural Heritage including, 
*Damer House, listed as being of special architectural, artistic, archaeological, historical and social interest.
*Roscrea railway station is listed as being of special architectural and social interest. 
*The railway signal box is listed as being of special architectural interest.
*Former Quaker meetinghouse listed as being of architectural and social interest.
*The 19th Century Fancy Fountain now located in Rosemary Square is listed as being of artistic, social and technical interest.

==History==
===Early history and medieval period c. 550 – c. 1500===
Roscrea has historically been an important trading town. The settlement grew around an ancient church or monastery, founded by St. Cronan in the late 6th century. The town is situated strategically in a gap in the hills on one of the great ancient roads of Ireland, the Slighe Dála. It became an important ecclesiastical centre evidenced by the beautiful west gable of a Romanesque church, a 12th-century sculptured High Cross, and a round tower also built during the 12th century. The round tower has a doorway from the ground and is the oldest surviving part of the ancient monastery. The usual conical cap is missing as the tower was shortened by around when it was used by snipers in the 1798 rebellion. The 8th century &quot;Book of Dimma&quot;, which belonged to Roscrea monastery, is preserved in Trinity College, Dublin. It contains a copy of the Gospels and a &quot;Missa Infirmorum&quot;, and is enclosed in a shrine of bronze with silver plates ornamented with Celtic interlacing.

In 1812, the Romanesque church was demolished with the exception of the west gable and its stones used for the erection of the current St. Cronan&#x27;s parish church of the Church of Ireland at the same site. The church was designed by the Roscrea architect James Sheane and restored under the supervision of Sir Thomas Newenham Deane in 1879. Records show that John Wesley, one of the founders of the Methodist movement, preached in Roscrea on 26 June 1750. Roscrea was one of the main settlements in the ancient and medieval Munster kingdom of Éile (commonly anglicised as Ely) and was briefly a diocesan see in the 12th century, before the superior power of the O&#x27;Briens ensured that the Roscrea was incorporated into the diocese of Killaloe.
King John I of England (reigned 1199–1216) is credited with having erected a castle at Roscrea in 1213, of which a circular tower and some sections of wall are still extant; such castles were built as part of a policy to consolidate the Norman conquest of the midlands. In 1209 King John&#x27;s officials established twelve shires or counties in Leinster and Munster, one of which was Tipperary, covering areas of English settlement such as Roscrea. Within county Tipperary there were fourteen baronies; Roscrea was the chief town in the barony of Ikerrin; baronies became obsolete after the Local Government Act (1898), which set up county and borough/town councils. From the mid-14th century (particularly after the Black Death) and 15th century native Irish influence the areas outside of the English Pale revived, strengthened by the intermarrying of the Norman aristocracy with the native Irish aristocracy.

The building of a castle at Roscrea was the subject of dispute between the king&#x27;s representatives and the bishops of Killaloe until 1280, as the castle was built on church land without the bishop&#x27;s permission. Though the castle was built as a royal castle, it was often in the hands of the Butlers as they controlled the surrounding lands and was close to Nenagh, where the Butlers had one of their principal castles. The castle was rebuilt in stone between 1276 and 1281, probably as part of King Edward I&#x27;s orders to secure safe storage and transport of mined silver from the Silvermines to the west of Nenagh. Large-scale mining of silver ceased at the Silvermines in the early 14th century following disputes with local people and as a result of Gaelic resurgence in the area. The later rectangular gate house, known as Ormonde Castle, was built by James Butler, 4th Earl of Ormond sometime before 1450[15] and still stands today. There are also references to a gaol in Roscrea Castle during the period c. 1280–1315.
There is no surviving reference to the granting of a royal charter for the founding of Roscrea and it is likely that the town began to grow around the castle in the 13th century, adding to the existing ecclesiastical settlements. There are references to &#x27;the burgesses of Roscrea&#x27;, two mills and a town oven, which is accepted as proof that Roscrea was a medieval town. In 1315, when Sir Edmund Butler was created 1st earl of Carrick (he later distinguished himself during the Bruce Invasion of Ireland), he was granted the castle and manors of Carrick and Roscrea, along with the attached lands. The castle remained in the Butler earl of Ormond&#x27;s possession until it was sold by the 2nd duke of Ormond in 1703. The earls of Ormond had good relations with the local Éile (Ely) O&#x27;Carroll family, the ancient Gaelic lords of the area, and intermarried with them. The earls were largely absent from Ireland between c. 1464–1514, being engaged in the Wars of the Roses in England, and left the running of their lands to junior members of their extended family. Today the Catholic church of St. Cronin is built close to the site of a ruined Franciscan friary, which was founded by the O&#x27;Carrolls about 1477. Some portion of the walls of the old Friary has been retained in the modern church building.
===Early modern period to 19th century===
The expanding power of the O&#x27;Brien earls of Thomand from the West and the Fitzgerald earls of Kildare from the east caused a weakening of Butler authority and to Roscrea being controlled by the Gaelic lords of Éile, the O&#x27;Carroll&#x27;s, for several decades. Despite attempts of the Butlers to re-conquer northern Tipperary in the 1530s a manuscript in the National Library, probably dating from the time of the Irish &#x27;Reformation Parliament&#x27; of 1536–37 describes Roscrea as being then by &#x27;Irishmen wasted, and not valuable&#x27;. The whole of northern and western Tipperary freed itself from Butler power after the death of the 9th earl of Ormond in 1546 and Roscrea remained virtually uninhabited for some years. The O&#x27;Carrolls fought wars with the Butlers in 1556–57, 1560–61 and 1564–66 but it was not until &#x27;Black Tom&#x27; Butler, the 10th earl of Ormond, returned home from England that Roscrea was again under the control of the Butlers. During this time Roscrea lay on the northern edge of the County Palatinate of Tipperary (a territorial area administered from Kilkenny in which legal jurisdiction was held by Butler Earls of Ormond, rather than the King, but with royal permission). One of the benefits was that the Earl appointed the local judges and sheriffs to administer the law in Roscrea and gave the town some protection during this turbulent period. The plantations of King&#x27;s County (now Offaly) and Queen&#x27;s County (now Laois) from 1556 and the failure of the two Desmond Rebellions (1569–1573 and 1579–1583) saw the Gaelic lands to the north, west and south of Roscrea increasingly fall into New English hands.

The friary at Roscrea, which had escaped dissolution, was finally suppressed in 1579. The conclusion of the Nine Years&#x27; War (1594–1603), again lost by the Gaelic Irish, brought some stability to Ireland however the commencement of the plantations from 1606 set the scene for the great 1641 rebellion. The development of the town was affected by the Ormond succession dispute which broke out in 1614. During this time Roscrea was leased out by the earls of Ormond first to Gerard fitz Lewis Bryan and then Sir George Hamilton Sr. and Jr. The castle was taken by Owen Roe O&#x27;Neill in 1649 during the Irish Confederate Wars (1641–1653) and was recaptured by Cromwellian troops in 1650. The castle, town, lands and friary of Roscrea were granted to Sir Francis Peisley in 1659 for 21 years. The town was not caught up in the Williamite Wars (1689–91) and though orders were issued to have the castle demolished to prevent it from falling into rebel hands in the future they were later rescinded. In 1703 the 2nd duke of Ormond sold the town to Robert Curtis, the Tipperary Palatinate was abolished by the Dublin parliament following the defection of the 2nd duke to join the English Catholic monarchy in exile in Louis XIV&#x27;s France in 1714. John Damer purchased the town in 1722 and soon after building Damer House within the walls of the castle. During the 18th century Joseph Damer (created Baron Milton in 1762 and later created the Earl of Dorchester in 1792) owned Roscrea but the titles died out on the death of his son the 2nd earl of Dorchester in 1808. Damer House and the castle became a military barracks and in 1811 was garrisoned by permanent cavalry (1 officer, 21 privates and 16 horses) and permanent infantry (8 officers and 345 privates). When Damer&#x27;s daughter died in 1828 the Damer estates (possibly over of land) were inherited by his grand-nephew John Dawson 2nd earl of Portarlington. Dawson died in considerable debt in 1844/5, Court of Chancery records from 1863 describe the estate of Roscrea in 1844 as comprising worth £3,882 in rent yearly. The town was then sold for £20,000 to the Irish Landed Estates Court which eventually sold the town in a succession of land sales from the mid-19th century, including the town and two town parks of Roscrea in 1858. Most of the town was sold to R.S. Palmer in March 1859 and July 1860. It is from this time that much of the modern town of Roscrea was constructed.

Roscrea Poor law union was declared in 1839 and covered an area of ; 37 &#x27;Guardians&#x27; oversaw the operations of Union. The Union was responsible for a population of 61,374 in 1831 – it covered Bourney, Borrisnafarney, Killea, Killevinogue, Rathnaveoge, Roscrea, Agahancon, Cullenwale, Dunkerrin, Ettagh, Kilcommon, Kilmurry, Roscomroe, Shinrone, Borris-in-Ossory, Doanmore, Eirke, Kyle and Rathdowney until after boundary changes following the famine in 1853 (spellings of placenames are repeated from original records). A new Roscrea Union workhouse was erected on a site around outside of the town on the Templemore road adjacent to Corville. The workhouse could accommodate up to 700 &#x27;inmates&#x27; and was declared fit for the reception of paupers in March 1842; it received its first admissions during May 1842. During the famine, an additional 200 people were accommodated in the workhouse and a fever hospital was built on the site around this time. A large graveyard, probably containing the remains of hundreds of people who died in the Great Famine, was situated behind the workhouse to the south of Kennedy Park. The workhouse was partially demolished and altered, it became a fever hospital and a &#x27;County Home&quot;for the &#x27;aged and infirm&quot;. It was closed in 1985/6 and demolished c. 1991.
== Demographics ==
While the population of Roscrea appeared to have reached its maximum in the 1830s (see below), this was exceeded in the 2022 census of Ireland. In 1885 a wool merchant from the neighbouring town of Birr reported to the House of Commons Select Committee on Industries (Ireland) that in the early decades of the 19th century 1,000 men were employed in Roscrea as weavers and wool combers, but that by the early 1880s this number had dropped to just 2.

Historical and Current Population of Roscrea:


In 2022, there were 5,542 people residing in Roscrea. In 2022, according to the CSO, the town is 72.4% White Irish and 2.7% Irish Traveller, 14.9% White of any other background, 0.3% Black, 2.05% Asian, 0.9% any other racial background, and 5.5% not stated.

=== Annalistic references ===
See Annals of Inisfallen (AI)
* &quot;AI761.1 Kl. Suairlech, abbot of Bennchor, and Daniél, abbot of Ros Cré, fell asleep.&quot;
* &quot;AI952.1 Kl. Repose of Orthanach, abbot of Ros Cré.&quot;
* &quot;AI1009.3 Muiredach Ua Maenaig, abbot of Ros Cré, went on his pilgrimage.&quot;
* &quot;AI1012.5 Repose of Loingsech son of Lonán, abbot of Ros Cré.&quot;

==Commerce==
The main employer in the town is Glanbia which makes and distributes meats product all over the world. In 2008 Glanbia sold off its pork operations. The 2 former Glanbia plants in Roscrea are now part of the Rosderra Irish Meats Group. It still uses the Glanbia brand under licence. This enterprise grew out of the Roscrea Bacon Factory, established in the late 1800s as one of the first cooperatives in Ireland, with legal underpinnings established by local solicitor Charles J Spain. Taro Pharmaceuticals was a sterile pharmaceutical injectables manufacturing plant in the town that employed approximately 30 people. The plant has since closed. FRS Network is a large employer with over 100 people employed across its varying divisions. Some people travel to Nenagh to work in the Procter &amp; Gamble factory there. Some make lengthy commutes to Dublin or Limerick for work. Shannon Development has a business park near Ashbury in the town. This houses local businesses like Walsh Printers and JS Hygiene (Upholstery cleaning). The other business park is at Benamore on the Dublin road. Dunnes Stores developed the site of the maltings into a large retail unit. The new Tesco supermarket was built in close proximity to the Round Tower, leading to queries about compliance with planning rules.

==Education==
The town is home to several educational institutions. Primary Schools include St. Cronan’s National School, Scoil Eoin Naofa, Scoil Íosaf Naofa Corville, Sacred Heart Primary School, Dunkerrin N.S., Lismackin N.S. and the school for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities St Anne&#x27;s. The solitary secondary school in the town is Coláiste Phobal Ros Cré. This school was formed when the Sacred Heart Convent, the Christian Brothers School and the Vocational School amalgamated to form one public school in 1999. Just outside Roscrea is the Cistercian College. This is a private school located on the grounds of the Mount St Joseph Cistercian Monastery. Third-level courses, accredited by FETAC are provided at the Colaiste. The nearest Third-Level Institute is Tipperary Institute in Thurles.

==Sport==
===Rugby, Soccer, Martial Arts===
Roscrea Rugby Club has been twinned with Holybush in Wales for over 50 years. There are also some football (soccer) teams in the town – Killavilla Utd F.C., Roscrea United F.C. and Streamstown Celtic F.C.
A martial arts club Premier Martial Arts Academy has introduced the sport of Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu and MMA to many of Roscrea&#x27;s youth and continues to offer a vital alternative sporting outlet to the area.
O.s.a premier taekwondo have been operating a taekwondo academy in roscrea for over 25 years and have produced over 50 black belts and many national and European champions.

===GAA===
Roscrea GAA has won few trophies in its history. The local Gaelic football club is Inane Rovers. Roscrea Hurling Club were the first-ever All-Ireland club Hurling Champions in 1971.

===Other sporting facilities===
Roscrea has an 18-hole parkland golf course (Roscrea Golf Club est. 1894) and also tennis facilities. There is an athletics club, a badminton club and many more sporting clubs. A swimming pool and leisure centre complex opened in September 2009.

==Voluntary and community groups==
Roscrea is home to a Scout troop, Roscrea Scout Troop, founded in 1971, covering all sections from Beaver Scouts to Rover Scouts. The troop is part of the Slieve Bloom Scout County in the South-Eastern Province in Scouting Ireland.

The international speaking organisation, Toastmasters also have a branch in town. Recently, Roscrea Active Citizenship Association was set up, with the stated aim of bringing together all the organisations of the town.

==Notable people==

* Daisy Bates (born Margaret Dwyer), in Australia a journalist, activist and amateur anthropologist.
*Kevin Carroll, world-renowned prosthetist; made Winter the dolphin&#x27;s prosthetic tail (of Dolphin Tail &amp; Dolphin Tail 2 movie fame); recipient of the Roscrea People of the Year International Award.
* Michael A. Hess (born Anthony Lee), son of Philomena Lee; lawyer in the United States.
* Marty Maher, US Army instructor (and subject of the 1955 film &quot;The Long Gray Line&quot;).
* William Maher, maternal grandfather of boxer Len Johnson.
* John Moyney, soldier; a recipient of the Victoria Cross.
* Harry Read (1888–1972), represented Ireland in rugby union and first class cricket.
* George Thomas, a soldier and &quot;Raja of Hansi&quot;, in India.

==References==
==External links==
* Roscrea
* The Annals of Roscrea</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1003178" start="0" end="7" title="Roscrea" label="Roscrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="16" end="27" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q184618" start="31" end="47" title="County Tipperary" label="County Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191499" start="196" end="219" title="Crónán of Roscrea" label="Saint Crónán of Roscrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910694" start="277" end="289" title="Civil parishes in Ireland" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905794" start="517" end="531" title="Roscrea Castle" label="Roscrea Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="613" end="623" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191499" start="649" end="658" title="St Cronan" label="St Cronan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335799" start="678" end="689" title="Irish round tower" label="Round Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q939644" start="712" end="722" title="High cross" label="High cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="838" end="848" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637403" start="860" end="869" title="Monaincha Church" label="Monaincha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899879" start="874" end="889" title="Sean Ross Abbey" label="Sean Ross Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q892982" start="966" end="979" title="Book of Dimma" label="Book of Dimma"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="1004" end="1027" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184445" start="1132" end="1145" title="County Offaly" label="County Offaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q184445" start="1164" end="1178" title="County Offaly" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840838" start="1179" end="1194" title="Mid-West Region, Ireland" label="Mid-West Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429577" start="1215" end="1231" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Bit" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658989" start="1267" end="1279" title="Slieve Bloom" label="Slieve Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="1320" end="1328" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1355" end="1361" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966984" start="1411" end="1429" title="R445 road (Ireland)" label="R445 regional road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952000" start="1438" end="1441" title="N62 road (Ireland)" label="N62"/>
<link wikidata="Q369911" start="1450" end="1457" title="Athlone" label="Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q339307" start="1462" end="1478" title="Horse and Jockey" label="Horse and Jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658989" start="1485" end="1507" title="Slieve Bloom Mountains" label="Slieve Bloom Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q543155" start="1700" end="1704" title="Tara, Ireland" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="1741" end="1749" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q969955" start="1766" end="1773" title="Tarbert, County Kerry" label="Tarbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601395" start="1823" end="1825" title="N7 road (Ireland)" label="N7"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966984" start="1840" end="1844" title="R445 road (Ireland)" label="R445"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="1943" end="1954" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1970" end="1976" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="1981" end="1989" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108322" start="2051" end="2071" title="JJ Kavanagh and Sons" label="JJ Kavanagh and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q119805248" start="2126" end="2136" title="TFI Local Link" label="Local Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970722" start="2180" end="2203" title="Roscrea railway station" label="Roscrea railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776310" start="2242" end="2250" title="Shinrone" label="Shinrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085856" start="2252" end="2264" title="Cloughjordan" label="Cloughjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q577157" start="2266" end="2275" title="Moneygall" label="Moneygall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465403" start="2280" end="2289" title="Toomevara" label="Toomevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970722" start="2368" end="2391" title="Roscrea railway station" label="Roscrea railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743461" start="2402" end="2435" title="Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line" label="Limerick–Ballybrophy railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968958" start="2444" end="2455" title="Ballybrophy railway station" label="Ballybrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969445" start="2460" end="2472" title="Cloughjordan railway station" label="Cloughjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="2507" end="2511" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2512" end="2518" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014758" start="2525" end="2536" title="History of rail transport in Ireland" label="At one time"/>
<link wikidata="Q865849" start="2579" end="2583" title="Birr, County Offaly" label="Birr"/>
<link wikidata="Q184445" start="2587" end="2600" title="County Offaly" label="County Offaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="2711" end="2726" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="2992" end="3002" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="3003" end="3012" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953677" start="3014" end="3036" title="Mount St. Joseph Abbey, Roscrea" label="Mount St. Joseph Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="3044" end="3059" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122290" start="3070" end="3088" title="Cistercian College, Roscrea" label="Cistercian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q893802" start="3151" end="3168" title="National monument (Ireland)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="4586" end="4600" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="1798 rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q892982" start="4624" end="4637" title="Book of Dimma" label="Book of Dimma"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="4698" end="4721" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="4866" end="4872" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905982" start="5022" end="5053" title="St. Cronan&amp;#x27;s Church, Roscrea (Church of Ireland)" label="St. Cronan&amp;#x27;s parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="5061" end="5078" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468387" start="5146" end="5158" title="James Sheane" label="James Sheane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792724" start="5201" end="5222" title="Thomas Newenham Deane" label="Thomas Newenham Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="5250" end="5261" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="5290" end="5299" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078167" start="5434" end="5438" title="Éile" label="Éile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033095" start="5553" end="5566" title="O&amp;#x27;Brien dynasty" label="O&amp;#x27;Briens"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="5644" end="5661" title="John I of England" label="John I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918718" start="6177" end="6194" title="Ikerrin" label="barony of Ikerrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q508481" start="6435" end="6447" title="The Pale" label="English Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540873" start="6664" end="6683" title="Bishop of Killaloe" label="bishops of Killaloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064999" start="6853" end="6860" title="Butler dynasty" label="Butlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862462" start="7146" end="7157" title="Silvermine Mountains" label="Silvermines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="7642" end="7655" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646378" start="8013" end="8032" title="Earl of Carrick (Ireland)" label="1st earl of Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978527" start="8076" end="8101" title="Irish-Bruce Wars (1315–1318)" label="Bruce Invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q610327" start="8288" end="8306" title="James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde" label="2nd duke of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065391" start="8370" end="8402" title="O&amp;#x27;Carroll" label="Éile (Ely) O&amp;#x27;Carroll family"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="8556" end="8573" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42307735" start="8736" end="8762" title="Roscrea Friary" label="a ruined Franciscan friary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326380" start="8979" end="9008" title="Earl of Thomond" label="O&amp;#x27;Brien earls of Thomand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158144" start="9031" end="9058" title="FitzGerald dynasty" label="Fitzgerald earls of Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q208922" start="9794" end="9847" title="Thomas Butler, 10th Earl of Ormond" label="&amp;#x27;Black Tom&amp;#x27; Butler, the 10th earl of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991489" start="9990" end="10020" title="County palatine" label="County Palatinate of Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="10481" end="10499" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="Desmond Rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42307735" start="10634" end="10651" title="Roscrea Friary" label="friary at Roscrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="10738" end="10758" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="10920" end="10934" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="1641 rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360966" start="11196" end="11217" title="Owen Roe O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Owen Roe O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672808" start="11237" end="11259" title="Irish Confederate Wars" label="Irish Confederate Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="11460" end="11475" title="Williamite War in Ireland" label="Williamite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q610327" start="11643" end="11661" title="James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde" label="2nd duke of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="11810" end="11844" title="James II of England" label="English Catholic monarchy in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="11848" end="11857" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326256" start="12076" end="12094" title="Earl of Dorchester" label="Earl of Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326357" start="12530" end="12551" title="earl of Portarlington" label="earl of Portarlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397866" start="13087" end="13101" title="Poor law union" label="Poor law union"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853282" start="14307" end="14318" title="County Home (Ireland)" label="County Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030587" start="14548" end="14570" title="2022 census of Ireland" label="2022 census of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q875651" start="15051" end="15066" title="Irish Traveller" label="Irish Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167008" start="15220" end="15240" title="Annals of Inisfallen" label="Annals of Inisfallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282869" start="15286" end="15294" title="Banagher" label="Bennchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566596" start="15619" end="15626" title="Glanbia" label="Glanbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16131515" start="16072" end="16092" title="Taro Pharmaceuticals" label="Taro Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q918372" start="16347" end="16353" title="Nenagh" label="Nenagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="16369" end="16389" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="16435" end="16441" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="16445" end="16453" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488854" start="16464" end="16483" title="Shannon Development" label="Shannon Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123578" start="16595" end="16605" title="Upholstery" label="Upholstery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266203" start="16676" end="16689" title="Dunnes Stores" label="Dunnes Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705434" start="16759" end="16764" title="Tesco Ireland" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q408284" start="17052" end="17064" title="Sacred Heart" label="Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q164294" start="17170" end="17177" title="St Anne" label="St Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q408284" start="17288" end="17300" title="Sacred Heart" label="Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="17301" end="17308" title="Convent" label="Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q783988" start="17314" end="17332" title="Congregation of Christian Brothers" label="Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="17390" end="17403" title="Public school (UK)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122290" start="17441" end="17459" title="Cistercian College, Roscrea" label="Cistercian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953677" start="17516" end="17531" title="Mount St. Joseph Abbey, Roscrea" label="Mount St Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="17532" end="17542" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509754" start="17589" end="17594" title="FETAC" label="FETAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458839" start="17662" end="17681" title="Tipperary Institute" label="Tipperary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q383188" start="17685" end="17692" title="Thurles" label="Thurles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273291" start="18337" end="18348" title="Roscrea GAA" label="Roscrea GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="18396" end="18411" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013537" start="18420" end="18432" title="Inane Rovers GFC" label="Inane Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878174" start="18933" end="18946" title="Beaver Scouts (Scouting Ireland)" label="Beaver Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371699" start="18950" end="18962" title="Rover Scouts (Scouting Ireland)" label="Rover Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438351" start="19022" end="19044" title="Scouting Ireland Provinces" label="South-Eastern Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438354" start="19048" end="19064" title="Scouting Ireland" label="Scouting Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q917036" start="19108" end="19120" title="Toastmasters" label="Toastmasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157679" start="19309" end="19320" title="Daisy Bates (Australia)" label="Daisy Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395987" start="19409" end="19422" title="Kevin Carroll (prosthetist)" label="Kevin Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615753" start="19617" end="19632" title="Michael A. Hess" label="Michael A. Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q18044571" start="19660" end="19673" title="Philomena Lee" label="Philomena Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776113" start="19706" end="19717" title="Martin Maher (soldier)" label="Marty Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639875" start="19774" end="19792" title="The Long Gray Line" label="The Long Gray Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007646" start="19848" end="19859" title="Len Johnson (boxer)" label="Len Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249675" start="19863" end="19874" title="John Moyney" label="John Moyney"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="19904" end="19918" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750473" start="19922" end="19932" title="Harry Read (rugby union and cricket)" label="Harry Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="19969" end="19980" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="19985" end="20004" title="first class cricket" label="first class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508349" start="20008" end="20021" title="George Thomas (soldier)" label="George Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707791" start="20043" end="20056" title="Hansi" label="Raja of Hansi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849328" wikidata="Q634556" url="?curid=849328" title="François Péron">
<text>François Auguste Péron (22 August 1775 – 14 December 1810) was a French naturalist and explorer.

==Life==
Péron was born in Cérilly, Allier, in 1775, the son of a tailor (not a harness maker as is frequently asserted). Although intended for the priesthood, due to the Revolution Péron reluctantly joined the 2nd Allier Volunteer Battalion in 1792 and helped defend besieged Landau. In the following year he was wounded and taken prisoner by Prussian forces near Hochspeyer in the Pfälzerwald. Imprisoned in the fortress of Magdeburg, he was not repatriated to France until 1794. Having lost the sight of an eye, Péron was invalided out of the army. For two years he was Town Clerk in Cérilly before gaining a scholarship to study medicine in Paris. While in Paris, Péron changed interests towards zoology, spending time at the Muséum d&#x27;histoire naturelle. In 1800, after an unhappy love affair, he sought to join Nicolas Baudin&#x27;s expedition to Australian waters as an anthropological observer. Instead he was appointed as a trainee zoologist.

During the voyage, which charted significant stretches of the Australian coast between 1801 and 1803, Péron clashed repeatedly with Baudin. When Stanislas Levillain and René Maugé died, Péron rose to prominence as the sole remaining zoologist. (Baudin had already lost numerous officers, sailors, savants and artists who deserted in Mauritius.) With the aid of the artist Charles Alexandre Lesueur, Péron was largely responsible for gathering some 100,000 zoological specimens—the most comprehensive Australian natural history collection to date. Although he died before he could fully study his specimens, Péron made a major contribution to the foundations of the natural sciences in Australia and was a prescient ecological thinker. He was also a pioneer oceanographer who conducted important experiments on sea water temperatures at depth.

As a Corresponding Member of the &quot;Société des observateurs de l&#x27;homme&quot;, Péron wrote a great deal about the Tasmanian Aborigines of the D’Entrecasteaux Channel, on south-eastern Tasmania. Within 30 years almost all were dead through disease and war. The Australian historian Edward Duyker has shown that he has been unfairly accused of polygenism and racism, mainly because of a mistranslation of extracts from one of his scientific papers.

Baudin died before he could return to France, and it was Péron who began writing the official account of the expedition: (). In doing so, he committed a great injustice to his former commander&#x27;s memory by magnifying his faults and frequently distorting the historical record. In the wake of the resumed fighting between France and Britain, Péron also drafted a secret &quot;Memo on English settlements in New Holland&quot; (), which advocated a French conquest of Port Jackson with the aid of rebellious Irish convicts.

Péron died of tuberculosis in his hometown of Cérilly in 1810. He was just thirty-five years old. The task of completing the official account of the expedition fell to Louis de Freycinet.

==Taxa named in honour of Péron==
Several species of reptiles, amphibians and mammals were named in honour of Péron:

*&quot;Litoria peronii&quot; (Tschudi, 1838) – Péron’s treefrog (Hylidae)
*&quot;Limnodynastes peronii&quot; (A.M.C. Duméril &amp; Bibron, 1841) – striped marsh frog (Limnodynastidae)
*&quot;Carlia peronii&quot; (A.M.C. Duméril &amp; Bibron, 1839) – Timor rainbow skink (Scincidae)
*&quot;Hemiergis peronii&quot; (Gray, 1831) - lowland earless skink (Scincidae)
*&quot;Acalyptophis peronii&quot; (A.M.C. Duméril, 1853) – spiny seasnake (Elapidae)
*&quot;Lissodelphis peronii&quot; (Lacépède, 1804) – southern right whale dolphin (Delphinidae)
*&quot;Phyllorhiza peronlesueuri&quot; (Goy, 1990) – a jellyfish (Mastigiidae). The specific epithet also honors Charles Alexandre Lesueur of the Baudin expedition.

==Taxa described by Péron==
In the 1807 first volume of &quot;Journey of Discovery to the Southern Lands&quot;, Péron described a number of frog species collected on his travels, but most are considered incertae sedis today (i.e., &quot;Rana pollicifera&quot; and &quot;Rana pustulosa&quot; in Anura, &quot;Hyla ianopoda, Hyla nebulosa, Hyla ocellata&quot; and &quot;Hyla rubeola&quot; in Hylidae: Pelodryadinae, and &quot;Bufo leucogaster&quot; and &quot;Bufo proteus&quot; in Myobatrachidae). &quot;Hyla cyanea&quot; was synonymised with &quot;Litoria caerulea&quot; (White, 1790)White&#x27;s treefrog, but &quot;Hyla citripoda&quot; does survive as a valid species, &quot;Litoria citropa&quot; (Péron, 1807)Blue Mountains treefrog.

See also :Category:Taxa named by François Péron.

==Publications==

—— Observations sur l’anthropologie, ou l’Histoire naturelle de l’homme, la nécessité de s’occuper de l’avancement de cette science, et l’importance de l’admission sur la Flotte du capitaine Baudin d’un ou de plusieurs Naturalistes, spécialement chargés des Recherches à faire sur cet objet, Stoupe, Paris, an VIII [1800].

—— Voyage de découvertes aux Terres Australes, exécuté par ordre de sa Majesté, l’Empereur et Roi, sur les corvettes le Géographe, le Naturaliste et la goëlette le Casuarina, pendant les années 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803 et 1804, L’Imprimerie Impériale, 3 vols and atlas, Paris, 1807–17; vol. i, Historique, 1807; vol. ii, Historique [completed by L. de Freycinet], 1816; vol. iii, Navigation et géographie [by L. de Freycinet], 1815; Atlas historique [by C. A. Leseur &amp; N. Petit], 1817.

—— A Voyage of Discovery to the Southern Hemisphere Performed by Order of the Emperor Napoleon, During the Years 1801, 1802, 1803, and 1804, printed for Richard Phillips, Bridge Street, Blackfriars, by B. McMillan, Bow Street, Covent Garden, London, 1809.

Péron, F. [and de Freycinet, L.], Voyage de découvertes aux Terres Australes, fait par ordre du gouvernement, sur les corvettes le Géographe, le Naturaliste et la goëlette le Casuarina, pendant les années 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803 et 1804, 4 vols and atlas, Paris, 1824.

—— Voyage of Discovery to the Southern Lands, by François Péron, continued by Louis de Freycinet, 2nd edn 1824: Book IV, Comprising Chapters XXII to XXXIV (trans. C. Cornell; introduction by Anthony J. Brown), Friends of the State Library of South Australia, Adelaide, 2003.

—— Entdeckungs-Reise nach den Süd-Ländern ausgefürt auf Befehl Sr. Majestät des Kaisers und Königs, auf den Corvetten dem Geographen, dem Naturalisten und der Golette dem Casuarina, während der Jahre 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803 und 1804 (trans. Ph. W. G. Hausleutner), J. G. Cotta’schen Buchhandlung, Tübingen, 2 vols, 1808–19.

Péron, F. A. [and de Freycinet. L.], Entdeckungsreise nach Australien unternommen auf Befehl Sr. Majestät des Kaisers von Frankreich und Königs von Italien mit den Korvetten der Geograph und der Naturalist, und der goelette Kasuarina in den Jahren 1800 bis 1804 (trans. T. F. Ehrmann), Verlage des Landes-Industrie-Comptoirs, Weimar, 2 vols, 1808–19.

Péron, F., ‘Discours préliminaire d’un travail sur les Méduses’, Procès-verbaux des séances de l’Académie, Classe des Sciences physiques et mathématiques, tome iv, séances du 21 novembre 1808, 28 novembre 1808 et 19 décembre 1808, pp. 136, 140, 147.

—— ‘Inventaire général de tous les objets relatifs à l’histoire de l’homme recueillis pendant le cours de l’expédition ou remis à M. Péron, naturaliste zoologiste du Gouvernement dans cette expédition, et présentés par M. Geoffroy et lui à Sa Majesté l’Impératrice Joséphine le 9 prairial an XII [29 May 1804]’ in Copans, J. and Jamin, J. (eds), Aux origines de l’anthropologie française: Les Mémoires de la Société des Observateurs de l’Homme en l’an VIII, Le Sycomore, Paris, 1978, pp. 195–203.

—— ‘Mémoire sur le nouveau genre Pyrosoma’, Annales du Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, tome 4, an XII (1804), pp. 437–46, planche 72.

—— ‘Mémoire sur les établissement anglais à la Nouvelle Hollande, à la Terre de Diemen et dans les archipels du grand océan Pacifique …‘, présentation, édition et notes de Roger Martin, transcription du manuscrit avec le concours de Jacqueline Bonnemains, préface de Joël Eymeret, Revue de l’Institut Napoléon, No. 176, 1998, I, pp. 1–187.

—— ‘Mémoire sur quelques faits zoologiques applicables à la théorie du globe, lu à la Classe des Sciences physiques et mathématiques de l’Institut national (Séance du 30 vendémiaire an XIII)’, Journal de physique, de chimie, d’histoire naturelle et des arts, vol. 59, 1804, pp. 463–80, planches i, ii.

—— ‘Notice d’un mémoire sur les animaux observés pendant la traversée de Timor au Cap Sud de la Terre de Van Diemen’, Bulletin des sciences de la Société philomatique, no. xi, 8e année, tome iii, no. 95, pluviôse an 13 [December 1804–January 1805], pp. 269–70.

—— ‘Notice sur quelques applications utiles des observations météorologiques à l’hygiène navale’, Journal de physique, de chimie, d’histoire naturelle et des arts, vol. 67, 1808, pp. 29–43.

—— ‘Observations sur la dyssenterie des pays chauds et sur l’usage du bétel’, Journal de physique, de chimie, d’histoire naturelle et des arts, vol. 59, 1804, pp. 290–9.

—— ‘Réponse de M. Péron, naturaliste de l’expédition de découvertes aux Terres Australes aux observations critiques de M. Dumont sur le tablier des femmes Hottentotes’, Journal de physique, de chimie et d’histoire naturelle, tome lxi, 1805, pp. 210–17.

—— ‘Sur la température de la mer soit à sa surface, soit à diverses profondeurs’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 5, an XIII (1804), pp. 123–48 [English translation: ‘Fragment from Peron, with notices from other voyagers, on the Temperature of the Sea, at great depths, far from Land’, American Journal of Science, vol. xvii, 1830, pp. 295–9].

Péron, F. and Lesueur, C.-A., ‘Observations sur le tablier des femmes Hottentotes, avec une note sur l’expédition française aux Terres Australes, et une étude critique sur la stéatopygie et le tablier des femmes Boschimanes, par le Dr Raphaël Blanchard’, Bulletin de la Société zoologique de France, vol. 8, 1883, pp. 15–33.

—— ‘Des caractères génériques et spécifiques de toutes les espèces de Méduses connues jusqu’à ce jour’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 14, 1809, pp. 325–66.

—— ‘Histoire de la famille des Molluques Ptéropodes’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 15, 1810, pp. 57–69, 2 planches.

—— ‘Histoire du genre Firole: Firola’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 15, 1810, pp. 76–82.

—— ‘Histoire générale et particulière de tous les animaux qui composent la famillle des Méduses’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 14, 1809, pp. 218–28.

—— ‘La conservation des diverses espèces d’animation dans l’alcool’, Journal de physique de chimie, d’histoire naturelle et des arts, vol. 71, octobre 1810, pp. 265–88.

—— ‘Notice sur l’habitation des animaux marins’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 15, 1810, pp. 287–92.

—— ‘Notice sur l’habitation des phoques’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 15, 1810, pp. 293–00.

—— ‘Sur les Méduses du genre Equorée’, Annales du Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, tome 15, 1810, pp. 41–56.

—— ‘Tableau des caractères génériques et spécifiques de toutes les espèces de Méduses connues jusqu’à ce jour’, Annales du Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, tome 14, 1809 [1810], pp. 325–66.

==See also==
* Tasmanian Aborigines
* Truganini
* European and American voyages of scientific exploration

==References==
==Further reading==
* Edward Duyker, François Péron: An Impetuous Life: Naturalist and Voyager, Miegunyah/MUP, Melb., 2006, pp. 349, [winner Frank Broeze Maritime History Prize, 2007].

==External links==

*Biography of Péron
*François Péron: An Impetuous Life: Naturalist and Voyager</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q634556" start="0" end="22" title="François Péron" label="François Auguste Péron"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="72" end="82" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="87" end="95" title="explorer" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223186" start="125" end="140" title="Cérilly, Allier" label="Cérilly, Allier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="269" end="279" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052" start="375" end="381" title="Landau" label="Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q567730" start="463" end="473" title="Hochspeyer" label="Hochspeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q707004" start="481" end="492" title="Pfälzerwald" label="Pfälzerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="524" end="533" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q838691" start="828" end="860" title="Muséum d&amp;#x27;histoire naturelle" label="Muséum d&amp;#x27;histoire naturelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q560680" start="919" end="933" title="Nicolas Baudin" label="Nicolas Baudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q176653" start="941" end="972" title="Baudin expedition to Australia" label="expedition to Australian waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q544589" start="1224" end="1234" title="René Maugé" label="René Maugé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="1388" end="1397" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063339" start="1427" end="1452" title="Charles Alexandre Lesueur" label="Charles Alexandre Lesueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488166" start="1938" end="1978" title="Société des observateurs de l&amp;#x27;homme" label="Société des observateurs de l&amp;#x27;homme"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="2021" end="2041" title="Tasmanian Aborigines" label="Tasmanian Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q25480" start="2049" end="2072" title="D’Entrecasteaux Channel" label="D’Entrecasteaux Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="2091" end="2099" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q337569" start="2188" end="2201" title="Edward Duyker" label="Edward Duyker"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="2249" end="2259" title="polygenism" label="polygenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="2824" end="2836" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q520189" start="3049" end="3067" title="Louis de Freycinet" label="Louis de Freycinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="3072" end="3076" title="Taxon" label="Taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="3112" end="3119" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275319" start="3195" end="3210" title="Litoria peronii" label="Litoria peronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q123016" start="3218" end="3225" title="Johann Jakob von Tschudi" label="Tschudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53696" start="3253" end="3260" title="Hylidae" label="Hylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q538161" start="3269" end="3290" title="Limnodynastes peronii" label="Limnodynastes peronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q433043" start="3298" end="3312" title="André Marie Constant Duméril" label="A.M.C. Duméril"/>
<link wikidata="Q508459" start="3319" end="3325" title="Gabriel Bibron" label="Bibron"/>
<link wikidata="Q55479" start="3355" end="3370" title="Limnodynastidae" label="Limnodynastidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q31809" start="3379" end="3393" title="Carlia" label="Carlia peronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q272206" start="3459" end="3468" title="Scincidae" label="Scincidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017723" start="3477" end="3494" title="Hemiergis peronii" label="Hemiergis peronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="3502" end="3506" title="John Edward Gray" label="Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q348776" start="3557" end="3577" title="Acalyptophis peronii" label="Acalyptophis peronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q186554" start="3625" end="3633" title="Elapidae" label="Elapidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q277767" start="3642" end="3662" title="Lissodelphis peronii" label="Lissodelphis peronii"/>
<link wikidata="Q313363" start="3670" end="3678" title="Bernard Germain de Lacépède" label="Lacépède"/>
<link wikidata="Q215760" start="3718" end="3729" title="Delphinidae" label="Delphinidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3738" end="3763" title="Phyllorhiza peronlesueuri" label="Phyllorhiza peronlesueuri"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3771" end="3774" title=":fr:Jacqueline Goy" label="Goy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729594" start="3797" end="3808" title="Mastigiidae" label="Mastigiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q235536" start="4100" end="4114" title="incertae sedis" label="incertae sedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="4191" end="4196" title="Anura (frog)" label="Anura"/>
<link wikidata="Q53696" start="4286" end="4293" title="Hylidae" label="Hylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q771067" start="4295" end="4308" title="Pelodryadinae" label="Pelodryadinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q56058" start="4375" end="4389" title="Myobatrachidae" label="Myobatrachidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q654682" start="4443" end="4459" title="Litoria caerulea" label="Litoria caerulea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387000" start="4467" end="4472" title="John White (surgeon)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848467" start="4572" end="4587" title="Litoria citropa" label="Litoria citropa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4642" end="4680" title=":Category:Taxa named by François Péron" label=":Category:Taxa named by François Péron"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="11451" end="11471" title="Tasmanian Aborigines" label="Tasmanian Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q242064" start="11474" end="11483" title="Truganini" label="Truganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563335" start="11486" end="11541" title="European and American voyages of scientific exploration" label="European and American voyages of scientific exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q337569" start="11580" end="11593" title="Edward Duyker" label="Edward Duyker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849339" wikidata="Q418970" url="?curid=849339" title="Reboxetine">
<text>Reboxetine, sold under the brand name Edronax among others, is a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (sNRI) medication marketed as an antidepressant by Pfizer for use in the treatment of major depressive disorder, although it has also been used off-label for panic disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It is approved for use in many countries worldwide, but has not been approved for use in the United States.

==Medical uses==

===Major depressive disorder===
There has been much debate as to whether reboxetine is more efficacious than placebo in the treatment of depression. According to a 2009 meta-analysis of 12 second-generation antidepressants, reboxetine was no more effective than placebo, and was &quot;significantly less&quot; effective and less acceptable than the other drugs in treating the acute-phase of adults with unipolar major depression.

The British MHRA said in September 2011 that the study had several limitations, and that &quot;Overall the balance of benefits and risks for reboxetine remains positive in its authorised indication.&quot; A UK and Europe-wide review of available efficacy and safety data has confirmed that reboxetine has benefit over placebo in its authorised indication. Efficacy was clearly shown in patients with severe or very severe depression.

According to a systematic review and meta-analysis by IQWiG, including unpublished data, published data on reboxetine overestimated the benefit of reboxetine versus placebo by up to 115% and reboxetine versus SSRIs by up to 23%, and also underestimated harm, concluding that reboxetine was an ineffective and potentially harmful antidepressant. The study also showed that nearly three quarters of the data on patients who took part in trials of reboxetine had not been published by Pfizer.

A 2018 systematic review and network meta-analysis comparing the efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs concluded that reboxetine was more effective than placebo but significantly less efficacious than other antidepressants tested.

===Panic disorder===
In a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial reboxetine significantly improved the symptoms of panic disorder. Another randomised controlled trial that compared paroxetine to reboxetine found that paroxetine significantly outperformed reboxetine as a treatment for panic disorder. Despite this discouraging finding an open-label trial examining the efficacy of reboxetine in SSRI-resistant panic disorder demonstrated significant benefit from reboxetine treatment.

===Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder===
Numerous clinical trials have provided support for the efficacy of reboxetine in the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in both the short and long-term and in both children/adolescents and adults.

===Other uses===
A case series and open-label pilot study demonstrated the efficacy of reboxetine in treating bulimia nervosa. Reboxetine may also have efficacy in treating therapy-resistant paediatric nocturnal enuresis. A pilot study demonstrated the efficacy of reboxetine in the treatment of narcolepsy. Individual trials and meta-analysis suggest that reboxetine can attenuate antipsychotic-induced weight gain and there is some evidence of a benefit on depressive, and possibly other symptoms of schizophrenia when added to antipsychotic treatment.

==Contraindications==
Reboxetine is contraindicated in narrow-angle glaucoma, cardiovascular disease, epilepsy, bipolar disorder, urinary retention, prostatic hypertrophy, those hypersensitive to reboxetine or any of its excipients.

There is conflicting information regarding use with MAOIs: one says the combination is possible with monitoring of side effects but the product informations indicate them as contraindicated.

==Adverse effects==
Very common (&gt;10% incidence) adverse effects include insomnia, dizziness, dry mouth, constipation, nausea, and excessive sweating.

Common (1–10%) adverse effects include loss of appetite, agitation, anxiety, headache, restlessness, tingling sensations, distorted sense of taste, difficulty with seeing near or far (problems with accommodation), fast heart beat, heart palpitations, relaxing of blood vessels leading to low blood pressure, high blood pressure, vomiting, rash, sensation of incomplete bladder emptying, urinary tract infection, painful or difficult urination, urinary retention, erectile dysfunction, ejaculatory pain or delay, and chills.

A 2009 meta-analysis found that reboxetine was significantly less well tolerated than the other 11 second-generation antidepressants compared in the analysis.

==Overdose==
Reboxetine is considered a relatively low-risk antidepressant in overdose. The symptoms are as follows:

* Sweating
* Tachycardia
* Changes in blood pressure

== Interactions ==

Because of its reliance on CYP3A4, reboxetine &quot;O&quot;-desethylation is markedly inhibited by papaverine and ketoconazole. It weakly inhibits CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. Reboxetine is an intermediate-level inhibitor of P-glycoprotein, which gives it the potential to interact with ciclosporin, tacrolimus, paroxetine, sertraline, quinidine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine.

==Pharmacology==

===Pharmacodynamics===
Reboxetine is a fairly selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NRI), with approximately 20-fold selectivity for the norepinephrine transporter (NET) over the serotonin transporter (SERT). Despite this selectivity, reboxetine does slightly inhibit the reuptake of serotonin at therapeutic doses. It does not interact with or inhibit the dopamine transporter (DAT).

Reboxetine has been found to inhibit both brain and cardiac GIRKs, a characteristic it shares with the NRI atomoxetine.

===Pharmacokinetics===
Both the (&quot;R&quot;,&quot;R&quot;)-(–) and (&quot;S&quot;,&quot;S&quot;)-(+)-enantiomers of reboxetine are predominantly metabolized by the CYP3A4 isoenzyme.
The primary metabolite of reboxetine is &quot;O&quot;-desethylreboxetine, and there are also three minor metabolites—Phenol A, Phenol B, and UK1, Phenol B being the most minor.

==Chemistry==
Reboxetine has two chiral centers. Thus, four stereoisomers may exist, the (&quot;R&quot;,&quot;R&quot;)-, (&quot;S&quot;,&quot;S&quot;)-, (&quot;R&quot;,&quot;S&quot;)-, and (&quot;S&quot;,&quot;R&quot;)-isomers. The active ingredient of reboxetine is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers, the (&quot;R&quot;,&quot;R&quot;)-(–)- and (&quot;S&quot;,&quot;S&quot;)-(+)-isomer.

==History==
Reboxetine was discovered at Farmitalia-Carlo Erba and was first published in 1984; Farmitalia did the first clinical studies. Farmitalia was acquired by Pharmacia in 1993, and Pharmacia in turn was acquired by Pfizer in 2003.

It was first approved in Europe in 1997 and was provisionally approved by the FDA in 1999. In 2001 the FDA issued Pfizer a &quot;not approvable&quot; letter based on clinical trials the FDA had required when it issued the preliminary approval letter.

In 2010, the German Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQEHC) published results of a meta-analysis of clinical trial data for reboxetine in acute depression, which included data on about 3,000 subjects that Pfizer had never published but had mentioned; IQEHC had combed through Pfizer&#x27;s publications and reboxetine approvals and had determined this data was missing from the publication record. The analysis of the complete data set yielded a result that reboxetine was not more effective than placebo but had more side effects than placebo and more than fluoxetine; the paper led to widespread and sharp criticism of Pfizer, and stronger calls for publication of all clinical trial data.

==Society and culture==

===Brand names===
Edronax is the brand name of reboxetine in every English-speaking country that has approved it for clinical use. Brand names include (where † denotes a product that is no longer marketed):
* Davedax 
* Edronax 
* Irenor 
* Norebox 
* Prolift 
* Solvex 
* Yeluoshu 
* Zuolexin 

== References ==
== External links ==
* Reboxetine: A Novel Antidepressant</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q418970" start="0" end="10" title="Reboxetine" label="Reboxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q418970" start="38" end="45" title="Reboxetine" label="Edronax"/>
<link wikidata="Q70884626" start="65" end="108" title="selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="142" end="156" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="160" end="166" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="195" end="220" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q119697" start="253" end="262" title="off-label" label="off-label"/>
<link wikidata="Q741713" start="267" end="281" title="panic disorder" label="panic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="286" end="326" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="428" end="441" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916302" start="906" end="910" title="Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency" label="MHRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q737480" start="1383" end="1388" title="Institut für Qualität und Wirtschaftlichkeit im Gesundheitswesen" label="IQWiG"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="2945" end="2960" title="bulimia nervosa" label="bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q318005" start="3037" end="3055" title="nocturnal enuresis" label="nocturnal enuresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="3131" end="3141" title="narcolepsy" label="narcolepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="3459" end="3467" title="glaucoma" label="glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="3493" end="3501" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="3503" end="3519" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="3521" end="3538" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="3677" end="3682" title="monoamine oxidase inhibitors" label="MAOIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q419793" start="4170" end="4183" title="Accommodation (eye)" label="accommodation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="4209" end="4221" title="palpitations" label="palpitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366695" start="4416" end="4433" title="urinary retention" label="urinary retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="4735" end="4743" title="overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="4876" end="4882" title="CYP3A4" label="CYP3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q410374" start="4948" end="4958" title="papaverine" label="papaverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407883" start="4963" end="4975" title="ketoconazole" label="ketoconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271142" start="4996" end="5002" title="CYP2D6" label="CYP2D6"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="5007" end="5013" title="CYP3A4" label="CYP3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q412902" start="5064" end="5078" title="P-glycoprotein" label="P-glycoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q367700" start="5126" end="5137" title="ciclosporin" label="ciclosporin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411648" start="5139" end="5149" title="tacrolimus" label="tacrolimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q408471" start="5151" end="5161" title="paroxetine" label="paroxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407617" start="5163" end="5173" title="sertraline" label="sertraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q412496" start="5175" end="5184" title="quinidine" label="quinidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="5186" end="5196" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409236" start="5198" end="5209" title="fluvoxamine" label="fluvoxamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899668" start="5286" end="5319" title="norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor" label="norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914025" start="5354" end="5365" title="binding selectivity" label="selectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874257" start="5374" end="5400" title="norepinephrine transporter" label="norepinephrine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q410142" start="5416" end="5437" title="serotonin transporter" label="serotonin transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271947" start="5594" end="5614" title="dopamine transporter" label="dopamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001168" start="5683" end="5688" title="G protein-coupled inwardly-rectifying potassium channel" label="GIRKs"/>
<link wikidata="Q417240" start="5730" end="5741" title="atomoxetine" label="atomoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="5911" end="5917" title="CYP3A4" label="CYP3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q407801" start="5918" end="5927" title="isoenzyme" label="isoenzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q214514" start="6140" end="6154" title="chirality (chemistry)" label="chiral centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="6399" end="6409" title="enantiomer" label="enantiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066966" start="6539" end="6560" title="Farmitalia-Carlo Erba" label="Farmitalia-Carlo Erba"/>
<link wikidata="Q898992" start="6664" end="6673" title="Pharmacia" label="Pharmacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="6721" end="6727" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q737480" start="7010" end="7061" title="Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care" label="Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="7568" end="7578" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849346" wikidata="Q1656479" url="?curid=849346" title="Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy">
<text>The Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal (also known as &quot;Andromeda VI&quot; or &quot;Peg dSph&quot; for short) is a dwarf spheroidal galaxy about 2.7 million light-years away in the constellation Pegasus. The Pegasus Dwarf is a member of the Local Group and a satellite galaxy of the Andromeda Galaxy (M31).

==General information==
The Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal is a galaxy with mainly metal-poor stellar populations. Its metallicity is [Fe/H] ≃ −1.3. It is located at the right ascension 23h51m46.30s and declination +24d34m57.0s in the equatorial coordinate system (epoch J2000.0), and in a distance of 820 ± 20 kpc from Earth and a distance of 294 ± 8 kpc from the Andromeda Galaxy.

The galaxy was discovered in 1999 by various authors on the Second Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS II) films.

==See also==
* List of Andromeda&#x27;s satellite galaxies
* Pegasus Dwarf Irregular Galaxy (Peg DIG)
* Pegasus galaxy, the Stargate Atlantis fictional location (probably the Pegasus Dwarf Irregular Galaxy).

== Notes ==


==References==
==External links==
*NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database: &quot;Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal&quot;
*Armandroff, Jacoby, &amp; Davies, &quot;Low Surface Brightness Galaxies around M31&quot;, &quot;Astrophys. J.&quot; 118, 1220-1229 (1999).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1656479" start="4" end="28" title="Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy" label="Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q654754" start="109" end="132" title="dwarf spheroidal galaxy" label="dwarf spheroidal galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="139" end="150" title="1 E22 m" label="2.7 million"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="151" end="161" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="175" end="188" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8864" start="189" end="196" title="Pegasus (constellation)" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="235" end="246" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495" start="253" end="269" title="satellite galaxy" label="satellite galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="277" end="293" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="415" end="426" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="466" end="481" title="right ascension" label="right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="499" end="510" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q208617" start="531" end="559" title="equatorial coordinate system" label="equatorial coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="561" end="566" title="Epoch (astronomy)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="607" end="610" title="Parsec" label="kpc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="616" end="621" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="648" end="651" title="Parsec" label="kpc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="661" end="677" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191684" start="740" end="777" title="Second Palomar Observatory Sky Survey" label="Second Palomar Observatory Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396702" start="811" end="854" title="List of Andromeda&amp;#x27;s satellite galaxies" label="List of Andromeda&amp;#x27;s satellite galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731972" start="857" end="887" title="Pegasus Dwarf Irregular Galaxy" label="Pegasus Dwarf Irregular Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437072" start="900" end="914" title="Pegasus Galaxy (Stargate)" label="Pegasus galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215287" start="920" end="937" title="Stargate Atlantis" label="Stargate Atlantis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849349" wikidata="Q536884" url="?curid=849349" title="Saul Bass">
<text>Saul Bass (; May 8, 1920 – April 25, 1996) was an American graphic designer and Oscar-winning filmmaker, best known for his design of motion-picture title sequences, film posters, and corporate logos.

During his 40-year career, Bass worked for some of Hollywood&#x27;s most prominent filmmakers, including Alfred Hitchcock, Otto Preminger, Billy Wilder, Stanley Kubrick, and Martin Scorsese. Among his best known title sequences are the animated paper cut-out of a heroin addict&#x27;s arm for Preminger&#x27;s &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot;, the credits racing up and down what eventually becomes a high-angle shot of a skyscraper in Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;North by Northwest&quot;, and the disjointed text that races together and apart in &quot;Psycho&quot;.

Bass designed some of the most iconic corporate logos in North America, including the Geffen Records logo in 1980, the Hanna-Barbera &quot;swirling star&quot; logo in 1979, the sixth and final version of the Bell System logo in 1969, as well as AT&amp;T Corporation&#x27;s first globe logo in 1983 after the breakup of the Bell System. He also designed Continental Airlines&#x27; 1968 jet stream logo, United Airlines&#x27; 1974 tulip logo (which became some of the most recognized airline industry logos of the era) and the 1972 Warner Bros. &quot;Big W&quot; logo (which is WB&#x27;s second most recognizable logo after the classic WB shield; currently also used as the Warner Music Group logo). He died from non-Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma in Los Angeles on April 25, 1996, at the age of 75.

==Early life==
Saul Bass was born on May 8, 1920, in the Bronx, New York, United States, to Eastern European Jewish immigrant parents. He graduated from James Monroe High School in the Bronx and studied part-time at the Art Students League in Manhattan until attending night classes with György Kepes at Brooklyn College. In 1938, Saul married Ruth Cooper and they had two children, Robert in 1942 and Andrea in 1946.

He began his time in Hollywood in the 1940s, designing print advertisements for films including &quot;Champion&quot; (1949), &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; (1951) and &quot;The Moon Is Blue&quot; (1953), directed by Otto Preminger. His next collaboration with Preminger was to design a film poster for his 1954 film &quot;Carmen Jones&quot;. Preminger was so impressed with Bass&#x27;s work that he asked him to produce the title sequence as well. This was when Bass first saw the opportunity to create a title sequence which would ultimately enhance the experience of the audience and contribute to the mood and the theme of the movie within the opening moments. Bass was one of the first to realize the creative potential of the opening and closing credits of a movie.

==Film title sequences==
Bass became widely known in the film industry after creating the title sequence for Otto Preminger&#x27;s &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot; (1955). The subject of the film was a jazz musician&#x27;s struggle to overcome his heroin addiction, a taboo subject in the mid-1950s. Bass decided to create an innovative title sequence to match the film&#x27;s controversial subject. He chose the arm as the central image, as it is a strong image relating to heroin addiction. The titles featured an animated, white on black paper cut-out arm of a heroin addict. As he hoped, it caused a sensation.
For Alfred Hitchcock, Bass provided effective, memorable title sequences, inventing a new type of kinetic typography, for &quot;North by Northwest&quot; (1959), &quot;Vertigo&quot; (1958), working with John Whitney, and &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960). It was this kind of innovative, revolutionary work that made Bass a revered graphic designer. Before the advent of Bass&#x27;s title sequences in the 1950s, titles were generally static, separate from the movie, and it was common for them to be projected onto the cinema curtains, the curtains only being raised right before the first scene of the movie. In 1960, Bass wrote an article for &quot;Graphis&quot; magazine called &quot;Film Titles – a New Field for the Graphic Designer,&quot; which has been revered as a milestone for &quot;the consecration of the movie credit sequence as a design object.&quot; One of the most studied film credit designers, Bass is known for integrating a stylistic coherence between the designs and the films in which they appear.

Bass once described his main goal for his title sequences as being to &quot;try to reach for a simple, visual phrase that tells you what the picture is all about and evokes the essence of the story&quot;. Another philosophy that Bass described as influencing his title sequences was the goal of getting the audience to see familiar parts of their world in an unfamiliar way. Examples of this or what he described as &quot;making the ordinary extraordinary&quot; can be seen in &quot;Walk on the Wild Side&quot; (1962) where an ordinary cat becomes a mysterious prowling predator, and in &quot;Nine Hours to Rama&quot; (1963) where the interior workings of a clock become an expansive new landscape. In the 1950s, Saul Bass used a variety of techniques, from cut-out animation for &quot;Anatomy of a Murder&quot; (1958), to fully animated mini-movies such as the epilogue for the Best Picture Oscar winner &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot; (1956), and live-action sequences.

On occasion, Bass&#x27; title sequences were said to outshine the films they introduced. When Billy Wilder&#x27;s &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; (1955) was released, a film critic wrote, &quot;If the film had lived up to the titles, it would have been a good picture.&quot; In reviewing &quot;A Walk on the Wild Side&quot; (1962), more than half of New York Critics claimed that Bass&#x27; titles were better than the film itself. In 1962, Variety even suggested that Bass might no longer find work in the title field since there has been too frequent the use of the line: &quot;The best thing about the film is the Saul Bass credits.&quot;

In 1955, Elaine Makatura came to work with Bass in his Los Angeles office. With the opening to &quot;Spartacus&quot; (1960), she was directing and producing title sequences, and in 1961 the couple married, beginning more than 30 years of close collaboration. After the birth of their children, Jennifer in 1964 and Jeffrey in 1967, they concentrated on their family, film directing, and title sequences. Saul and Elaine designed title sequences for more than 30 years, continuously experimenting with a variety of innovative techniques and effects, from Bunraku-style maneuvers in &quot;Spartacus&quot; (1960), live-action sequences in &quot;Walk on the Wild Side&quot; (1962), to time-lapse photography in &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; (1993), and even chopped liver in &quot;Mr. Saturday Night&quot; (1992). Their live-action opening title sequences often served as prologues to their films and transitioned seamlessly into their opening scenes. These &quot;time before&quot; title sequences either compress or expand time with startling results. The title sequence to &quot;Grand Prix&quot; (1966) portrays the moments before the opening race in Monte Carlo, the title sequence to &quot;The Big Country&quot; (1958) depicts the days it takes a stage coach to travel to a remote Western town, and the opening montage title sequence to &quot;The Victors&quot; (1963) chronicles the twenty-seven years between World War I and the middle of World War II, where the film begins.

From the mid-1960s to the late &#x27;80s, Saul and Elaine moved away from main titles to focus on filmmaking and their children. About this time away from title design, Saul said:

In the 1980s, Saul and Elaine were rediscovered by James L. Brooks and Martin Scorsese, who had grown up admiring their film work. For Scorsese, Saul and Elaine Bass created title sequences for &quot;Goodfellas&quot; (1990), &quot;Cape Fear&quot; (1991), &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; (1993), and &quot;Casino&quot; (1995), their last title sequence. This later work with Martin Scorsese saw the Basses move away from the optical techniques that Saul had pioneered and move into the use of computerized effects. The Basses&#x27; title sequences featured new and innovative methods of production and startling graphic design.
Screenwriter Nicholas Pileggi said of Saul and Elaine Bass, &quot;You write a book of 300 to 400 pages and then you boil it down to a script of maybe 100 to 150 pages. Eventually you have the pleasure of seeing that the Basses have knocked you right out of the ballpark. They have boiled it down to four minutes flat.&quot;

In a sense, all modern opening title sequences that introduce the mood or theme of a film can be seen as a legacy of the Basses&#x27; innovative work. In particular, title sequences for some recent movies and television series, especially those whose setting is during the 1960s, have purposely emulated the graphic style of Saul Bass&#x27;s animated sequences from the 1950s. Some examples of title sequences that pay homage to Bass&#x27;s graphics and animated title sequences are &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot; (2002), &quot;X-Men: First Class&quot; (2011), and the openings to the AMC series &quot;Mad Men&quot; and TBS&#x27;s &quot;Conan&quot;.

==Selected film title sequences==
* &quot;Carmen Jones&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Big Knife&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Racers&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Shrike&quot; (1955)
* &quot;Around the World in Eighty Days&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Storm Center&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Attack&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Johnny Concho&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Edge of the City&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Saint Joan&quot; (1957)
* &quot;The Pride and the Passion&quot; (1957)
* &quot;The Young Stranger&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Bonjour Tristesse&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Cowboy&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Vertigo&quot; (1958)
* &quot;The Big Country&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Anatomy of a Murder&quot; (1959)
* &quot;North by Northwest&quot; (1959)
* &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Spartacus&quot; (1960)
* &quot;The Facts of Life&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Exodus&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Ocean&#x27;s 11&quot; (1960)
* &quot;West Side Story&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Something Wild&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Advise &amp; Consent&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Walk on the Wild Side&quot; (1962)
* &quot;The Victors&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Nine Hours to Rama&quot; (1963)
* &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World&quot; (1963)
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot; (1963)
* &quot;In Harm&#x27;s Way&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Bunny Lake Is Missing&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Grand Prix&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Not with My Wife, You Don&#x27;t!&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Seconds&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Such Good Friends&quot; (1971)
* &quot;That&#x27;s Entertainment, Part II&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Broadcast News&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Big&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Tonkō&quot; (1988)
* &quot;The War of the Roses&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Goodfellas&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Cape Fear&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Doc Hollywood&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Mr. Saturday Night&quot; (1992)
* &quot;The Age of Innocence&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Higher Learning&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Casino&quot; (1995)
* &quot;A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies&quot; (1995)
==Logos and other designs==

Bass was responsible for some of the best-remembered, most iconic logos in North America, including both the Bell Telephone logo (1969) and successor AT&amp;T globe (1983). Other well-known designs were Continental Airlines (1968), Dixie (1969) and United Airlines (1974). Later, he produced logos for a number of Japanese companies as well.

Selected logos by Saul Bass and their respective dates (note that the links shown point to articles on the entities themselves, and not necessarily to the logos):

* Alcoa (1963)
* Ajinomoto (1973)
* AT&amp;T Corporation (1984)
* Avery International (1975)
* Bell System (1969)
* Boys Clubs of America (1980)
* Celanese (1965)
* Continental Airlines (1967)
* Dixie (1969)
* Frontier Airlines (1978)
* Fuller(-O&#x27;Brien) Paints (1963)
* Geffen Records (1980)
* General Foods (1984)
* Girl Scouts of the USA (1978)
* Hanna-Barbera (1979)
* Japan Energy Corporation (1993)
* J. Paul Getty Trust (1993)
* (1964)
* (1984)
* Kleenex (1961)
* Kosé Cosmetics (1991)
* Lawry&#x27;s Seasoned Salt and Lawry&#x27;s The Prime Rib (1960)
* Maeda Corporation (1991)
* Minami Sports (1991)
* Minolta (1981)
* NCR Corporation (1996)
* Quaker Oats Company (1970)
* Rockwell International (1968)
* Security Pacific Bank (1966)
* Southern California Rapid Transit District (1980)
* United Airlines (1974)
* United Way and United Way Centraide Canada (1972–75)
* University of Southern California (1994)
* US postage stamp, &quot;Science and Industry&quot; (1983)
* Warner Communications (1972)
* Wienerschnitzel (1978)
* Wesson Oil (1964)
* YWCA USA (1988)
An analysis of a sample of Bass&#x27;s corporate logos in 2011 found them to have an unusual longevity. The most common cause of the end of a Bass corporate logo (in the selection analyzed) was the demise or merger of the company, rather than a corporate logo redesign. The average lifespan of a Bass logo was more than 34 years as of 2013. In 2014, Frontier Airlines resurrected the stylized F logo originally designed for Frontier by Bass in 1978, and discontinued when the airline went bankrupt in 1984. Bass created the sculpture which each of the World Food Prize laureates receive.

==Movie posters==

Saul Bass designed emblematic movie posters that transformed the visuals of film advertising. Before Bass&#x27;s seminal poster for &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot; (1955), movie posters were dominated by depictions of key scenes or characters from the film, often both juxtaposed with each other. Bass&#x27;s posters, however, typically developed simplified, symbolic designs that visually communicated key essential elements of the film. For example, his poster for &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot;, with a jagged arm and off-kilter typography, starkly communicates the protagonist&#x27;s struggle with heroin addiction. Bass&#x27;s iconic &quot;Vertigo&quot; (1958) poster, with its stylized figures sucked down into the nucleus of a spiral vortex, captures the anxiety and disorientation central to the film. His poster for &quot;Anatomy of a Murder&quot; (1959), featuring the silhouette of a corpse jarringly dissected into seven pieces, makes both a pun on the film&#x27;s title and captures the moral ambiguities within which this court room drama is immersed.

He created some of his best known posters for films directed by Otto Preminger, Alfred Hitchcock, Billy Wilder, and Stanley Kubrick among others. His last commissioned film poster was created for Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;Schindler&#x27;s List&quot; (1993), but it was never distributed. His poster work spanned five decades and inspired numerous other poster and graphic designers. Bass&#x27;s film posters are characterized by a distinctive typography and minimalistic style.

Selected posters by Saul Bass, and their respective dates:

===1950s===

* &quot;Carmen Jones&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot; (1955)
* &quot;Edge of the City&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Storm Center&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Love in the Afternoon&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Saint Joan&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Bonjour tristesse&quot; (1958)
* &quot;The Big Country&quot; (1958) (style b poster)
* &quot;Vertigo&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Anatomy of a Murder&quot; (1959)

===1960s===

* &quot;Exodus&quot; (1960)
* &quot;One, Two, Three&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Advise &amp; Consent&quot; (1962) 
* &quot;Birdman of Alcatraz&quot; (1962)
* &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World&quot; (1963)
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot; (1963)
* &quot;In Harm&#x27;s Way&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Bunny Lake Is Missing&quot; (1965)
* &quot;The Firemen&#x27;s Ball&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Two of Us&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Why Man Creates&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Very Happy Alexander&quot; (1969)

===1970s===
* &quot;Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Such Good Friends&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Rosebud&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Brothers&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Notes on the Popular Arts&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Bass on Titles&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Human Factor&quot; (1979)
* &quot;The Solar Film&quot; (1979)
* &quot;The Double McGuffin&quot; (1979)

===1980s and 1990s===

* &quot;The Shining&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Return from the River Kwai&quot; (1989) (not distributed)
* &quot;Schindler&#x27;s List&quot; (1993) (rejected poster)

He received an unintentionally backhanded tribute in 1995, when Spike Lee&#x27;s film &quot;Clockers&quot; was promoted by a poster that was strikingly similar to Bass&#x27;s 1959 work for Preminger&#x27;s film &quot;Anatomy of a Murder&quot;. Designer Art Sims claimed that it was made as an homage, but Bass regarded it as theft. Many film posters have been considered to be homages to Saul Bass&#x27;s posters. Some recent examples include the theatrical release poster for &quot;Burn After Reading&quot; (2008) which incorporates Bass&#x27;s typography and style of figurative minimalism, and a poster for &quot;Precious&quot; (2009) which includes elements from several of Bass&#x27;s posters, including &quot;Anatomy of a Murder&quot;. The cover art for The White Stripes&#x27; single &quot;The Hardest Button to Button&quot; is clearly inspired by the Bass poster for &quot;The Man with the Golden Arm&quot;.

The comic book artist J. H. Williams III&#x27;s designs for the Batman story &quot;The Black Glove&quot; pay homage to Bass&#x27;s designs as well.

In addition to movie posters, Bass designed numerous posters for film festivals, and several magazine, book, and album covers. He also designed five Academy Award Presentation posters and the Student Academy Award for the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. In 1962 he illustrated his only children&#x27;s book, &quot;Henri&#x27;s Walk to Paris&quot;, written by Lenore Klein.

==Filmmaker==
During the 1960s, Bass was asked by directors and producers to produce not only title sequences for their films, but also to visualize and storyboard key scenes and sequences within them. Bass has the unusual credit of &quot;visual consultant&quot; or &quot;pictorial consultant&quot; on five films. For &quot;Spartacus&quot; (1960), Bass as &quot;visual consultant&quot; designed key elements of the gladiator school and storyboarded the final battle between slaves and Romans. John Frankenheimer, the director of &quot;Grand Prix&quot; (1966), had Bass storyboard, direct, and edit all but one of the racing sequences for his film. For &quot;West Side Story&quot; (1961) Bass filmed the prologue, storyboarded the opening dance sequence, and created the ending title sequence.

It is Bass&#x27;s credited role as &quot;pictorial consultant&quot; for Alfred Hitchcock on &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960); however, that has caused some controversy and debate. Bass claimed that he participated in directing the highlight scene of &quot;Psycho&quot;, the tightly edited shower-murder sequence, though several on set at the time (including star Janet Leigh) disputed this claim.

The research of several film scholars on Hitchcock&#x27;s production of &quot;Psycho&quot; validates the claim that Bass in his capacity as a graphic artist did indeed have a significant influence on the visual design and pacing of that famous scene. Hitchcock had asked Bass to design and produce storyboards for the shower murder scene and for some other scenes in the film. For this, Bass received a credit as Pictorial Consultant as well as Title Designer. Janet Leigh told Donald Spoto that &quot;the planning of the shower scene was left up to Saul Bass, and Hitchcock followed his storyboard precisely. Because of this ... [the shooting] went very professionally,&quot; and she told Stephen Rebello that &quot;Mr. Hitchcock showed Saul Bass&#x27;s storyboards to me quite proudly, telling me in exact detail how he was going to shoot the scene from Saul&#x27;s plans&quot;.

Bill Krohn has noted that Bass&#x27;s 48 story board panels for the scene introduced all the key aspects of the final shower murder scene – most notably, the fact that the attacker appears as a silhouette, close-ups of a slashing knife, the shower curtain torn down, a shot of the shower head from below, Marion&#x27;s desperate outstretched arm, and the famous shot of the transition from the drain hole of the bathtub to Marion Crane&#x27;s dead eye. Krohn notes that this final transition is highly reminiscent of Bass&#x27;s iris titles for &quot;Vertigo&quot;. Krohn also concludes that Bass did not literally direct the shower scene, proving Hitchcock&#x27;s presence on the set throughout the shooting of that scene.

Bass introduced the idea of using a montage of fast cuts and tight framing to render a violent, bloody murder as an impressionistic and nearly bloodless one. Hitchcock felt uncertain about Bass&#x27;s conception of the scene fearing that audiences might not accept such a stylized and quickly cut sequence. In an interview with film historian Pat Kirkham, Bass recalled, &quot;Having designed and storyboarded the shower sequence, I showed it to Hitch. He was uneasy about it. It was very un-Hitchcockian in character. He never used that kind of quick cutting; he loved the long shot [&quot;sic&quot;]&quot;.

To convince Hitchcock that the scene would work as planned, eight days before shooting of the final shower scene, Bass used a newsreel camera and Janet Leigh&#x27;s stand-in Marli Renfro to shoot footage on the set to plan the shots in more detail. Working with Hitchcock&#x27;s editor George Tomasini, he edited this footage following the storyboards to show Hitchcock how the scene could work. In the end, Hitchcock gave his approval but, according to Kirkham, made two additions: a spray of blood on the chest of Marion Crane/Janet Leigh as she slides down the tiles, and a close-up of her belly getting stabbed.

In 1964, Saul and his wife and creative partner Elaine directed the short film &quot;The Searching Eye&quot; shown during the 1964 New York World&#x27;s Fair, co-produced with Sy Wexler. The Basses also directed a short documentary film called &quot;Why Man Creates&quot; which won the Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject in 1968. An abbreviated version of that film was broadcast on the first episode of the television newsmagazine &quot;60 Minutes&quot;. In 2002, this film was selected for the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;. Saul and Elaine directed several other short films, two of which were nominated for Academy Awards: &quot;Notes on the Popular Arts&quot;, in 1977, and &quot;The Solar Film&quot;, in 1979.

In 1974, Saul Bass made his only feature-length film as a director, the visually splendid though little-known science fiction film &quot;Phase IV&quot;, a &quot;quiet, haunting, beautiful, ... and largely overlooked, science-fiction masterwork&quot;.

==Legacy==
The moving image collection of Saul Bass is held at the Academy Film Archive and consists of 2,700 items. The film material is complemented by the Saul Bass papers at the Academy&#x27;s Margaret Herrick Library. The Academy Film Archive has preserved two of Bass&#x27;s films: &quot;Why Man Creates&quot;, in 2011, and &quot;Notes on the Popular Arts&quot; (also known as &quot;An Essay: The Popular Arts Today&quot;), in 2012.

On May 8, 2013, Bass&#x27;s 93rd birthday was celebrated by a Google Doodle, which featured the tune &quot;Unsquare Dance&quot; by Dave Brubeck.

==See also==

* Motion graphics
* Paul Rand
* Richard Amsel
* Tom Jung
* Frank McCarthy
* Bob Peak
* Drew Struzan
* Howard Terpning
* Pablo Ferro

==References==
==Further reading==
* Horak, Jan-Christopher (2014). &quot;Saul Bass. Anatomy of Film Design&quot;. Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press. .
* Kirkham, Pat and Jennifer Bass (2011). &quot;Saul Bass: A Life in Film &amp; Design&quot;. London: Laurence King. .
* Tomislav Terek (2001). &quot;Saul Bass on Titles: Film Titles Revealed&quot;. Defunkt Century. .

==External links==
* Saul Bass Archive at FilmArt Gallery
* Saul Bass Poster Archive The Saul Bass Estate
* Titles Designed by Saul Bass (still sequences &amp; commentary)
* Saul Bass Title Sequences on Art of the Title
* Title Sequences from Saul Bass (videos &amp; commentary)
* Saul Bass title sequences: ten of the best compiled by &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* Saul Bass papers, Margaret Herrick Library, Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q536884" start="0" end="9" title="Saul Bass" label="Saul Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q627325" start="59" end="75" title="graphic designer" label="graphic designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="80" end="85" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="149" end="163" title="title sequence" label="title sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q374821" start="166" end="177" title="film poster" label="film poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="184" end="199" title="logo" label="corporate logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="307" end="323" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q52997" start="325" end="339" title="Otto Preminger" label="Otto Preminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="341" end="353" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="355" end="370" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="376" end="391" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="414" end="428" title="title sequence" label="title sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195631" start="518" end="545" title="The Man with the Golden Arm" label="The Man with the Golden Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q223139" start="668" end="686" title="North by Northwest" label="North by Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="757" end="763" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="858" end="872" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="891" end="904" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="980" end="991" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="1017" end="1037" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959692" start="1080" end="1106" title="breakup of the Bell System" label="breakup of the Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="1125" end="1145" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="1174" end="1189" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="1302" end="1314" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="1444" end="1462" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="1483" end="1510" title="non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1617" end="1626" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139911" start="1717" end="1741" title="James Monroe High School (New York)" label="James Monroe High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1745" end="1754" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="1784" end="1803" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League"/>
<link wikidata="Q721633" start="1852" end="1864" title="György Kepes" label="György Kepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q371625" start="1868" end="1884" title="Brooklyn College" label="Brooklyn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q244865" start="2085" end="2093" title="Champion (1949 film)" label="Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321222" start="2114" end="2133" title="Death of a Salesman (1951 film)" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q939614" start="2157" end="2173" title="The Moon Is Blue (film)" label="The Moon Is Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q374821" start="2270" end="2281" title="film poster" label="film poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043659" start="2306" end="2318" title="Carmen Jones (film)" label="Carmen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q52997" start="2865" end="2879" title="Otto Preminger" label="Otto Preminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195631" start="2893" end="2920" title="The Man with the Golden Arm" label="The Man with the Golden Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639178" start="3011" end="3027" title="heroin addiction" label="heroin addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="3100" end="3114" title="title sequence" label="title sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q638636" start="3476" end="3494" title="kinetic typography" label="kinetic typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q223139" start="3506" end="3524" title="North by Northwest" label="North by Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="3545" end="3552" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182739" start="3580" end="3592" title="John Whitney (animator)" label="John Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="3604" end="3610" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q627325" start="3701" end="3717" title="graphic designer" label="graphic designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q759471" start="4874" end="4895" title="Walk on the Wild Side (film)" label="Walk on the Wild Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855824" start="4984" end="5002" title="Nine Hours to Rama" label="Nine Hours to Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q488376" start="5177" end="5196" title="Anatomy of a Murder" label="Anatomy of a Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="5270" end="5288" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q696057" start="5302" end="5329" title="Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)" label="Around the World in 80 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="5492" end="5511" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721120" start="6024" end="6039" title="Elaine Bass" label="Elaine Makatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q108297" start="6116" end="6125" title="Spartacus (film)" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243170" start="6569" end="6576" title="Bunraku" label="Bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125442" start="6728" end="6748" title="The Age of Innocence (1993 film)" label="The Age of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199372" start="6795" end="6813" title="Mr. Saturday Night" label="Mr. Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534298" start="7095" end="7105" title="Grand Prix (1966 film)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q303477" start="7208" end="7223" title="The Big Country" label="The Big Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216269" start="7361" end="7372" title="The Victors (1963 film)" label="The Victors"/>
<link wikidata="Q95125" start="7728" end="7743" title="James L. Brooks" label="James L. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="7748" end="7763" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="7877" end="7887" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q501995" start="7908" end="7917" title="Cape Fear (1991 film)" label="Cape Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125442" start="7938" end="7958" title="The Age of Innocence (1993 film)" label="The Age of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q220910" start="7983" end="7989" title="Casino (1995 film)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="8052" end="8067" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="8289" end="8303" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q450279" start="8318" end="8334" title="Nicholas Pileggi" label="Nicholas Pileggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="9119" end="9138" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9159" end="9177" title="X-Men: First Class" label="X-Men: First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="9233" end="9240" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814593" start="9268" end="9273" title="Conan (talk show)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043659" start="9324" end="9336" title="Carmen Jones (film)" label="Carmen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631423" start="9358" end="9371" title="The Big Knife" label="The Big Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195631" start="9393" end="9420" title="The Man with the Golden Arm" label="The Man with the Golden Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438205" start="9442" end="9452" title="The Racers" label="The Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="9474" end="9493" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011994" start="9515" end="9525" title="The Shrike (film)" label="The Shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q696057" start="9547" end="9578" title="Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film)" label="Around the World in Eighty Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609491" start="9600" end="9612" title="Storm Center" label="Storm Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q638884" start="9634" end="9640" title="Attack (1956 film)" label="Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441978" start="9662" end="9675" title="Johnny Concho" label="Johnny Concho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304888" start="9697" end="9713" title="Edge of the City" label="Edge of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q589555" start="9735" end="9745" title="Saint Joan (1957 film)" label="Saint Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q611966" start="9767" end="9792" title="The Pride and the Passion" label="The Pride and the Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q795045" start="9814" end="9832" title="The Young Stranger" label="The Young Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q511332" start="9854" end="9871" title="Bonjour Tristesse (film)" label="Bonjour Tristesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747719" start="9893" end="9899" title="Cowboy (1958 film)" label="Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="9921" end="9928" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q303477" start="9950" end="9965" title="The Big Country" label="The Big Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q488376" start="9987" end="10006" title="Anatomy of a Murder" label="Anatomy of a Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q223139" start="10028" end="10046" title="North by Northwest" label="North by Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="10068" end="10074" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q108297" start="10096" end="10105" title="Spartacus (film)" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003616" start="10127" end="10144" title="The Facts of Life (film)" label="The Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355901" start="10166" end="10172" title="Exodus (1960 film)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q464933" start="10194" end="10209" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s 11" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q273704" start="10231" end="10246" title="West Side Story (1961 film)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004483" start="10268" end="10282" title="Something Wild (1961 film)" label="Something Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631150" start="10304" end="10324" title="Advise &amp;amp; Consent" label="Advise &amp;amp; Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q759471" start="10346" end="10367" title="Walk on the Wild Side (film)" label="Walk on the Wild Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216269" start="10389" end="10400" title="The Victors (1963 film)" label="The Victors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855824" start="10422" end="10440" title="Nine Hours to Rama" label="Nine Hours to Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306890" start="10462" end="10498" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q737065" start="10520" end="10532" title="The Cardinal" label="The Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362240" start="10554" end="10572" title="In Harm&amp;#x27;s Way" label="In Harm&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009708" start="10594" end="10615" title="Bunny Lake Is Missing" label="Bunny Lake Is Missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534298" start="10637" end="10647" title="Grand Prix (1966 film)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q846987" start="10669" end="10702" title="Not with My Wife, You Don&amp;#x27;t!" label="Not with My Wife, You Don&amp;#x27;t!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195447" start="10724" end="10731" title="Seconds (1966 film)" label="Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648111" start="10753" end="10770" title="Such Good Friends" label="Such Good Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484046" start="10792" end="10826" title="That&amp;#x27;s Entertainment, Part II" label="That&amp;#x27;s Entertainment, Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539062" start="10848" end="10862" title="Broadcast News (film)" label="Broadcast News"/>
<link wikidata="Q858467" start="10884" end="10887" title="Big (film)" label="Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227053" start="10909" end="10914" title="The Silk Road (film)" label="Tonkō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121597" start="10936" end="10956" title="The War of the Roses (film)" label="The War of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="10978" end="10988" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q501995" start="11010" end="11019" title="Cape Fear (1991 film)" label="Cape Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q691838" start="11041" end="11054" title="Doc Hollywood" label="Doc Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199372" start="11076" end="11094" title="Mr. Saturday Night" label="Mr. Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125442" start="11116" end="11136" title="The Age of Innocence (1993 film)" label="The Age of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617908" start="11158" end="11173" title="Higher Learning" label="Higher Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q220910" start="11195" end="11201" title="Casino (1995 film)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354637" start="11223" end="11286" title="A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies" label="A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="11532" end="11552" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131992" start="11561" end="11566" title="Dixie Cup" label="Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="11578" end="11593" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q135325" start="11838" end="11843" title="Alcoa" label="Alcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q412826" start="11853" end="11862" title="Ajinomoto" label="Ajinomoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="11872" end="11892" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q790650" start="11902" end="11921" title="Avery Dennison" label="Avery International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="11931" end="11942" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923055" start="11952" end="11973" title="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Clubs of America" label="Boys Clubs of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q547450" start="11983" end="11991" title="Celanese" label="Celanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="12001" end="12021" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131992" start="12031" end="12036" title="Dixie Cup" label="Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505955" start="12046" end="12063" title="Frontier Airlines (1950–1986)" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12073" end="12101" title="Imperial Chemical Industries#Reorganisation of the business (1991–2007)" label="Fuller(-O&amp;#x27;Brien) Paints"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="12111" end="12125" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272111" start="12135" end="12148" title="General Foods" label="General Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576280" start="12158" end="12180" title="Girl Scouts of the USA" label="Girl Scouts of the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="12190" end="12203" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q497244" start="12213" end="12237" title="Japan Energy Corporation" label="Japan Energy Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919540" start="12247" end="12266" title="J. Paul Getty Trust" label="J. Paul Getty Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371867" start="12294" end="12301" title="Kleenex" label="Kleenex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18857532" start="12311" end="12325" title="Kosé" label="Kosé Cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116247" start="12335" end="12361" title="Lawry&amp;#x27;s Seasoned Salt" label="Lawry&amp;#x27;s Seasoned Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504870" start="12366" end="12392" title="Lawry&amp;#x27;s The Prime Rib" label="Lawry&amp;#x27;s The Prime Rib"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729092" start="12402" end="12419" title="Maeda Corporation" label="Maeda Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q354578" start="12452" end="12459" title="Minolta" label="Minolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="12469" end="12484" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699694" start="12494" end="12513" title="Quaker Oats Company" label="Quaker Oats Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="12523" end="12545" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444977" start="12555" end="12576" title="Security Pacific Bank" label="Security Pacific Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569730" start="12586" end="12628" title="Southern California Rapid Transit District" label="Southern California Rapid Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="12638" end="12653" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050859" start="12663" end="12673" title="United Way" label="United Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944379" start="12678" end="12705" title="United Way of Canada" label="United Way Centraide Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="12718" end="12751" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885391" start="12761" end="12777" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the United States" label="US postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="12821" end="12842" title="Warner Communications" label="Warner Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q324679" start="12852" end="12867" title="Wienerschnitzel" label="Wienerschnitzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984163" start="12877" end="12887" title="Wesson Oil" label="Wesson Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022739" start="12897" end="12905" title="YWCA USA" label="YWCA USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="13263" end="13280" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q772112" start="13465" end="13481" title="World Food Prize" label="World Food Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195631" start="13659" end="13686" title="The Man with the Golden Arm" label="The Man with the Golden Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="14183" end="14190" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q488376" start="14369" end="14388" title="Anatomy of a Murder" label="Anatomy of a Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q52997" start="14669" end="14683" title="Otto Preminger" label="Otto Preminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="14685" end="14701" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="14703" end="14715" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="14721" end="14736" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="14801" end="14817" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q483941" start="14831" end="14852" title="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List" label="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043659" start="15169" end="15181" title="Carmen Jones (film)" label="Carmen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195631" start="15203" end="15230" title="The Man with the Golden Arm" label="The Man with the Golden Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304888" start="15252" end="15268" title="Edge of the City" label="Edge of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609491" start="15290" end="15302" title="Storm Center" label="Storm Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q630855" start="15324" end="15345" title="Love in the Afternoon (1957 film)" label="Love in the Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q589555" start="15367" end="15377" title="Saint Joan (1957 film)" label="Saint Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q511332" start="15399" end="15416" title="Bonjour tristesse (film)" label="Bonjour tristesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q303477" start="15438" end="15453" title="The Big Country" label="The Big Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="15492" end="15499" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q488376" start="15521" end="15540" title="Anatomy of a Murder" label="Anatomy of a Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355901" start="15576" end="15582" title="Exodus (1960 film)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="15604" end="15619" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631150" start="15641" end="15661" title="Advise &amp;amp; Consent (film)" label="Advise &amp;amp; Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q608943" start="15684" end="15703" title="Birdman of Alcatraz (film)" label="Birdman of Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306890" start="15725" end="15761" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q737065" start="15783" end="15795" title="The Cardinal" label="The Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362240" start="15817" end="15835" title="In Harm&amp;#x27;s Way" label="In Harm&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009708" start="15857" end="15878" title="Bunny Lake Is Missing" label="Bunny Lake Is Missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193389" start="15900" end="15923" title="The Firemen&amp;#x27;s Ball" label="The Firemen&amp;#x27;s Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370719" start="15945" end="15958" title="The Two of Us (1967 film)" label="The Two of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070468" start="15980" end="15995" title="Why Man Creates" label="Why Man Creates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294901" start="16017" end="16037" title="Very Happy Alexander" label="Very Happy Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478641" start="16072" end="16108" title="Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon" label="Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648111" start="16130" end="16147" title="Such Good Friends" label="Such Good Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432500" start="16169" end="16176" title="Rosebud (1975 film)" label="Rosebud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199453" start="16311" end="16327" title="The Human Factor (1979 film)" label="The Human Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15809194" start="16349" end="16363" title="The Solar Film" label="The Solar Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714149" start="16385" end="16404" title="The Double McGuffin" label="The Double McGuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186341" start="16450" end="16461" title="The Shining (film)" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q73583" start="16483" end="16509" title="Return from the River Kwai" label="Return from the River Kwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q483941" start="16549" end="16570" title="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List" label="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="16667" end="16676" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268296" start="16695" end="16703" title="Clockers (film)" label="Clockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q488376" start="16820" end="16839" title="Anatomy of a Murder" label="Anatomy of a Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q381731" start="17086" end="17104" title="Burn After Reading" label="Burn After Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q269331" start="17219" end="17227" title="Precious (film)" label="Precious"/>
<link wikidata="Q488376" start="17318" end="17337" title="Anatomy of a Murder" label="Anatomy of a Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="17363" end="17380" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642226" start="17400" end="17428" title="The Hardest Button to Button" label="The Hardest Button to Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195631" start="17484" end="17511" title="The Man with the Golden Arm" label="The Man with the Golden Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676330" start="17542" end="17560" title="J. H. Williams III" label="J. H. Williams III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="17584" end="17590" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q791352" start="17597" end="17624" title="Batman R.I.P." label="&amp;quot;The Black Glove&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q375039" start="17861" end="17882" title="Student Academy Award" label="Student Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="17891" end="17934" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q108297" start="18380" end="18389" title="Spartacus (film)" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="18549" end="18567" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534298" start="18591" end="18601" title="Grand Prix (1966 film)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q273704" start="18714" end="18729" title="West Side Story (1961 film)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="18948" end="18954" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q205314" start="19206" end="19217" title="Janet Leigh" label="Janet Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056710" start="19719" end="19731" title="Donald Spoto" label="Donald Spoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610339" start="19931" end="19946" title="Stephen Rebello" label="Stephen Rebello"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="20674" end="20681" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57062789" start="21191" end="21202" title="Pat Kirkham" label="Pat Kirkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931170" start="21422" end="21431" title="long take" label="long shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771816" start="21632" end="21644" title="Marli Renfro" label="Marli Renfro"/>
<link wikidata="Q704752" start="21744" end="21759" title="George Tomasini" label="George Tomasini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721120" start="22123" end="22129" title="Elaine Bass" label="Elaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189910" start="22201" end="22232" title="1964 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1964 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659433" start="22251" end="22260" title="Sy Wexler" label="Sy Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070468" start="22325" end="22340" title="Why Man Creates" label="Why Man Creates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425151" start="22361" end="22404" title="Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject" label="Academy Award for Documentary Short Subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="22522" end="22532" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="22594" end="22616" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="22624" end="22643" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="22805" end="22819" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324407" start="22827" end="22852" title="Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film" label="Notes on the Popular Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15809194" start="22879" end="22893" title="The Solar Film" label="The Solar Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="23021" end="23041" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q589871" start="23048" end="23056" title="Phase IV (1974 film)" label="Phase IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671357" start="23230" end="23250" title="Academy Film Archive" label="Academy Film Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052709" start="23360" end="23384" title="Margaret Herrick Library" label="Margaret Herrick Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="23665" end="23678" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290193" start="23710" end="23724" title="Unsquare Dance" label="Unsquare Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597" start="23734" end="23746" title="Dave Brubeck" label="Dave Brubeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039318" start="23765" end="23780" title="Motion graphics" label="Motion graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q468160" start="23783" end="23792" title="Paul Rand" label="Paul Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323729" start="23795" end="23808" title="Richard Amsel" label="Richard Amsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816379" start="23811" end="23819" title="Tom Jung" label="Tom Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488248" start="23822" end="23836" title="Frank McCarthy (artist)" label="Frank McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323334" start="23839" end="23847" title="Bob Peak" label="Bob Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q932839" start="23850" end="23862" title="Drew Struzan" label="Drew Struzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921026" start="23865" end="23880" title="Howard Terpning" label="Howard Terpning"/>
<link wikidata="Q712906" start="23883" end="23894" title="Pablo Ferro" label="Pablo Ferro"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849350" wikidata="Q1596018" url="?curid=849350" title="1999–2000 Heineken Cup">
<text>The 1999–2000 Heineken Cup was the fifth edition of the Heineken Cup of rugby. Teams from France, Ireland, Italy, Wales, England and Scotland were divided into six pools of four and played home and away matches against each other. The pool winners and two best runners-up qualified for the knockout stages.
&#x27;

==Teams==
==Pool stage==
In the pool matches teams received
* 2 points for a win
* 1 points for a draw
===Pool 1===
===Pool 2===
===Pool 3===
===Pool 4===
===Pool 5===
===Pool 6===
==Seeding==
==Knockout stage==

===Quarter-finals===




===Semi-finals===


===Final===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1596018" start="4" end="26" title="1999–2000 Heineken Cup" label="1999–2000 Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="56" end="68" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="90" end="96" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="98" end="105" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="107" end="112" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="114" end="119" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="121" end="128" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="133" end="141" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849357" wikidata="Q204059" url="?curid=849357" title="Mateja Kežman">
<text>Mateja Kežman (, ; born 12 April 1979) is a Serbian sports agent and former professional footballer who played as a striker.

Upon playing in his homeland, Kežman went on to play top-flight football in the Netherlands, England, Spain, Turkey, France, Russia, Hong Kong and Belarus. He is arguably best known for his career at PSV, earning numerous awards and worldwide recognition as having the potential to be one of the greatest strikers of his generation, being named Dutch Footballer of the Year in 2003. Kežman was subsequently labeled as a flop after his spell at Chelsea, as there were extremely high expectations of him. By the end of his illustrious career, he had amassed a record number of championship medals in the top-tier competitions of five different countries. Internationally, Kežman represented FR Yugoslavia / Serbia and Montenegro in one European Championship and one World Cup.

After finishing his professional playing career, Kežman became a sports agent, currently representing Sergej Milinković-Savić among other players. He also served as a director of football at Vojvodina in 2013.

==Early and personal life==
Kežman&#x27;s father Zlatko was also a footballer who played as a goalkeeper, spending the majority of his career with Zemun.

His early career at Partizan was disrupted by NATO&#x27;s airstrikes on Belgrade in 1999. In 2003, he took protection when a Yugoslav criminal threatened to kidnap him and hold PSV to ransom.

Kežman is a devout member of the Serbian Orthodox Church. During his time in the Netherlands, he prayed in the German city of Dortmund to retain his privacy. Although he considers his addiction to tattoos to be a vice, his tattoos are of a religious theme, and while playing he wore an undershirt with a printed icon of Jesus; this drew media attention during his spell in Turkey. He pledged to become a monk in the church.

==Club career==

===Partizan===
In the summer of 1998. At the age of 19, Kežman joined Partizan. In the 1998/99 season. He scored six goals in 22 league games, and won the championship title. In that season, he drew attention to himself when, in the 111-th Eternal derby against Red Star, he scored a goal in the last minute, which gave Partizan a 2–1 victory.

In the 1999/00 season. Coach Miodrag Ješić takes the helm on the Partizan bench and then Kežman plays even better games. He scored 27 goals in 32 league games. However, (The Black-Whites) ended that season without a trophy.
In his two seasons at the club, Kežman made a name for himself as a prolific striker and became a favourite among the fans of the club. He scored a total of 33 league goals in 54 appearances and was the top scorer of the national championship in the 1999–2000 season. He was especially good in the eternal derbies with Red Star, because he scored the same number of goals in 5 games he played.

===PSV===
In the summer of 2000, Kežman completed his move to Dutch club PSV. In his debut season, he was the league&#x27;s top scorer, achieving 24 goals in 33 games as PSV won the title. He also picked up the nickname &#x27;Batman&#x27;, because the famous theme song was played at Philips Stadion every time he scored. He formed a successful partnership with Arjen Robben, and they gained the epithet &#x27;Batman and Robben&#x27;, a pun on Batman and Robin.

Kežman went to score 81 goals over the following three seasons with PSV. His best season in terms of both goals and appearances was 2002–03 when he played 33 out of 34 of PSV&#x27;s matches and scored 35 goals to help them win the title.

===Chelsea===
Kežman spent the 2004–05 season at Chelsea and scored seven goals in 40 appearances in all competitions. He was signed for the club on 13 July 2004 for £5.3 million by José Mourinho. He wore the number 9 shirt left vacant by Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink&#x27;s transfer to Middlesbrough.

He played 24 league games and scored four goals. The first goal came on 4 December 2004 in a 4–0 victory over Newcastle United at home, with an injury time penalty after coming on as a substitute in the 61st minute. He did not score again until 11 March 2005 in a 3–1 away victory over Norwich City, who were relegated at the end of the season. Eight days later he scored twice at home against another team that would be relegated, Crystal Palace, as Chelsea won 4–1. At the end of the season Chelsea won their first league title since 1954–55.

His first ever goal for Chelsea was in League Cup third round at home to West Ham United on 27 October 2004. It was the only goal of the game. He scored a goal in extra time (112th minute) of the 2005 League Cup Final against Liverpool. Chelsea won 3–2 after it finished 1–1 after 90 minutes.

Kežman scored a goal in the 3rd round of that season&#x27;s FA Cup against Scunthorpe United as Chelsea won 3–1 at home. His attack down the right wing set up Chelsea&#x27;s first goal in the 4-2 win against Barcelona in the Champions League Round of 16, in a &quot;brilliant&quot; play with the scorer Eiður Guðjohnsen.

In 2011, Kežman revealed to Sky Sports that his time at Chelsea was the best he has ever had in football, despite failing to make an impact for the club: &quot;Chelsea was the best thing in my career. That was the climax of my career, for sure. Living and playing in London was something that I will never forget. I don&#x27;t know if I made a mistake because I moved away so quickly. Maybe I do and maybe I don&#x27;t regret it, but I always believe in my decisions. But the transfer to Chelsea made my dreams come true. That was the best thing that ever happened to me. Maybe I could achieve more and I could have been more successful at Stamford Bridge, but I don&#x27;t regret anything.&quot;

===Atlético Madrid===
Kežman left Chelsea for Atlético Madrid of Spain&#x27;s Primera División on 29 June 2005 for £5.3 million, the same price as he had joined Chelsea. He soon suffered a knee injury, which he did not recover from until after New Year&#x27;s in 2006. Initially, the appointment of José Murcia as coach allegedly boosted Kežman&#x27;s confidence, but by the end of his spell in Madrid, Kežman actually scored more goals (six) under Carlos Bianchi than with Murcia (with whom he scored a total of two goals in the remainder of the season). Atlético ended the season in 10th and were knocked out by Real Zaragoza in the Copa del Rey round of 16. Kežman scored a total of eight goals in 30 league matches, often in a strike partnership with Fernando Torres.

===Fenerbahçe===
In the summer of 2006, Kežman was transferred to Fenerbahçe on a four-year contract. He played a central role in Fenerbahçe winning the 2006–07 Süper Lig in their centennial year. In the 2007–08 UEFA Champions League, he appeared in over half of Fenerbahçe&#x27;s group stage matches against the likes of his former club PSV, Internazionale and CSKA Moscow. Ironically, he even played against Chelsea over both legs of the 2008 Champions League quarter-finals; the first of which he started and showed off with a close bicycle kick in a 2–1 win, while in the second leg he was subbed in during the dying minutes of his team&#x27;s 2–0 loss at Stamford Bridge, where Fenerbahçe was eliminated in the longest-lasting Champions League campaign in the club&#x27;s history. As a result of this and the preceding regular season, in which Kežman scored almost a goal every other game by statistical average, Fenerbahçe S.K. supporters revered him even in the years after he left Istanbul in his journeyman years.

===Paris Saint-Germain===
On 19 August 2008, Kežman signed for Paris Saint-Germain, a one-year loan with a buyout clause. He appeared in 21 league matches, mostly as substitute, and scored three goals.

On 30 August 2009, it was announced that Kežman would be joining Zenit Saint Petersburg from Paris Saint-Germain on a season-long loan, with a purchase option for an undisclosed fee. The next day, the transfer had been officially confirmed when the player passed medical examinations. He scored two goals for Zenit helping the team to finish 3rd in the Russian Premier League, but the Russian side decided not to retain his services, and he returned to Paris in January 2010.

On 3 November 2010, Kežman&#x27;s contract with PSG was terminated by mutual consent.

===South China===
On 20 January 2011, it was announced that Kežman had signed to play for South China for the rest of the 2010–11 Hong Kong First Division League. Kežman made his debut on 29 January 2011 versus NT Realty Wofoo Tai Po which lost 1–0; he was substituted by Leung Chun Pong in the 64th minute.

On 13 February 2011, in the League Cup semi-final against league leader Kitchee, Kežman scored his first goal for the club in the 32nd minute and his second goal seven minutes before the end. South China beat Kitchee by 4–2 and entered the finals.

On 13 April 2011, in the 2011 AFC Cup group H match against Kingfisher East Bengal, Kežman scored his first AFC Cup goal in the 69th minute with a header, assisted by Au Yeung Yiu Chung. His goal helped South China gain victory and moved up to 3rd position in the group, but he also received a yellow card in the match, his second yellow card in the tournament and he missed the away game to East Bengal.

In May 2011, after his team failed to progress into the 2011 AFC Cup knockout stage, following 2–4 loss to Indonesian outfit Persipura Jayapura, Kežman said to the media that the AFC Cup is a strange competition and kind of stupid. He blamed the hot weather and long travel to go to Jayapura as one of the factors why his team could not progress further.

In the final match of the 2010–11 Hong Kong FA Cup, Kežman managed to take advantage of an opponent&#x27;s defensive error and scored an outstanding goal in extra time to give his team a 2–1 win over NT Realty Wofoo Tai Po on 29 May 2011. The next day, Kežman finished his stint with South China after his four-month contract expired.

===BATE===
On 31 August 2011, Kežman joined Belarusian side BATE Borisov as a free agent until the end of the year. He was seen as a reinforcement for upcoming UEFA Champions League group stage games and as a potential replacement for seriously injured striker Vitali Rodionov. Ultimately, Kežman played six games in the Belarusian League and 5 games in the Champions League without scoring any goals. He parted ways with BATE after the last Champions League game against Barcelona.

===Return to Hong Kong and retirement===
In January 2012, Kežman returned to South China to play at the Asian Challenge Cup. He played his last professional match on 26 January 2012, missing the last penalty in the shoot-out series against Guangzhou R&amp;F, in the third-place match. The club retired Kežman&#x27;s number 38 after his last match.

==International career==
Kežman marked his senior international debut for FR Yugoslavia during March 2000 with a goal against China in a friendly match as part of the preparations for UEFA Euro 2000. Head coach Vujadin Boškov included him in the final 23-man roster that he took to Belgium and the Netherlands. Despite being the fourth attacking option behind Predrag Mijatović, Savo Milošević and Darko Kovačević, 21-year-old Kežman got his chance as substitute late in the group match versus Norway. However, after being on the pitch for about 90 seconds, he was sent off following a rash tackle on Erik Mykland.

In February 2003, after embarrassing performances of the team during UEFA Euro 2004 qualifying, Kežman announced that he retired from the national jersey. However, Kežman returned to the team few months later, after Ilija Petković was appointed as the new coach.

Kežman led Serbia and Montenegro&#x27;s scoring during the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualifications with five goals, including the only goal in the final game against Bosnia and Herzegovina which in turn allowed Serbia and Montenegro to qualify directly, having come first in their group. During the competition, he was sent off in a group match against Argentina by referee Roberto Rosetti.

After his sending off against Argentina at the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Kežman did not receive any call up for his country&#x27;s national team.

During his six-year career in the national team, Kežman scored 17 goals in 49 appearances.

==Career statistics==

===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Serbia and Montenegro&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Kežman goal.&quot;

==Honours==
Partizan
*First League of FR Yugoslavia: 1998–99

PSV
*Eredivisie: 2000–01, 2002–03
*Johan Cruyff Shield: 2000, 2001, 2003

Chelsea
*Premier League: 2004–05
*Football League Cup: 2004–05

Fenerbahçe
*Süper Lig: 2006–07
*Turkish Super Cup: 2007

Paris Saint-Germain
*Coupe de France: 2009–10

South China
*Hong Kong FA Cup: 2010–11

BATE Borisov
* Belarusian Premier League: 2011

Individual
*First League of FR Yugoslavia top scorer: 1999–2000
*Eredivisie top scorer: 2000–01, 2002–03, 2003–04
*Dutch Footballer of the Year: 2002–03
*ESM Team of the Year: 2002–03

==See also==
*2017–2019 Belgian football fraud scandal

==Notes==


==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204059" start="0" end="13" title="Mateja Kežman" label="Mateja Kežman"/>
<link wikidata="Q144662" start="52" end="64" title="sports agent" label="sports agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="89" end="99" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="116" end="123" title="striker (association football)" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="326" end="329" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q39692" start="471" end="499" title="Dutch Footballer of the Year" label="Dutch Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="570" end="577" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131732" start="815" end="852" title="Serbia and Montenegro national football team" label="FR Yugoslavia / Serbia and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="860" end="881" title="UEFA European Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="890" end="899" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15673000" start="1004" end="1027" title="Sergej Milinković-Savić" label="Sergej Milinković-Savić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130252" start="1069" end="1089" title="director of football" label="director of football"/>
<link wikidata="Q207501" start="1093" end="1102" title="FK Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1180" end="1190" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="1207" end="1217" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323373" start="1260" end="1265" title="FK Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1314" end="1318" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="1326" end="1348" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="airstrikes on Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="1494" end="1517" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="1587" end="1595" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="1773" end="1777" title="Icon (art)" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442042" start="1865" end="1883" title="Orthodox monasticism" label="monk in the church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188656" start="1973" end="1981" title="FK Partizan" label="Partizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657120" start="2143" end="2156" title="Eternal derby (Serbia)" label="Eternal derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q173009" start="2165" end="2173" title="Red Star Belgrade" label="Red Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743657" start="2277" end="2290" title="Miodrag Ješić" label="Miodrag Ješić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270157" start="2722" end="2738" title="1999–2000 First League of FR Yugoslavia" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="2940" end="2943" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349894" start="2952" end="2964" title="2000–01 Eredivisie" label="debut season"/>
<link wikidata="Q500972" start="3151" end="3166" title="Philips Stadion" label="Philips Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43913" start="3229" end="3241" title="Arjen Robben" label="Arjen Robben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633138" start="3311" end="3327" title="Batman (comic book)" label="Batman and Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349907" start="3462" end="3469" title="2002–03 Eredivisie" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="3618" end="3625" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79983" start="3751" end="3764" title="José Mourinho" label="José Mourinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q223176" start="3808" end="3831" title="Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink" label="Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="3851" end="3864" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="3977" end="3993" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="4153" end="4165" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="4299" end="4313" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667052" start="4403" end="4410" title="1954–55 Chelsea F.C. season" label="1954–55"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="4452" end="4462" title="Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="4486" end="4501" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471364" start="4609" end="4630" title="2005 Football League Cup Final" label="2005 League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="4639" end="4648" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386656" start="4748" end="4773" title="2004–05 FA Cup" label="that season&amp;#x27;s FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19615" start="4782" end="4799" title="Scunthorpe United F.C." label="Scunthorpe United"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="4915" end="4924" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4932" end="4960" title="2004–05 Chelsea F.C. season#Round of 16" label="Champions League Round of 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q187396" start="5010" end="5026" title="Eiður Guðjohnsen" label="Eiður Guðjohnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="5057" end="5067" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="5669" end="5684" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="5773" end="5788" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="5805" end="5821" title="La Liga" label="Primera División"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758104" start="6026" end="6037" title="José Murcia" label="José Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q449873" start="6176" end="6190" title="Carlos Bianchi" label="Carlos Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162977" start="6298" end="6308" title="2005–06 La Liga" label="the season"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308" start="6341" end="6354" title="Real Zaragoza" label="Real Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130876" start="6362" end="6374" title="2005–06 Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42731" start="6482" end="6497" title="Fernando Torres" label="Fernando Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601875" start="6566" end="6576" title="Fenerbahçe S.K. (football)" label="Fenerbahçe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924871" start="6653" end="6670" title="2006–07 Süper Lig" label="2006–07 Süper Lig"/>
<link wikidata="Q186489" start="6704" end="6733" title="2007–08 UEFA Champions League" label="2007–08 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="6843" end="6857" title="Inter Milan" label="Internazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q176371" start="6862" end="6873" title="PFC CSKA Moscow" label="CSKA Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="6910" end="6917" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q860430" start="7036" end="7048" title="bicycle kick" label="bicycle kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="7160" end="7175" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443325" start="7418" end="7444" title="Fenerbahçe S.K. supporters" label="Fenerbahçe S.K. supporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="7489" end="7497" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q483020" start="7587" end="7606" title="Paris Saint-Germain F.C." label="Paris Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29108" start="7792" end="7814" title="FC Zenit Saint Petersburg" label="Zenit Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084791" start="8059" end="8072" title="2009 Russian Premier League" label="to finish 3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q182165" start="8080" end="8102" title="Russian Premier League" label="Russian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140533" start="8381" end="8392" title="South China AA" label="South China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951723" start="8413" end="8452" title="2010–11 Hong Kong First Division League" label="2010–11 Hong Kong First Division League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210621" start="8502" end="8524" title="NT Realty Wofoo Tai Po" label="NT Realty Wofoo Tai Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534570" start="8563" end="8578" title="Leung Chun Pong" label="Leung Chun Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619507" start="8628" end="8638" title="2010–11 Hong Kong League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q141045" start="8672" end="8679" title="Kitchee" label="Kitchee"/>
<link wikidata="Q291810" start="8874" end="8886" title="2011 AFC Cup" label="2011 AFC Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981749" start="8909" end="8931" title="Kingfisher East Bengal" label="Kingfisher East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916590" start="9016" end="9034" title="Au Yeung Yiu Chung" label="Au Yeung Yiu Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620209" start="9311" end="9338" title="2011 AFC Cup knockout stage" label="2011 AFC Cup knockout stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151980" start="9380" end="9398" title="Persipura Jayapura" label="Persipura Jayapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q291808" start="9434" end="9441" title="AFC Cup" label="AFC Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860" start="9538" end="9546" title="Jayapura" label="Jayapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619509" start="9637" end="9661" title="2010–11 Hong Kong FA Cup" label="2010–11 Hong Kong FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210621" start="9811" end="9833" title="NT Realty Wofoo Tai Po" label="NT Realty Wofoo Tai Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q191101" start="10007" end="10019" title="FC BATE Borisov" label="BATE Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q485002" start="10107" end="10128" title="2011–12 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087189" start="10208" end="10223" title="Vitali Rodionov" label="Vitali Rodionov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239430" start="10268" end="10285" title="2011 Belarusian Premier League" label="Belarusian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="10419" end="10428" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616462" start="10535" end="10554" title="2012 Asian Challenge Cup" label="Asian Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192340" start="10671" end="10688" title="Guangzhou R&amp;amp;F F.C." label="Guangzhou R&amp;amp;F"/>
<link wikidata="Q930912" start="10725" end="10732" title="List of retired numbers in association football" label="retired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131732" start="10823" end="10829" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia national football team" label="senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="10854" end="10867" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130582" start="10906" end="10911" title="China PR national football team" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="10964" end="10978" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="UEFA Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q373776" start="10991" end="11005" title="Vujadin Boškov" label="Vujadin Boškov"/>
<link wikidata="Q237964" start="11140" end="11157" title="Predrag Mijatović" label="Predrag Mijatović"/>
<link wikidata="Q240456" start="11159" end="11173" title="Savo Milošević" label="Savo Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q313050" start="11178" end="11193" title="Darko Kovačević" label="Darko Kovačević"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="11274" end="11280" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q524168" start="11381" end="11393" title="Erik Mykland" label="Erik Mykland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19622" start="11465" end="11490" title="UEFA Euro 2004 qualifying" label="UEFA Euro 2004 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q173923" start="11612" end="11626" title="Ilija Petković" label="Ilija Petković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131732" start="11671" end="11692" title="Serbia and Montenegro national football team" label="Serbia and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q155069" start="11719" end="11752" title="2006 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="2006 FIFA World Cup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q181190" start="11821" end="11843" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208625" start="11930" end="11941" title="2006 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 7" label="their group"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="11950" end="11965" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="the competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="12008" end="12017" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q296229" start="12029" end="12044" title="Roberto Rosetti" label="Roberto Rosetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="12077" end="12086" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="12094" end="12113" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182740" start="12158" end="12186" title="Serbia national football team" label="country&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344912" start="12495" end="12524" title="First League of Serbia and Montenegro" label="First League of FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270175" start="12526" end="12533" title="1998–99 First League of FR Yugoslavia" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="12540" end="12550" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349894" start="12552" end="12559" title="2000–01 Eredivisie" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349907" start="12561" end="12568" title="2002–03 Eredivisie" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q591412" start="12570" end="12589" title="Johan Cruyff Shield" label="Johan Cruyff Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210481" start="12591" end="12595" title="2000 Johan Cruyff Shield" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069373" start="12597" end="12601" title="2001 Johan Cruyff Shield" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q63927" start="12603" end="12607" title="2003 Johan Cruyff Shield" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="12618" end="12632" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q456869" start="12634" end="12641" title="2004–05 FA Premier League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="12643" end="12662" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606640" start="12664" end="12671" title="2004–05 Football League Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q485568" start="12685" end="12694" title="Süper Lig" label="Süper Lig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924871" start="12696" end="12703" title="2006–07 Süper Lig" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q718298" start="12705" end="12722" title="Turkish Super Cup" label="Turkish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609446" start="12724" end="12728" title="2007 Turkish Super Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q212412" start="12751" end="12766" title="Coupe de France" label="Coupe de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137516" start="12768" end="12775" title="2009–10 Coupe de France" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701760" start="12790" end="12806" title="Hong Kong FA Cup" label="Hong Kong FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619509" start="12808" end="12815" title="2010–11 Hong Kong FA Cup" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q244464" start="12832" end="12857" title="Belarusian Premier League" label="Belarusian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239430" start="12859" end="12863" title="2011 Belarusian Premier League" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270157" start="12919" end="12928" title="1999–2000 First League of FR Yugoslavia" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349894" start="12953" end="12960" title="2000–01 Eredivisie" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349907" start="12962" end="12969" title="2002–03 Eredivisie" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q586866" start="12971" end="12978" title="2003–04 Eredivisie" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q39692" start="12980" end="13008" title="Dutch Footballer of the Year" label="Dutch Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601015" start="13010" end="13017" title="2002–03 in Dutch football" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q370379" start="13019" end="13022" title="European Sports Media" label="ESM"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305037" start="13064" end="13104" title="2017–2019 Belgian football fraud scandal" label="2017–2019 Belgian football fraud scandal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849358" wikidata="Q283962" url="?curid=849358" title="Split (Unix)">
<text>codice_1 is a utility on Unix, Plan 9, and Unix-like operating systems most commonly used to split a computer file into two or more smaller files.

==History==
The command first appeared in Version 3 Unix and is part of the X/Open Portability Guide since issue 2 of 1987. It was inherited into the first version of POSIX.1 and the Single Unix Specification. The version of codice_1 bundled in GNU coreutils was written by Torbjorn Granlund and Richard Stallman. The command has also been ported to the IBM i operating system.

==Usage==
The command-syntax is:

 split [OPTION] [INPUT [PREFIX]]
The default behavior of codice_1 is to generate output files of a fixed size, default 1000 lines. The files are named by appending &quot;aa&quot;, &quot;ab&quot;, &quot;ac&quot;, etc. to &quot;output filename&quot;. If &quot;output filename&quot; is not given, the default filename of &quot;x&quot; is used, for example, &quot;xaa&quot;, &quot;xab&quot;, etc. When a hyphen (&quot;-&quot;) is used instead of &quot;input filename&quot;, data is derived from standard input. The files are typically rejoined using a utility such as cat.

Additional program options permit a maximum character count (instead of a line count), a maximum line length, how many incrementing characters in generated filenames, and whether to use letters or digits.

=== Split file into pieces ===
Create a file named &quot;codice_4&quot; with exactly 3,000 lines of data:

$ head -3000 &lt; /dev/urandom &gt; myfile.txt
Now, use the codice_1 command to break this file into pieces (note: unless otherwise specified, codice_1 will break the file into 1,000-line files):

$ split myfile.txt
$ ls -l
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 761K Jun 16 18:17 myfile.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 242K Jun 16 18:17 xaa
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 263K Jun 16 18:17 xab
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 256K Jun 16 18:17 xac
$ wc --lines xa*
 1000 xaa
 1000 xab
 1000 xac
 3000 total

As seen above, the codice_1 command has broken the original file (keeping the original intact) into three, equal in number of lines (i.e., 1,000), files: codice_8, codice_9, and codice_10.

==See also==
* csplit – splits by content rather than by size
* File spanning
* List of Unix commands

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283962" start="0" end="8" title="Split (Unix)" label="codice_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="25" end="29" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="31" end="37" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="43" end="52" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="53" end="69" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="101" end="114" title="computer file" label="computer file"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079196" start="164" end="171" title="command (computing)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752932" start="190" end="204" title="Ancient Unix" label="Version 3 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753881" start="224" end="230" title="X/Open" label="X/Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q635130" start="331" end="356" title="Single Unix Specification" label="Single Unix Specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348204" start="393" end="406" title="GNU coreutils" label="GNU coreutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="444" end="460" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="502" end="507" title="IBM i" label="IBM i"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="549" end="555" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070408" start="1052" end="1066" title="standard input" label="standard input"/>
<link wikidata="Q300918" start="1125" end="1128" title="cat (Unix)" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191594" start="2120" end="2126" title="csplit" label="csplit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448360" start="2169" end="2182" title="File spanning" label="File spanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q839478" start="2185" end="2206" title="List of Unix commands" label="List of Unix commands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849361" wikidata="Q571659" url="?curid=849361" title="Old Harry Rocks">
<text>Old Harry Rocks are three chalk formations, including a stack and a stump, located at Handfast Point, on the Isle of Purbeck in Dorset, southern England. They mark the most eastern point of the Jurassic Coast, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

== Location ==
Old Harry Rocks lie directly east of Studland, about north east of Swanage, and about south of the large towns of Poole and Bournemouth. To the south are the chalk cliffs of Ballard Down, much of which is owned by the National Trust. The rocks can be viewed from the Dorset section of the South West Coast Path.

== Formation ==
The chalk of Old Harry Rocks used to be part of a long stretch of chalk between Purbeck and the Isle of Wight, but remained as a headland after large parts of this seam were eroded away. As the headland suffered hydraulic action (a process in which air and water are forced into small cracks by the force of the sea, resulting in enlarging cracks), first caves, then arches formed. The tops of the arches collapsed after being weakened by rainfall and wind, leaving disconnected stacks. One of these stacks is known as Old Harry. Old Harry&#x27;s Wife was another stack which was eroded through corrosion and abrasion, until the bottom was so weak the top fell away, leaving a stump. Hydraulic action is the main cause of erosion (shear force of the waves) that damaged the rock and caused it to fall away.

== Geology ==
The downlands of Ballard Down are part of the Portsdown Chalk Formation, containing some bands of flint, and were formed 84–72 million years ago in the Campanian age of the Late Cretaceous. The bands of stone have been gradually eroded over the centuries, some of the earlier stacks having fallen (Old Harry&#x27;s original wife fell in 1509), while new ones have been formed by the breaching of narrow isthmuses. Across the water to the east, The Needles on the Isle of Wight are usually visible. These are also part of the same chalk band and only a few thousand years ago were connected to Ballard Down.

To form the stacks, the sea gradually eroded along the joints and bedding planes where the softer chalk meets harder bedrock of the rock formations to create a cave. This eventually eroded right through to create an arch. The arch subsequently collapsed to leave the stacks of Old Harry and his wife, No Man&#x27;s Land (the large outcrop of rock at the end of the cliffs) and the gap of St Lucas&#x27; Leap.

Old Harry is formed by erosion processes, which will eventually remove the stack, whilst new stacks develop. Some people desire to preserve the rocks and protect them from the erosive processes that formed Old Harry. The National Trust, who own the stacks in perpetuity, have experience in looking after the coast, and have found that &quot;working with natural processes is the most sustainable approach&quot;.

== Legend ==
There are various stories about the naming of the rocks. One legend says that the Devil (traditionally known euphemistically as &quot;Old Harry&quot;) slept on the rocks. Another local legend says that the rocks were named after Harry Paye, the infamous Poole pirate, whose ship hid behind the rocks awaiting passing merchantmen.
Yet another tale has it that a ninth-century Viking raid was thwarted by a storm and that one of the drowned, Earl Harold, was turned into a pillar of chalk.

==See also==
* The Needles

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==

* Geology of Harry Rocks and Ballard Point Ian West, University of Southampton
* Old Harry Rocks, Dorset: GCSE Geography BBC Bitesize</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571659" start="0" end="15" title="Old Harry Rocks" label="Old Harry Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="26" end="31" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="56" end="61" title="Stack (geology)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q514259" start="109" end="124" title="Isle of Purbeck" label="Isle of Purbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="128" end="134" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="145" end="152" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="194" end="208" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="219" end="238" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q385621" start="293" end="301" title="Studland" label="Studland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009298" start="323" end="330" title="Swanage" label="Swanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="370" end="375" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="380" end="391" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q805152" start="430" end="442" title="Ballard Down" label="Ballard Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="474" end="488" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="545" end="566" title="South West Coast Path#Dorset" label="South West Coast Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954360" start="797" end="813" title="hydraulic action" label="hydraulic action"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583542" start="1316" end="1321" title="shearing (physics)" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253315" start="1411" end="1419" title="downland" label="downland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="1505" end="1510" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q492941" start="1559" end="1568" title="Campanian" label="Campanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="1580" end="1595" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1636" end="1642" title="erosion" label="eroded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281259" start="1851" end="1862" title="The Needles" label="The Needles"/>
<link wikidata="Q805152" start="2000" end="2012" title="Ballard Down" label="Ballard Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="2646" end="2660" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="2933" end="2938" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671511" start="3080" end="3090" title="Harry Paye" label="Harry Paye"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="3111" end="3117" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281259" start="3355" end="3366" title="The Needles" label="The Needles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849367" wikidata="Q1209594" url="?curid=849367" title="Nenets (disambiguation)">
<text>Nenets may refer to:
*Nenets Autonomous Okrug, a federal subject of Russia
*Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug, a federal subject of Russia
*Nenets people, a Samoyedic people
*Nenets languages, a small language family of two closely related Samoyedic languages spoken by the Nenets people:
**Tundra Nenets language
**Forest Nenets language</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2164" start="22" end="45" title="Nenets Autonomous Okrug" label="Nenets Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407" start="76" end="106" title="Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug" label="Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q166176" start="137" end="150" title="Nenets people" label="Nenets people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36452" start="172" end="188" title="Nenets languages" label="Nenets languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564258" start="288" end="310" title="Tundra Nenets language" label="Tundra Nenets language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295107" start="313" end="335" title="Forest Nenets language" label="Forest Nenets language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849371" wikidata="Q3410725" url="?curid=849371" title="Brennero">
<text>Brennero may refer to:

* Brenner, South Tyrol, a municipality in Italy
* Brenner Pass</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375769" start="26" end="46" title="Brenner, South Tyrol" label="Brenner, South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212946" start="74" end="86" title="Brenner Pass" label="Brenner Pass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849374" wikidata="Q1413777" url="?curid=849374" title="Toupée">
<text>A toupée ( ) is a hairpiece or partial wig of natural or synthetic hair worn to cover partial baldness or for theatrical purposes. While toupées and hairpieces are typically associated with male wearers, some women also use hairpieces to lengthen existing hair, or cover a partially exposed scalp.

The toupée developed during the 18th century.

== Toupées and wigs ==
While most toupées are small and designed to cover bald spots at the top and back of the head, large toupées are not unknown.

Toupées are often referred to as hairpieces, units, or hair systems. Many women now wear hairpieces rather than full wigs if their hair loss is confined to the top and crown of their heads.

==Etymology==

&quot;Toupée&quot; comes from the French &quot;toupet&quot;, meaning tuft of hair, as in a curl or lock of hair at the top of the head, not necessarily relating to covering baldness.

==History==
===18th century===
The toupée developed during the 18th century; large toupées were popular in the 1770s. Their popularity began to fade after the French Revolution.

===19th century===
In the United States, toupée use (as opposed to wigs) grew in the 19th century. One researcher has noted that this is in part due to a shift in perceptions over the perceived value of aging that occurred at that time. Men chose to attempt to appear younger, and toupées were one method used.
...since 1800, the U.S. Census generally shows far more 39-year-olds than 40-year-olds. Furthermore, the costume of men switched from a design clearly intended to make the young look older to one that was clearly intended to make the old look younger. For example, this era saw the decline of the wig and the rise of the toupée.

===20th century===
By the 1950s, it was estimated that over 350,000 U.S. men wore hairpieces, out of a potential 15 million wearers. Toupée manufacturers helped to build credibility for their product starting in 1954, when several makers advertised hairpieces in major magazines and newspapers, with successful results. Key to the promotion and acceptance of toupées was improved toupée craftsmanship, pioneered by Max Factor. Factor&#x27;s toupées were carefully made and almost invisible, with each strand of hair sewed to a piece of fine flesh-colored lace, and in a variety of long and short hairstyles. Factor, also a Hollywood makeup innovator, was the supplier of choice for most Hollywood actors.

By 1959, total U.S. sales were estimated by &quot;Time&quot; magazine to be $15 million a year. Sears-Roebuck, which had sold toupées as early as 1900 via its mail order catalog, tried to tap into the market by sending out 30,000 special catalogs by direct mail to a targeted list, advertising &quot;career winning&quot; hair products manufactured by Joseph Fleischer &amp; Co., a respected wig manufacturer. Toupées continued to be advertised in print, likely with heavier media buys taking place in magazines with the appropriate male demographic. A typical &quot;advertorial&quot; can be found in Modern Mechanix .

By 1970, &quot;Time&quot; magazine estimated that in the U.S., toupées were worn by more than 2.5 million men out of 17–20 million balding men. The increase was chalked up once again to further improvements in hairpiece technology, a desire to seem more youthful, and the long hairstyles that were increasingly in fashion.

===21st century===
Toupée and wig manufacture is no longer centered in the U.S., but in Asia. Aderans, based in Japan, is one of the world&#x27;s largest wigmakers, with 35% share of the Japanese domestic market.

From 2002 to 2004, new orders from Aderans&#x27;s male customers (both domestic and international) slipped by 30%. Researchers at both the Daiwa Institute and Nomura Research – two key Japanese economic research institutes – conclude that there is &quot;no sign of a recovery&quot; for the toupée industry. Sales for male wearers have continued to fall at Aderans in every year since, aside from 2016 where they increased slightly.

These numbers confirm the media consensus that toupée use is in decline overall.

==Manufacture==

Toupées are often custom made to the needs of the wearer, and can be manufactured using either synthetic or human hair. Toupées are usually held to one&#x27;s head using an adhesive, but the cheaper versions often merely use an elastic band.

Toupée manufacture is often done at the local level by a craftsman, but large wig manufacturers also produce toupées. Both individuals and large firms have constantly innovated to produce better quality toupées and toupée material, with over 60 patents for toupées. and over 260 for hairpieces filed at the U.S. Patent Office since 1790.

The first patent for a toupée was filed in 1921, and the first patent for a &quot;hairpiece&quot; was filed in 1956.

===Hair weaves===

Hair weaves are a technique in which the toupée&#x27;s base is then woven into whatever natural hair the wearer retains. While this may result in a less detectable toupée, the wearer can experience discomfort, and sometimes hair loss from frequently retightening of the weave as one&#x27;s own hair grows. After about six months a person can begin to lose hair permanently along the weave area, resulting in traction alopecia. Hair weaves were very popular in the 1980s and 1990s, but are not usually recommended because of the potential for permanent hair damage and hair loss.

==Use and maintenance==
While toupée dealers and manufacturers usually advertise their products showing men swimming, water-skiing and enjoying watersports, these activities can often cause irreversible wear to the toupée. Saltwater and chlorine can cause a toupée to &quot;wear out&quot; quickly. Many shampoos and soaps will damage toupée fibers, which unlike natural hair, cannot grow back or replace themselves.

While dealers of toupées can in fact help many customers to care for their toupées and make their presence virtually undetectable, the hairpieces must be of very high quality to begin with, carefully fitted, and maintained regularly and carefully. Even the best-cared-for toupée will need to be replaced on a regular basis, due to wear and, over time, to the growing areas of baldness on the wearer&#x27;s head and changes in the shade of remaining hair.

Toupée wearers may choose to own two or even three toupées at a time, ensuring that they have one to wear while the other is being cleaned, and, optionally, a spare.

==Alternatives==
Men typically wear toupées after resorting to less extreme methods of coverage. The first tactic is to make remaining hair appear thick and widespread through a combover. Other alternatives include non-surgical hair replacement, which consists of a very thin hairpiece which is put on with a medical adhesive and worn for weeks at a time.

===Medications and medical procedures===

Propecia, Rogaine and other pharmaceutical remedies were approved for treatment of alopecia by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the 1990s. These have proven capable of regrowing or sustaining existing hair at least part of the time.

However, hair transplantation, which guarantees at least some immediate results, has often replaced the use of toupées among those who can afford them, particularly onscreen celebrities.

===Baldness as fashion, acceptance of hair loss===
Other trends leading to the decline in toupée use include a rise in acceptance of baldness by those men experiencing it. Short haircuts, in fashion since the 1990s, have tended to minimize the appearance of baldness, and many balding men choose to shave their heads entirely.

==Humor==
Toupées have a long and often humorous history in Western culture. The toupée is a regular butt of jokes in many media, with a typical toupée joke focusing on the wearer&#x27;s inability to recognize how ineffective the toupée is in concealing their baldness. An early instance of &quot;toupée humor&quot; was an illustration by George Cruikshank in &quot;The Comic Almanack&quot; in 1837, in which he drew the effect of a strong wind, with a man&#x27;s toupée whipped from his head.

In the 20th century, toupées were a source of humor in virtually all forms of media, including cartoons, films, radio and television. In the 21st century, toupées continue to be a source for humor, with a variety of internet sites devoted to toupées, with a special emphasis on suspected celebrity hairpiece wearers. Also, toupée is a homophone of &quot;to pay&quot; and has been used in many jokes.

Thaddeus Stevens, famed 19th-century U.S. Congressman and abolitionist, was known for his humor and wit. On one occasion while in the Capitol, a woman requested a lock of his hair (collecting locks of hair was common at this time). Since he was bald and wearing a toupée, he ripped it off and gave it to her.

There was a long-running gag in the &quot;Morecambe &amp; Wise Show&quot; about Ernie Wise&#x27;s wig; in reality he had a full head of hair.

== Known wearers ==
Film and television stars of both past and present often wear toupées for professional reasons, particularly as they begin to age and need to maintain the image their fans have become accustomed to. However, many of these same celebrities go &quot;uncovered&quot; when not working or making public appearances.
* Bud Abbott
* Marv Albert
* Steve Allen
* Neil Aspinall
* Fred Astaire
* Raymond Bailey
* Edgar Bergen
* Humphrey Bogart
* George Burns
* Archie Campbell
* Sean Connery
* Gary Cooper
* Howard Cosell
* Bing Crosby
* Peter Cushing
* Bobby Darin
* Ted Danson
* Charles O. Finley
* Bruce Forsyth
* Paul Harvey
* Ted Healy
* Charlton Heston
* Frankie Howerd
* Gene Kelly
* Jack Klugman
* Frankie Laine
* Bela Lugosi
* Fred MacMurray
* Miles Malleson
* Groucho Marx
* John L. Mica
* Ray Milland
* Ricardo Montalbán
* James C. Morton
* Charles Nelson Reilly
* Keith Olbermann
* Carl Reiner
* Rob Reiner
* Burt Reynolds
* John D. Rockefeller
* William Roth
* William Shatner
* Frank Sinatra
* James Stewart
* Rip Taylor
* James Traficant
* Billy Vaughn
* John Wayne
* Hank Williams
* Tony Curtis

===Notes===
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1413777" start="2" end="8" title="Toupée" label="toupée"/>
<link wikidata="Q785464" start="18" end="27" title="Fake hair" label="hairpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q105507" start="39" end="42" title="wig" label="wig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856" start="57" end="71" title="synthetic fiber" label="synthetic hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="94" end="102" title="baldness" label="baldness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1045" end="1062" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354647" start="2121" end="2131" title="Max Factor" label="Max Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2462" end="2466" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="2508" end="2521" title="Sears-Roebuck" label="Sears-Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851835" start="2662" end="2673" title="direct mail" label="direct mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805586" start="2886" end="2895" title="media buying" label="media buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380060" start="2978" end="2989" title="advertorial" label="advertorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="4651" end="4669" title="U.S. Patent Office" label="U.S. Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q785464" start="4820" end="4830" title="Hair weave" label="Hair weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831635" start="5228" end="5245" title="traction alopecia" label="traction alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439902" start="6618" end="6626" title="combover" label="combover"/>
<link wikidata="Q424167" start="6839" end="6847" title="Propecia" label="Propecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424165" start="6849" end="6856" title="Minoxidil" label="Rogaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276095" start="6922" end="6930" title="Androgenetic alopecia" label="alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="6938" end="6971" title="Food and Drug Administration (United States)" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q685286" start="7090" end="7110" title="hair transplantation" label="hair transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q360466" start="7936" end="7953" title="George Cruikshank" label="George Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="8308" end="8316" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="8427" end="8436" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131138" start="8485" end="8489" title="joke" label="joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353767" start="8493" end="8509" title="Thaddeus Stevens" label="Thaddeus Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="8551" end="8563" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50408376" start="8845" end="8870" title="The Morecambe &amp;amp; Wise Show (disambiguation)" label="Morecambe &amp;amp; Wise Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23888" start="9279" end="9289" title="Bud Abbott" label="Bud Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778062" start="9292" end="9303" title="Marv Albert" label="Marv Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="9306" end="9317" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380912" start="9320" end="9333" title="Neil Aspinall" label="Neil Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="9336" end="9348" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q433493" start="9351" end="9365" title="Raymond Bailey" label="Raymond Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q721957" start="9368" end="9380" title="Edgar Bergen" label="Edgar Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="9383" end="9398" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q344793" start="9401" end="9413" title="George Burns" label="George Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786638" start="9416" end="9431" title="Archie Campbell (comedian)" label="Archie Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="9434" end="9446" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q93957" start="9449" end="9460" title="Gary Cooper" label="Gary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472983" start="9463" end="9476" title="Howard Cosell" label="Howard Cosell"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="9479" end="9490" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="9493" end="9506" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q311267" start="9509" end="9520" title="Bobby Darin" label="Bobby Darin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381203" start="9523" end="9533" title="Ted Danson" label="Ted Danson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307199" start="9536" end="9553" title="Charles O. Finley" label="Charles O. Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245136" start="9556" end="9569" title="Bruce Forsyth" label="Bruce Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q772302" start="9572" end="9583" title="Paul Harvey" label="Paul Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9586" end="9595" title="Ted Healy#After the Stooges" label="Ted Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="9598" end="9613" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="9616" end="9630" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q73089" start="9633" end="9643" title="Gene Kelly" label="Gene Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q286738" start="9646" end="9658" title="Jack Klugman" label="Jack Klugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q342774" start="9661" end="9674" title="Frankie Laine" label="Frankie Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="9677" end="9688" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q356309" start="9691" end="9705" title="Fred MacMurray" label="Fred MacMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q440360" start="9708" end="9722" title="Miles Malleson" label="Miles Malleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="9725" end="9737" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q918506" start="9740" end="9752" title="John L. Mica" label="John L. Mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="9755" end="9766" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q333595" start="9769" end="9786" title="Ricardo Montalbán" label="Ricardo Montalbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806479" start="9789" end="9804" title="James C. Morton" label="James C. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065627" start="9807" end="9828" title="Charles Nelson Reilly" label="Charles Nelson Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q463229" start="9831" end="9846" title="Keith Olbermann" label="Keith Olbermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q287793" start="9849" end="9860" title="Carl Reiner" label="Carl Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="9863" end="9873" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="9876" end="9889" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="9892" end="9911" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400609" start="9914" end="9926" title="William V. Roth, Jr." label="William Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="9929" end="9944" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="9947" end="9960" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="9963" end="9976" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354181" start="9979" end="9989" title="Rip Taylor" label="Rip Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q465728" start="9992" end="10007" title="James Traficant" label="James Traficant"/>
<link wikidata="Q863257" start="10010" end="10022" title="Billy Vaughn" label="Billy Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="10025" end="10035" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="10038" end="10051" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="10054" end="10065" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849375" wikidata="Q1076995" url="?curid=849375" title="Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider">
<text>The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC ) is the first and one of only two operating heavy-ion colliders, and the only spin-polarized proton collider ever built. Located at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) in Upton, New York, and used by an international team of researchers, it is the only operating particle collider in the US. By using RHIC to collide ions traveling at relativistic speeds, physicists study the primordial form of matter that existed in the universe shortly after the Big Bang. By colliding spin-polarized protons, the spin structure of the proton is explored.

RHIC is as of 2019 the second-highest-energy heavy-ion collider in the world, with nucleon energies for collisions reaching 100 GeV for gold ions and 250 GeV for protons. As of November 7, 2010, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) has collided heavy ions of lead at higher energies than RHIC. The LHC operating time for ions (lead–lead and lead–proton collisions) is limited to about one month per year.

In 2010, RHIC physicists published results of temperature measurements from earlier experiments which concluded that temperatures in excess of 345 MeV (4 terakelvin or 7 trillion degrees Fahrenheit) had been achieved in gold ion collisions, and that these collision temperatures resulted in the breakdown of &quot;normal matter&quot; and the creation of a liquid-like quark–gluon plasma.

In January 2020, the US Department of Energy Office of Science selected the eRHIC design for the future Electron–Ion collider (EIC), building on the existing RHIC facility at BNL.

==The accelerator==
RHIC is an intersecting storage ring particle accelerator. Two independent rings (arbitrarily denoted as &quot;Blue&quot; and &quot;Yellow&quot;) circulate heavy ions and/or polarized protons in opposite directions and allow a virtually free choice of colliding positively charged particles (the eRHIC upgrade will allow collisions between positively and negatively charged particles). The RHIC double storage ring is hexagonally shaped and has a circumference of , with curved edges in which stored particles are deflected and focused by 1,740 superconducting magnets using niobium-titanium conductors. The dipole magnets operate at . The six interaction points (between the particles circulating in the two rings) are in the middle of the six relatively straight sections, where the two rings cross, allowing the particles to collide. The interaction points are enumerated by clock positions, with the injection near 6 o&#x27;clock. Two large experiments, STAR and sPHENIX, are located at 6 and 8 o&#x27;clock respectively. The sPHENIX experiment is the newest experiment to be built at RHIC, replacing PHENIX at the 8 o&#x27;clock position.

A particle passes through several stages of s before it reaches the RHIC storage ring. The first stage for ions is the electron beam ion source (EBIS), while for protons, the linear accelerator (Linac) is used. As an example, gold nuclei leaving the EBIS have a kinetic energy of per nucleon and have an electric charge &quot;Q&quot; = +32 (32 of 79 electrons stripped from the gold atom). The particles are then accelerated by the Booster synchrotron to per nucleon, which injects the projectile now with &quot;Q&quot; = +77 into the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron (AGS), before they finally reach per nucleon and are injected in a &quot;Q&quot; = +79 state (no electrons left) into the RHIC storage ring over the AGS-to-RHIC Transfer Line (AtR).

To date the types of particle combinations explored at RHIC are , 
, , , , , , , , and . The projectiles typically travel at a speed of 99.995% of the speed of light. For collisions, the center-of-mass energy is typically per nucleon-pair, and was as low as per nucleon-pair. An average luminosity of was targeted during the planning. The current average luminosity of the collider has reached , 44 times the design value. The heavy ion luminosity is substantially increased through stochastic cooling.

One unique characteristic of RHIC is its capability to collide polarized protons. RHIC holds the record of highest energy polarized proton beams. Polarized protons are injected into RHIC and preserve this state throughout the energy ramp. This is a difficult task that is accomplished with the aid of corkscrew magnetics called &#x27;Siberian snakes&#x27; (in RHIC a chain 4 helical dipole magnets). The corkscrew induces the magnetic field to spiral along the direction of the beam 
Run-9 achieved center-of-mass energy of on 12 February 2009. In Run-13 the average luminosity of the collider reached , with a time and intensity averaged polarization of 52%.

AC dipoles have been used in non-linear machine diagnostics for the first time in RHIC.

==The experiments==
There are two detectors currently operating at RHIC: STAR (6 o&#x27;clock, and near the AGS-to-RHIC Transfer Line) and sPHENIX (8 o&#x27;clock), the successor to PHENIX. PHOBOS (10 o&#x27;clock) completed its operation in 2005, and BRAHMS (2 o&#x27;clock) in 2006.

Among the two larger detectors, STAR is aimed at the detection of hadrons with its system of time projection chambers covering a large solid angle and in a conventionally generated solenoidal magnetic field, while PHENIX is further specialized in detecting rare and electromagnetic particles, using a partial coverage detector system in a superconductively generated axial magnetic field. The smaller detectors have larger pseudorapidity coverage, PHOBOS has the largest pseudorapidity coverage of all detectors, and tailored for bulk particle multiplicity measurement, while BRAHMS is designed for momentum spectroscopy, in order to study the so-called &quot;small-&quot;x&quot;&quot; and saturation physics. There is an additional experiment, PP2PP (now part of STAR), investigating spin dependence in p + p scattering.

The spokespersons for each of the experiments are:
*STAR: Frank Geurts (Rice University) and Lijuan Ruan (Brookhaven National Laboratory)
*PHENIX: Yasuyuki Akiba (Riken) 
*sPHENIX: Gunter Roland (MIT) and David Morrison (Brookhaven National Laboratory)

==Current results==
For the experimental objective of creating and studying the quark–gluon plasma, RHIC has the unique ability to provide baseline measurements for itself. This consists of both the lower energy and also lower mass number projectile combinations that do not result in the density of 200 GeV Au + Au collisions, like the p + p and d + Au collisions of the earlier runs, and also Cu + Cu collisions in Run-5.

Using this approach, important results of the measurement of the hot QCD matter created at RHIC are:

* Collective anisotropy, or elliptic flow. The major part of the particles with lower momenta is emitted following an angular distribution formula_1 (&quot;p&quot;T is the transverse momentum, formula_2 angle with the reaction plane). This is a direct result of the elliptic shape of the nucleus overlap region during the collision and hydrodynamical property of the matter created.
* Jet quenching. In the heavy ion collision event, scattering with a high transverse &quot;p&quot;T can serve as a probe for the hot QCD matter, as it loses its energy while traveling through the medium. Experimentally, the quantity &quot;RAA&quot; (&quot;A&quot; is the mass number) being the quotient of observed jet yield in &quot;A&quot; + &quot;A&quot; collisions and &quot;N&quot;bin × yield in p + p collisions shows a strong damping with increasing &quot;A&quot;, which is an indication of the new properties of the hot QCD matter created.
* Color glass condensate saturation. The Balitsky–Fadin–Kuraev–Lipatov (BFKL) dynamics which are the result of a resummation of large logarithmic terms ln&quot;(1/x)&quot; for deep inelastic scattering with small Bjorken-&quot;x&quot;, saturate at a unitarity limit formula_3, with &quot;N&quot;part/2 being the number of participant nucleons in a collision (as opposed to the number of binary collisions). The observed charged multiplicity follows the expected dependency of formula_4, supporting the predictions of the color glass condensate model. For a detailed discussion, see e.g. Dmitri Kharzeev &quot;et al.&quot;; for an overview of color glass condensates, see e.g. Iancu &amp; Venugopalan.
* Particle ratios. The particle ratios predicted by statistical models allow the calculation of parameters such as the temperature at chemical freeze-out &quot;T&quot;ch and hadron chemical potential formula_5. The experimental value &quot;T&quot;ch varies a bit with the model used, with most authors giving a value of 160 MeV &lt; &quot;T&quot;ch &lt; 180 MeV, which is very close to the expected QCD phase transition value of approximately 170 MeV obtained by lattice QCD calculations (see e.g. Karsch).

While in the first years, theorists were eager to claim that RHIC has discovered the quark–gluon plasma (e.g. Gyulassy &amp; McLarren), the experimental groups were more careful not to jump to conclusions, citing various variables still in need of further measurement. The present results shows that the matter created is a fluid with a viscosity near the quantum limit, but is unlike a weakly interacting plasma (a widespread yet not quantitatively unfounded belief on how quark–gluon plasma looks).

A recent overview of the physics result is provided by the RHIC Experimental Evaluations 2004 , a community-wide effort of RHIC experiments to evaluate the current data in the context of implication for formation of a new state of matter. These results are from the first three years of data collection at RHIC.

New results were published in &quot;Physical Review Letters&quot; on February 16, 2010, stating the discovery of the first hints of symmetry transformations, and that the observations may suggest that bubbles formed in the aftermath of the collisions created in the RHIC may break parity symmetry, which normally characterizes interactions between quarks and gluons.

The RHIC physicists announced new temperature measurements for these experiments of up to 4 trillion kelvins, the highest temperature ever achieved in a laboratory. It is described as a recreation of the conditions that existed during the birth of the Universe.

==Possible closure under flat nuclear science budget scenarios==
In late 2012, the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee (NSAC) was asked to advise the Department of Energy&#x27;s Office of Science and the National Science Foundation how to implement the nuclear science long range plan written in 2007, if future nuclear science budgets continue to provide no growth over the next four years. In a narrowly decided vote, the NSAC committee showed a slight preference, based on non-science related considerations, for shutting down RHIC rather than canceling the construction of the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB).

By October 2015, the budget situation had improved, and RHIC continued operations into the next decade.

==The future==
RHIC began operation in 2000 and until November 2010 was the highest-energy heavy-ion collider in the world. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) of CERN, while used mainly for colliding protons, operates with heavy ions for about one month per year. The LHC has operated with 25 times higher energies per nucleon. As of 2018, RHIC and the LHC are the only operating hadron colliders in the world.

Due to the longer operating time per year, a greater number of colliding ion species and collision energies can be studied at RHIC. In addition and unlike the LHC, RHIC is also able to accelerate spin polarized protons, which would leave RHIC as the world&#x27;s highest energy accelerator for studying spin-polarized proton structure.

A major upgrade is the Electron–Ion Collider (EIC), the addition of a 18 GeV high intensity electron beam facility, allowing electron–ion collisions. At least one new detector will have to be built to study the collisions. A review was published by Abhay Deshpande et al. in 2005. A more recent description is at:

On January 9, 2020, It was announced by Paul Dabbar, undersecretary of the US Department of Energy Office of Science, that the BNL eRHIC design has been selected for the future electron–ion collider (EIC) in the United States. In addition to the site selection, it was announced that the BNL EIC had acquired CD-0 (mission need) from the Department of Energy.

==Critics of high-energy experiments==
Before RHIC started operation, critics postulated that the extremely high energy could produce catastrophic scenarios,
such as creating a black hole, a transition into a different quantum mechanical vacuum (see false vacuum), or the creation of strange matter that is more stable than ordinary matter. These hypotheses are complex, but many predict that the Earth would be destroyed in a time frame from seconds to millennia, depending on the theory considered. However, the fact that objects of the Solar System (e.g., the Moon) have been bombarded with cosmic particles of significantly higher energies than that of RHIC and other man-made colliders for billions of years, without any harm to the Solar System, were among the most striking arguments that these hypotheses were unfounded.
The other main controversial issue was a demand by critics for physicists to reasonably exclude the probability for such a catastrophic scenario. Physicists are unable to demonstrate experimental and astrophysical constraints of zero probability of catastrophic events, nor that tomorrow Earth will be struck with a &quot;doomsday&quot; cosmic ray (they can only calculate an upper limit for the likelihood). The result would be the same destructive scenarios described above, although obviously not caused by humans. According to this argument of upper limits, RHIC would still modify the chance for the Earth&#x27;s survival by an infinitesimal amount.

Concerns were raised in connection with the RHIC particle accelerator, both in the media and in the popular science media. The risk of a doomsday scenario was indicated by Martin Rees, with respect to the RHIC, as being at least a 1 in 50,000,000 chance. With regards to the production of strangelets, Frank Close, professor of physics at the University of Oxford, indicates that &quot;the chance of this happening is like you winning the major prize on the lottery 3 weeks in succession; the problem is that people believe it is possible to win the lottery 3 weeks in succession.&quot; After detailed studies, scientists reached such conclusions as &quot;beyond reasonable doubt, heavy-ion experiments at RHIC will not endanger our planet&quot; and that there is &quot;powerful empirical evidence against the possibility of dangerous strangelet production&quot;.

The debate started in 1999 with an exchange of letters in &quot;Scientific American&quot; between Walter L. Wagner and F. Wilczek, in response to a previous article by M. Mukerjee. The media attention unfolded with an article in UK &quot;Sunday Times&quot; of July 18, 1999, by J. Leake, closely followed by articles in the U.S. media. The controversy mostly ended with the report of a committee convened by the director of Brookhaven National Laboratory, J. H. Marburger, ostensibly ruling out the catastrophic scenarios depicted. However, the report left open the possibility that relativistic cosmic ray impact products might behave differently while transiting earth compared to &quot;at rest&quot; RHIC products; and the possibility that the qualitative difference between high-E proton collisions with earth or the moon might be different than gold on gold collisions at the RHIC. Wagner tried subsequently to stop full-energy collision at RHIC by filing Federal lawsuits in San Francisco and New York, but without success. The New York suit was dismissed on the technicality that the San Francisco suit was the preferred forum. The San Francisco suit was dismissed, but with leave to refile if additional information was developed and presented to the court.

On March 17, 2005, the BBC published an article implying that researcher Horaţiu Năstase believes black holes have been created at RHIC. However, the original papers of H. Năstase and the &quot;New Scientist&quot; article cited by the BBC state that the correspondence of the hot dense QCD matter created in RHIC to a black hole is only in the sense of a correspondence of QCD scattering in Minkowski space and scattering in the &quot;AdS&quot;5 × &quot;X&quot;5 space in AdS/CFT; in other words, it is similar mathematically. Therefore, RHIC collisions might be described by mathematics relevant to theories of quantum gravity within AdS/CFT, but the described physical phenomena are not the same.

==Financial information==
The RHIC project was sponsored by the United States Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Nuclear physics. It had a line-item budget of 616.6 million U.S. dollars.

For fiscal year 2006 the operational budget was reduced by 16.1 million U.S. dollars from the previous year, to 115.5 million U.S. dollars. Though operation under the fiscal year 2006 federal budget cut was uncertain, a key portion of the operational cost (13 million U.S. dollars) was contributed privately by a group close to Renaissance Technologies of East Setauket, New York.

==In fiction==
* The novel &quot;Cosm&quot; () by the American author Gregory Benford takes place at RHIC. The science fiction setting describes the main character Alicia Butterworth, a physicist at the BRAHMS experiment, and a new universe being created in RHIC by accident, while running with uranium ions.
* The zombie apocalypse novel &quot;The Rising&quot; by the American author Brian Keene referenced the media concerns of activating the RHIC raised by the article in &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; of July 18, 1999, by J. Leake. As revealed very early in the story, side effects of the collider experiments of the RHIC (located at &quot;Havenbrook National Laboratories&quot;) were the cause of the zombie uprising in the novel and its sequel &quot;City of the Dead&quot;.
* In the &quot;Rayloria&#x27;s Memory&quot; novel series by the American author Othello Gooden Jr, beginning with &quot;Raylorian Dawn&quot; (), it is noted that each Lunar City and their space station is powered by a RHIC.

==See also==
* The ISABELLE Project
* Large Hadron Collider

==References==
==Further reading==
* Preprints are available at
:* BRAHMS 
:* PHENIX 
:* PHOBOS 
:* STAR

==External links==
*Brookhaven National Laboratory Collider-Accelerator Department
*Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
*Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at Google Maps
*RHIC Run Overview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1076995" start="4" end="35" title="Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider" label="Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076995" start="37" end="41" title="Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider" label="RHIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="93" end="96" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033879" start="97" end="105" title="collider" label="collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q962347" start="121" end="135" title="Spin polarization" label="spin-polarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="136" end="142" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="175" end="205" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752638" start="215" end="230" title="Upton, New York" label="Upton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="361" end="364" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="379" end="391" title="special relativity" label="relativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q733096" start="421" end="436" title="quark–gluon plasma" label="primordial form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="467" end="475" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="494" end="502" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="567" end="573" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="787" end="814" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider (LHC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q733096" start="1357" end="1375" title="quark–gluon plasma" label="quark–gluon plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610721" start="1482" end="1503" title="electron–ion collider" label="Electron–Ion collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q919917" start="1603" end="1615" title="storage ring" label="storage ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="1616" end="1636" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1741" end="1744" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="1763" end="1769" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q587553" start="1852" end="1868" title="charged particle" label="charged particle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1875" end="1880" title="#The future" label="eRHIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83043" start="1997" end="2004" title="hexagon" label="hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120120" start="2124" end="2146" title="superconducting magnet" label="superconducting magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877263" start="2154" end="2170" title="niobium-titanium" label="niobium-titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227285" start="2187" end="2200" title="dipole magnet" label="dipole magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q905291" start="2843" end="2867" title="electron beam ion source" label="electron beam ion source"/>
<link wikidata="Q836828" start="2899" end="2917" title="linear accelerator" label="linear accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="3164" end="3175" title="synchrotron" label="synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q438407" start="3259" end="3291" title="Alternating Gradient Synchrotron" label="Alternating Gradient Synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="3626" end="3640" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="3662" end="3676" title="center of mass" label="center-of-mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="3701" end="3708" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="3737" end="3744" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267326" start="3762" end="3772" title="luminosity (scattering theory)" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536308" start="3958" end="3976" title="stochastic cooling" label="stochastic cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="4362" end="4368" title="dipole" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="4763" end="4772" title="detectors" label="detectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298734" start="4802" end="4806" title="STAR detector" label="STAR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4868" end="4875" title="sPHENIX detector" label="sPHENIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044134" start="4911" end="4917" title="PHENIX detector" label="PHENIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="5081" end="5087" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535336" start="5108" end="5131" title="time projection chamber" label="time projection chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208476" start="5150" end="5161" title="solid angle" label="solid angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="5207" end="5221" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064924" start="5438" end="5452" title="pseudorapidity" label="pseudorapidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064924" start="5486" end="5500" title="pseudorapidity" label="pseudorapidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="5800" end="5804" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210028" start="5825" end="5835" title="scattering" label="scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="5910" end="5925" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="5944" end="5974" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153275" start="6001" end="6006" title="Riken" label="Riken"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="6034" end="6037" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="6059" end="6089" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="6319" end="6330" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365798" start="6647" end="6660" title="elliptic flow" label="elliptic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="6705" end="6712" title="momentum" label="momenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="6955" end="6969" title="hydrodynamics" label="hydrodynamical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188951" start="7004" end="7017" title="Jet quenching" label="Jet quenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q196291" start="7552" end="7574" title="Color glass condensate" label="Color glass condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q196291" start="8071" end="8093" title="color glass condensate" label="color glass condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883324" start="8137" end="8152" title="Dmitri Kharzeev" label="Dmitri Kharzeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018386" start="9610" end="9633" title="Physical Review Letters" label="Physical Review Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="9706" end="9729" title="symmetry transformation" label="symmetry transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="9855" end="9870" title="Parity (physics)" label="parity symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q380528" start="9901" end="9913" title="color charge" label="interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="9922" end="9927" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299" start="9933" end="9938" title="gluon" label="gluon"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="10181" end="10202" title="birth of the Universe" label="birth of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428604" start="10785" end="10816" title="Facility for Rare Isotope Beams" label="Facility for Rare Isotope Beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="11059" end="11086" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider (LHC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="11090" end="11094" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610721" start="12169" end="12190" title="electron–ion collider" label="electron–ion collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="12530" end="12540" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="12572" end="12590" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q766202" start="12591" end="12597" title="vacuum state" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538708" start="12603" end="12615" title="false vacuum" label="false vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q925640" start="12637" end="12651" title="strange matter" label="strange matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="12686" end="12692" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="12947" end="12963" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="13245" end="13254" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="13282" end="13293" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="13382" end="13395" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531622" start="13504" end="13512" title="Doomsday event" label="doomsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="13519" end="13529" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q335213" start="14010" end="14021" title="Martin Rees" label="Martin Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382024" start="14127" end="14137" title="strangelet" label="strangelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482444" start="14140" end="14151" title="Frank Close" label="Frank Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="14181" end="14201" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="14767" end="14786" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14801" end="14817" title="Walter L. Wagner" label="Walter L. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q107450" start="14822" end="14832" title="Frank Wilczek" label="F. Wilczek"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="14941" end="14953" title="The Sunday Times" label="Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="15089" end="15098" title="committee" label="committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="15115" end="15123" title="Board of Directors" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700322" start="15159" end="15174" title="John Marburger" label="J. H. Marburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="15664" end="15671" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="15993" end="15996" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902878" start="16043" end="16058" title="Horaţiu Năstase" label="Horaţiu Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q525592" start="16164" end="16177" title="New Scientist" label="New Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755153" start="16256" end="16266" title="QCD matter" label="QCD matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="16343" end="16346" title="Quantum chromodynamics" label="QCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="16361" end="16376" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="16442" end="16449" title="AdS/CFT" label="AdS/CFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="16582" end="16597" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="16734" end="16768" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424738" start="17202" end="17226" title="Renaissance Technologies" label="Renaissance Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49349466" start="17230" end="17253" title="East Setauket, New York" label="East Setauket, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q358312" start="17326" end="17341" title="Gregory Benford" label="Gregory Benford"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="17367" end="17382" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="17488" end="17496" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="17551" end="17558" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633346" start="17571" end="17588" title="zombie apocalypse" label="zombie apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760908" start="17601" end="17611" title="The Rising (Keene novel)" label="The Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q912443" start="17641" end="17652" title="Brian Keene" label="Brian Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="17737" end="17753" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124005" start="18011" end="18027" title="City of the Dead (novel)" label="City of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18115" end="18132" title="Othello Gooden Jr" label="Othello Gooden Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706515" start="18275" end="18295" title="ISABELLE" label="The ISABELLE Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="18298" end="18319" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849376" wikidata="Q906964" url="?curid=849376" title="Transition state">
<text>In chemistry, the transition state of a chemical reaction is a particular configuration along the reaction coordinate. It is defined as the state corresponding to the highest potential energy along this reaction coordinate. It is often marked with the double dagger (‡) symbol.

As an example, the transition state shown below occurs during the SN2 reaction of bromoethane with a hydroxide anion:

The activated complex of a reaction can refer to either the transition state or to other states along the reaction coordinate between reactants and products, especially those close to the transition state.

According to the transition state theory, once the reactants have passed through the transition state configuration, they always continue to form products.

== History of concept ==

The concept of a transition state has been important in many theories of the rates at which chemical reactions occur. This started with the transition state theory (also referred to as the activated complex theory), developed independently in 1935 by Eyring, Evans and Polanyi, and introduced basic concepts in chemical kinetics that are still used today.

== Explanation ==

A collision between reactant molecules may or may not result in a successful reaction. The outcome depends on factors such as the relative kinetic energy, relative orientation and internal energy of the molecules. Even if the collision partners form an activated complex they are not bound to go on and form products, and instead the complex may fall apart back to the reactants.

== Observing transition states ==

Because the structure of the transition state is a first-order saddle point along a potential energy surface, the population of species in a reaction that are at the transition state is negligible. Since being at a saddle point along the potential energy surface means that a force is acting along the bonds to the molecule, there will always be a lower energy structure that the transition state can decompose into. This is sometimes expressed by stating that the transition state has a &quot;fleeting existence&quot;, with species only maintaining the transition state structure for the time-scale of vibrations of chemical bonds (femtoseconds). However, cleverly manipulated spectroscopic techniques can get us as close as the timescale of the technique allows. Femtochemical IR spectroscopy was developed for that reason, and it is possible to probe molecular structure extremely close to the transition point. Often, along the reaction coordinate, reactive intermediates are present not much lower in energy from a transition state making it difficult to distinguish between the two.

== Determining the geometry of a transition state ==

Transition state structures can be determined by searching for first-order saddle points on the potential energy surface (PES) of the chemical species of interest. A first-order saddle point is a critical point of index one, that is, a position on the PES corresponding to a minimum in all directions except one. This is further described in the article geometry optimization.

== The Hammond–Leffler postulate ==

The Hammond–Leffler postulate states that the structure of the transition state more closely resembles either the products or the starting material, depending on which is higher in enthalpy. A transition state that resembles the reactants more than the products is said to be &quot;early&quot;, while a transition state that resembles the products more than the reactants is said to be &quot;late&quot;. Thus, the Hammond–Leffler Postulate predicts a late transition state for an endothermic reaction and an early transition state for an exothermic reaction.

A dimensionless reaction coordinate that quantifies the lateness of a transition state can be used to test the validity of the Hammond–Leffler postulate for a particular reaction.

== The structure–correlation principle ==

The structure–correlation principle states that &quot;structural changes that occur along the reaction coordinate can reveal themselves in the ground state as deviations of bond distances and angles from normal values along the reaction coordinate&quot;. According to this theory if one particular bond length on reaching the transition state increases then this bond is already longer in its ground state compared to a compound not sharing this transition state. One demonstration of this principle is found in the two bicyclic compounds depicted below. The one on the left is a bicyclo[2.2.2]octene, which, at 200 °C, extrudes ethylene in a retro-Diels–Alder reaction.

Compared to the compound on the right (which, lacking an alkene group, is unable to give this reaction) the bridgehead carbon-carbon bond length is expected to be shorter if the theory holds, because on approaching the transition state this bond gains double bond character. For these two compounds the prediction holds up based on X-ray crystallography.

== Implications for enzymatic catalysis ==

One way that enzymatic catalysis proceeds is by stabilizing the transition state through electrostatics. By lowering the energy of the transition state, it allows a greater population of the starting material to attain the energy needed to overcome the transition energy and proceed to product.

== See also ==
* Transition state theory
* Transition state analogs, chemical compounds mimicking the substrate&#x27;s transition state and act as enzyme inhibitors
* Reaction intermediate
* Reactive intermediate
* Activated complex

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q906964" start="18" end="34" title="Transition state" label="transition state"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="40" end="57" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076414" start="98" end="117" title="reaction coordinate" label="reaction coordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q582668" start="175" end="191" title="Chemical energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282364" start="252" end="265" title="double dagger" label="double dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q838084" start="345" end="348" title="SN2 reaction" label="SN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q412245" start="361" end="372" title="bromoethane" label="bromoethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="380" end="389" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421183" start="402" end="419" title="activated complex" label="activated complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="532" end="541" title="reactants" label="reactants"/>
<link wikidata="Q542929" start="546" end="554" title="Product (chemistry)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q582857" start="622" end="645" title="transition state theory" label="transition state theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="880" end="897" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q582857" start="928" end="951" title="transition state theory" label="transition state theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q574810" start="1039" end="1045" title="Henry Eyring (chemist)" label="Eyring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954463" start="1047" end="1052" title="Meredith Gwynne Evans" label="Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q163087" start="1057" end="1064" title="Michael Polanyi" label="Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="1099" end="1116" title="chemical kinetics" label="chemical kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q238053" start="1166" end="1175" title="collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="1184" end="1192" title="reactant" label="reactant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="1193" end="1201" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="1241" end="1249" title="Chemical reaction" label="reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="1303" end="1317" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180241" start="1344" end="1359" title="internal energy" label="internal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421183" start="1417" end="1434" title="activated complex" label="activated complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q542929" start="1472" end="1480" title="product (chemistry)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q690935" start="1643" end="1655" title="saddle point" label="saddle point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572687" start="1664" end="1688" title="potential energy surface" label="potential energy surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="2258" end="2271" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910223" start="2345" end="2358" title="Femtochemistry" label="Femtochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="2359" end="2374" title="IR spectroscopy" label="IR spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134627" start="2533" end="2554" title="reactive intermediate" label="reactive intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q577705" start="2920" end="2934" title="critical point (mathematics)" label="critical point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377176" start="3078" end="3099" title="geometry optimization" label="geometry optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q903818" start="3143" end="3168" title="Hammond–Leffler postulate" label="Hammond–Leffler postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161064" start="3320" end="3328" title="enthalpy" label="enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q903818" start="3553" end="3578" title="Hammond–Leffler Postulate" label="Hammond–Leffler Postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="3619" end="3639" title="Endothermic process" label="endothermic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="3677" end="3696" title="Exothermic process" label="exothermic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076414" start="3715" end="3734" title="reaction coordinate" label="reaction coordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q903818" start="3826" end="3851" title="Hammond–Leffler postulate" label="Hammond–Leffler postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863695" start="4221" end="4232" title="bond length" label="bond length"/>
<link wikidata="Q225972" start="4443" end="4451" title="bicyclic" label="bicyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="4552" end="4560" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316958" start="4566" end="4592" title="retro-Diels–Alder reaction" label="retro-Diels–Alder reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="4652" end="4658" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="4927" end="4948" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="5008" end="5017" title="enzyme" label="enzymatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="5018" end="5027" title="catalysis" label="catalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="5084" end="5098" title="electrostatics" label="electrostatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q582857" start="5308" end="5331" title="Transition state theory" label="Transition state theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087414" start="5334" end="5357" title="Transition state analog" label="Transition state analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458208" start="5458" end="5479" title="Reaction intermediate" label="Reaction intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134627" start="5482" end="5503" title="Reactive intermediate" label="Reactive intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421183" start="5506" end="5523" title="Activated complex" label="Activated complex"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849378" wikidata="Q3285333" url="?curid=849378" title="Manchester Aquatics Centre">
<text>The Manchester Aquatics Centre, abbreviated MAC, is a public aquatics sports facility south of the city centre of Manchester, England, north of the main buildings of the University of Manchester near Manchester Metropolitan University. It was purpose built for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, and cost £32 million to build.

Before it was built, for many years its site was open waste ground, left by demolishing inner city industrial terrace houses. The building was designed by FaulknerBrowns Architects. The building takes the approximate shape of an asymmetric trapezoidal prism (the apex provides clearance above the highest diving board), and from the outside, the roof resembles a wave.

Construction started in August 1996, and was completed in July 2000, with finishing touches made in September 2001. MAC hosts many swimming and water polo events but also hosts Lancashire County Championships and Age group North west Regionals for swimming. It was opened on 12 October 2000, by Queen Elizabeth II. The pool was closed in 2021 for major refurbishment works over the following two years.

==Facilities==
The centre&#x27;s facilities include:
* Two swimming pools, each able to be split into sections of varying dimensions and depths with the help of moveable floors and booms. In fact, the centre has the world&#x27;s largest area of movable floors and booms in a swimming facility.
**The &quot;main pool&quot; on the ground floor is by with a maximum depth of . A sinkable boom can separate the pool into a by with constant depth between floor level and depth; and a by section at depth, which in turn can be separated by another sinkable boom to allow a section of by . The floors of these three sections can each be independently raised or lowered between very shallow and depth. 1,000 permanent spectator seats overlook the main pool hall.
**The &quot;training pool&quot; is located in the basement and is by in size, with a constant depth of . A traversable boom allows separation into two length pools, one of which can be varied in depth from floor level to . The training pool&#x27;s ceiling is in the shape of two long waves representing waves on water.
*A diving pool (ground level) with movable floor to allow a maximum depth of . The pool is often also used for water polo, and scuba diving training.
*A &quot;leisure pool&quot; (ground floor) – a shallow water area suitable for younger pool users, with two water flumes and two bubble pools.
*Workout and fitness studios (behind the spectator seating), a health suite including sauna and steam room.
*Poolside café.

==Use==
It is jointly owned by Manchester City Council, the University of Manchester and Manchester Metropolitan University. All the facilities can be used by members of the public.

The centre is the home of the City of Manchester Aquatics Swim Team, as well as Disability Swimming and Water Polo athletes within the English Institute of Sport.

As well as the 2002 Commonwealth Games, the MAC has been used for:
*Paralympic World Cup since 2005
* Training for 9th FINA World Short Course Championships 2008
* Duel in the Pool 2009
* LEN European Waterpolo
* Training for teams for the 2012 Olympic Games
* SwimBritain 2013

==See also==

*List of Commonwealth Games venues

==References==
==External links==

* The University of Manchester site
* Manchester aquatics centre facilities list</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3285333" start="4" end="30" title="Manchester Aquatics Centre" label="Manchester Aquatics Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285333" start="44" end="47" title="Manchester Aquatics Centre" label="MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="61" end="69" title="List of water sports" label="aquatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="114" end="124" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="170" end="194" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888771" start="200" end="234" title="Manchester Metropolitan University" label="Manchester Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="265" end="288" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="2002 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="432" end="446" title="terrace houses" label="terrace houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="987" end="1005" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="1155" end="1168" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="2173" end="2179" title="diving (sport)" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="2281" end="2291" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="2297" end="2309" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q68530" start="2434" end="2439" title="flume" label="flume"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="2476" end="2483" title="physical fitness" label="fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q57036" start="2549" end="2554" title="sauna" label="sauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q718955" start="2559" end="2569" title="steam room" label="steam room"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741434" start="2581" end="2585" title="Cafe (British)" label="café"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302252" start="2619" end="2642" title="Manchester City Council" label="Manchester City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="2648" end="2672" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888771" start="2677" end="2711" title="Manchester Metropolitan University" label="Manchester Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378293" start="2906" end="2932" title="English Institute of Sport" label="English Institute of Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="2950" end="2973" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="2002 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135074" start="3003" end="3023" title="Paralympic World Cup" label="Paralympic World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="3175" end="3193" title="2012 Olympic Games" label="2012 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883023" start="3229" end="3262" title="List of Commonwealth Games venues" label="List of Commonwealth Games venues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849380" wikidata="Q548719" url="?curid=849380" title="Aniridia">
<text>Aniridia is a condition characterized by the absence or near absence of the iris, the colored, muscular ring in the eye that controls the size of the pupil and regulates the amount of light entering the eye. This absence results in a primarily black appearance of the central eye. Aniridia can be congenital, typically affecting both eyes, or caused by a penetrant injury. Congenital aniridia is not simply an iris defect but a more complex condition affecting multiple parts of the eye, with macular and optic nerve hypoplasia, cataract, and corneal changes. Vision may be severely compromised and the disorder is frequently associated with several other ocular complications, including nystagmus, amblyopia, buphthalmos, and cataract. In some cases, aniridia occurs as part of a broader syndrome, like WAGR syndrome (kidney nephroblastoma, genitourinary anomalies and intellectual disability) or Gillespie syndrome (cerebellar ataxia).

==PAX6==

The PAX6 gene, located within the AN2 region on the short arm of chromosome 11 (11p13), plays a crucial role in the development of the eye and other structures. This gene, named for its &quot;PAired boX&quot; sequence, regulates a cascade of other genetic processes involved in eye formation. Remarkably, the PAX6 gene exhibits high evolutionary conservation, sharing approximately 95% similarity with the &quot;pax&quot; gene found in zebrafish, a species whose evolutionary lineage diverged from humans around 400 millions of years ago.

Defects in the PAX6 gene cause aniridia-like ocular defects in mice (as well as &quot;Drosophila&quot;). Aniridia is a heterozygous disorder, meaning that only one of the two chromosome 11 copies is affected. When both copies are altered (homozygous condition), the result is a uniformly fatal condition with near complete failure of entire eye formation. In 2001, two cases of homozygous aniridia patients were reported; the fetuses died prior to birth and had severe brain damage. In mice, homozygous &quot;small eye&quot; defect (mouse Pax-6) leads to loss of the eyes and nose and the murine fetuses sustain severe brain damage.

==Types==
Aniridia may be broadly divided into hereditary and sporadic forms. Hereditary aniridia is usually transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner (each offspring has a 50% chance of being affected), although rare autosomal recessive forms (such as Gillespie syndrome) have also been reported. Sporadic aniridia mutations may affect the WT1 region adjacent to the AN2 aniridia region, causing a kidney cancer called nephroblastoma (Wilms tumor). These patients often also have genitourinary abnormalities and intellectual disability (WAGR syndrome).

Several different mutations may affect the PAX6 gene. Some mutations appear to inhibit gene function more than others, with subsequent variability in the severity of the disease. Thus, some aniridic individuals are only missing a relatively small amount of iris, do not have foveal hypoplasia, and retain relatively normal vision. Presumably, the genetic defect in these individuals causes less &quot;heterozygous insufficiency,&quot; meaning they retain enough gene function to yield a milder phenotype.

* AN
* Aniridia and absent patella
* Aniridia, microcornea, and spontaneously reabsorbed cataract
* Aniridia, cerebellar ataxia, and mental deficiency (Gillespie syndrome)

==Mutational analysis==
Molecular (DNA) testing for PAX6 gene mutations (by sequencing of the entire coding region and deletion/duplication analysis) is available for isolated aniridia and the Gillespie syndrome. For the WAGR syndrome, high-resolution cytogenetic analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can be utilized to identify deletions within chromosome band 11p13, where both the PAX6 and WT1 genes are located.

== Symptoms ==
Aniridia can cause many symptoms, such as:

* Poor vision (not always present)
* More sensitivity to light
* Fast, uncontrolled, shaking &quot;to and from&quot; eye movements (nystagmus)
* Eyes do not line up (strabismus)

==Treatment==
In May 2018, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the CustomFlex Artificial Iris, the first synthetic iris for use in adults and children with congenital aniridia or iris defects related to other conditions, such as albinism, traumatic injury, or surgical removal due to ocular melanoma. The artificial iris is a surgically implanted device made of thin, foldable, medical-grade silicone and is custom-sized and colored for each individual patient. The prosthetic iris is held in place by the anatomical structures of the eye or, if needed, by sutures.

==See also==
*WAGR syndrome
*Scleral lenses

==References==
== External links ==
* GeneReviews/NCBI/NIH/UW entry on Aniridia
* NCBI/Molecular diagnosis of aniridia
* OMIM entries on Aniridia
* GeneReviews/NIH/NCBI/UW entry on Wilms Tumor Overview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q548719" start="0" end="8" title="Aniridia" label="Aniridia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="76" end="80" title="Iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="297" end="307" title="Birth defect" label="congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725784" start="493" end="500" title="macular hypoplasia" label="macular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098797" start="505" end="527" title="optic nerve hypoplasia" label="optic nerve hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="529" end="537" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="543" end="549" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="688" end="697" title="nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207855" start="699" end="708" title="amblyopia" label="amblyopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305015" start="710" end="721" title="buphthalmos" label="buphthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="727" end="735" title="cataract" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892153" start="804" end="817" title="WAGR syndrome" label="WAGR syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q756289" start="819" end="840" title="Wilms tumour" label="kidney nephroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562120" start="898" end="916" title="Gillespie syndrome" label="Gillespie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q154709" start="918" end="935" title="cerebellar ataxia" label="cerebellar ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916213" start="953" end="957" title="PAX6" label="PAX6"/>
<link wikidata="Q847096" start="1014" end="1027" title="chromosome 11" label="chromosome 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q169444" start="1385" end="1394" title="zebrafish" label="zebrafish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="1552" end="1556" title="mice" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="1575" end="1585" title="Drosophila" label="Drosophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="1608" end="1620" title="heterozygous" label="heterozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q847096" start="1664" end="1677" title="chromosome 11" label="chromosome 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="1728" end="1738" title="homozygous" label="homozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="2250" end="2268" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="2343" end="2362" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562120" start="2378" end="2396" title="Gillespie syndrome" label="Gillespie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="2441" end="2450" title="mutations" label="mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q756289" start="2545" end="2559" title="nephroblastoma" label="nephroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q756289" start="2561" end="2572" title="Wilms tumor" label="Wilms tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="2638" end="2661" title="intellectual disability" label="intellectual disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892153" start="2663" end="2676" title="WAGR syndrome" label="WAGR syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2955" end="2972" title="foveal hypoplasia" label="foveal hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="3003" end="3009" title="Visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="3174" end="3183" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3394" end="3397" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764062" start="3435" end="3445" title="sequencing" label="sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780824" start="3460" end="3473" title="coding region" label="coding region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3478" end="3507" title="deletion/duplication analysis" label="deletion/duplication analysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3595" end="3631" title="high-resolution cytogenetic analysis" label="high-resolution cytogenetic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336182" start="3636" end="3670" title="fluorescence in situ hybridization" label="fluorescence in situ hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="3985" end="3994" title="nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="4019" end="4029" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604269" start="4148" end="4162" title="artificial iris" label="synthetic iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="4272" end="4280" title="albinism" label="albinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q356372" start="4327" end="4342" title="ocular melanoma" label="ocular melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="4435" end="4443" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892153" start="4624" end="4637" title="WAGR syndrome" label="WAGR syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434127" start="4639" end="4653" title="Scleral lenses" label="Scleral lenses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849382" wikidata="Q1139752" url="?curid=849382" title="Feed Me Weird Things">
<text>Feed Me Weird Things is the debut studio album by English electronic musician Tom Jenkinson under the alias Squarepusher. It was released on 3 June 1996 through Rephlex Records.

Upon release, &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; peaked at number 10 on the UK Dance Albums Chart. The album received positive reviews from critics and has been retrospectively cited as a landmark release in the drill &#x27;n&#x27; bass subgenre. A 25th anniversary remastered edition was released on 4 June 2021 by Warp.

==Background and production==
Around late 1994, Tom Jenkinson started experimenting with breakbeats and incorporating them into the electronic music he produced. His earliest songs in this new style were released on the Spymania label. Jenkinson produced the tracks on &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; from December 1994 to February 1996, while he was a student at Chelsea College of Art and Design. He used his student loans to purchase much of the equipment that he utilised in recording the album.

Richard D. James (also known as Aphex Twin), who co-founded Rephlex Records (where the album was originally released), selected the tracks that appeared on the final album. The tracks were mastered by Paul Solomons at the studio Porky&#x27;s.

==Title and packaging==
According to Jenkinson, the title &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; was inspired by a conversation with Steve Beckett, a co-founder of the label Warp, &quot;in which he told me about his girlfriend who would ask him to &#x27;feed me drum &amp; bass&#x27;.&quot; Jenkinson collaborated on the artwork for &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; with Johnny Clayton. 

The packaging for the album features various photographs taken by Jenkinson at different London locations in February 1996, which were subsequently edited by Clayton. The front cover photograph was taken inside a job centre in Palmers Green. The album&#x27;s liner notes were penned by Richard D. James.

==Release==
&quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; was released on 3 June 1996 by Rephlex Records. It entered the UK Dance Albums Chart at number 10 on 15 June. On 4 June 2021, Warp released a remastered edition of &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; for the album&#x27;s 25th anniversary.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Muzik&quot;″s Calvin Bush praised &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; as &quot;the kind of album Miles Davis might have made if he had been wired into breakbeats, Aphex Twin and Ninja Tune.&quot; Ben Willmott of &quot;NME&quot; deemed it Jenkinson&#x27;s &quot;most consistently varied, bedazzling and rounded deposit to date.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot; critic Neil Strauss said that Jenkinson &quot;deftly combines the laid-back cool of fusion jazz with the frenetic intensity of drum-and-bass&quot; and &quot;makes one realize just how wide a window of opportunity for musicians drum-and-bass has opened.&quot; At the end of 1996, &quot;The Wire&quot; named &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; one of the year&#x27;s 50 best records.

Writing for &quot;Spin&quot;, Ken Micallef said that with &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; and its follow-up &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; (1997), Jenkinson &quot;did to jungle what Frank Zappa did to rock—satirized its excesses with a maze of neurotic, scurrying notes, while adding a nerdy musicality that practically invented a new genre.&quot; AllMusic credited the 1996 releases of &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; and Plug&#x27;s &quot;Drum &#x27;n&#x27; Bass for Papa&quot; as catalysts for the popularisation of the drill &#x27;n&#x27; bass subgenre. Ben Cardew of &quot;Pitchfork&quot; called &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; &quot;a time capsule of the era&#x27;s drill&#x27;n&#x27;bass and jazzy jungle&quot; that demonstrated Jenkinson&#x27;s innovative fusion of &quot;the maximal drum programming of drum&#x27;n&#x27;bass&quot; with live fretless bass guitar playing. AllMusic&#x27;s Paul Simpson wrote that the album showed that Jenkinson &quot;was capable of doing things nobody else had dreamt of before, and it still holds some of his all-time best material.&quot; &quot;San Diego Union-Tribune&quot; journalist AnnaMaria Stephens cited &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; as one of the most important IDM albums. In 2007, &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed it as one of &quot;1000 Albums to Hear Before You Die&quot;.

==Track listing==

==Charts==

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="34" end="46" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="58" end="68" title="electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q553861" start="108" end="120" title="Squarepusher" label="Squarepusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462331" start="161" end="176" title="Rephlex Records" label="Rephlex Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666354" start="253" end="274" title="UK Dance Singles and Albums Charts" label="UK Dance Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259016" start="389" end="413" title="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass" label="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="443" end="451" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="493" end="497" title="Warp (record label)" label="Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q903577" start="589" end="599" title="break (music)" label="breakbeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="632" end="648" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581765" start="720" end="728" title="Spymania" label="Spymania"/>
<link wikidata="Q860450" start="865" end="898" title="Chelsea College of Arts" label="Chelsea College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q462058" start="912" end="924" title="student loan" label="student loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="1002" end="1018" title="Aphex Twin" label="Richard D. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462331" start="1062" end="1077" title="Rephlex Records" label="Rephlex Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="1191" end="1199" title="mastering (audio)" label="mastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="1414" end="1418" title="Warp (record label)" label="Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="1502" end="1517" title="drum and bass" label="drum &amp;amp; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1718" end="1724" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887044" start="1856" end="1869" title="Palmers Green" label="Palmers Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666354" start="2042" end="2063" title="UK Dance Singles and Albums Charts" label="UK Dance Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="2121" end="2129" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944449" start="2245" end="2250" title="Muzik" label="Muzik"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="2339" end="2350" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358555" start="2420" end="2430" title="Ninja Tune" label="Ninja Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2460" end="2463" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2581" end="2595" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q519984" start="2609" end="2621" title="Neil Strauss" label="Neil Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="2686" end="2697" title="jazz fusion" label="fusion jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="2887" end="2895" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="3000" end="3004" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127336" start="3097" end="3114" title="Hard Normal Daddy" label="Hard Normal Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="3152" end="3158" title="jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="3164" end="3175" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="3183" end="3187" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3330" end="3338" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352724" start="3406" end="3410" title="Luke Vibert" label="Plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040107" start="3424" end="3456" title="Drum &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Bass for Papa" label="Drum &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Bass for Papa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259016" start="3506" end="3530" title="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass" label="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="3561" end="3570" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289786" start="3781" end="3792" title="programming (music)" label="programming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3834" end="3854" title="Bass guitar#Fretless bass guitars" label="fretless bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547109" start="4071" end="4094" title="The San Diego Union-Tribune" label="San Diego Union-Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="4199" end="4202" title="intelligent dance music" label="IDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="4226" end="4238" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849386" wikidata="Q2824064" url="?curid=849386" title="Adamoli-Cattani fighter">
<text>The Adamoli-Cattani fighter was a prototype fighter aircraft designed as a private venture by two Italian aircraft builders in 1918.

==Design and development==
The Adamoli-Cattani was intended to be the smallest practical biplane around the most powerful engine available to them, a le Rhône M. The result was a reasonably conventional design, other than that the wings featured hinged leading edges in place of conventional ailerons. The Farina Coach Building factory in Turin began construction of the prototype; the &quot;Officine Moncenisio&quot; in Condove completed it.

==Operational history==
Upon completion, ground testing revealed that the engine as installed could only deliver some 80% of its rated power, thus leaving the aircraft significantly underpowered. Limited tests continued until the end of World War I, when the Armistice made further development superfluous.

==Specifications (estimated performance with 200hp engine)==


==See also==
Comparable aircraft:
* Nieuport-Delage Ni-D 29

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2824064" start="4" end="27" title="Adamoli-Cattani fighter" label="Adamoli-Cattani fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="44" end="60" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="98" end="105" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="223" end="230" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098426" start="284" end="294" title="le Rhône M" label="le Rhône M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="387" end="399" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="426" end="433" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="473" end="478" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="505" end="514" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q9318" start="555" end="562" title="Condove" label="Condove"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="815" end="826" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="837" end="846" title="Armistice with Germany (Compiègne)" label="Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508406" start="985" end="1008" title="Nieuport-Delage Ni-D 29" label="Nieuport-Delage Ni-D 29"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849397" wikidata="Q1596013" url="?curid=849397" title="1998–99 Heineken Cup">
<text>The 1998–99 Heineken Cup was the fourth edition of the Heineken Cup. Competing teams from France, Ireland, Italy, Wales, and Scotland, were divided into four pools of four, in which teams played home and away matches against each other. Cardiff and Swansea did not compete due to a dispute with their union, the Welsh Rugby Union, whereas teams from England did not compete due to a dispute between European Rugby and the Rugby Football Union. The pool winners and runners-up qualified for the knock-out stages.


==Teams==
==Pool stage==

In the pool matches teams received 2 points for a win, 1 point for a draw and 0 points for a defeat.

===Pool 1===
===Pool 2===
===Pool 3===
===Pool 4===
==Seeding==
==Knockout stage==
===Quarter-finals===




===Semi-finals===


===Final===


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1596013" start="4" end="24" title="1998–99 Heineken Cup" label="1998–99 Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="55" end="67" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="90" end="96" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="98" end="105" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="107" end="112" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="114" end="119" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="125" end="133" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038022" start="312" end="329" title="Welsh Rugby Union" label="Welsh Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="350" end="357" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347463" start="422" end="442" title="Rugby Football Union" label="Rugby Football Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849398" wikidata="Q3127336" url="?curid=849398" title="Hard Normal Daddy">
<text>Hard Normal Daddy is the second studio album by English electronic musician Tom Jenkinson under the alias Squarepusher, released on 28 April 1997. The album was Jenkinson&#x27;s first studio album as Squarepusher for Warp. A single for the track &quot;Vic Acid&quot; was released in 1997 prior to the album&#x27;s release.

&quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; received positive reviews from critics and was listed as one of the best albums of 1997 by &quot;NME&quot; and &quot;The Wire&quot;. The album has received further acclaim years after its release, with &quot;Stylus Magazine&quot; referring to it in 2003 as Squarepusher&#x27;s &quot;masterpiece&quot; and &quot;Pitchfork&quot; ranking it in 2017 as one of the greatest IDM albums of all time.

== Background ==
Tom Jenkinson was offered to sign to Ninja Tune, Rephlex Records, R&amp;S Records and Warp. Jenkinson eventually chose Warp as he was more interested in the label&#x27;s music.

=== Music ===
&quot;Pitchfork&quot;″s Seth Colter Walls cited the album&#x27;s musical style as an early example of the drill &#x27;n&#x27; bass subgenre, described by the online music database AllMusic as a version of drum &#x27;n&#x27; bass that warped &quot;old midtempo beats and breaks into a frenzied, experimental potpourri of low-attention-span electronic music.&quot;

&quot;Baltimore Sun&quot; critic J. D. Considine described the album as jazz fusion influenced, characterising its contents as &quot;lyrical, complicated keyboard riffs, dense, churning beats, nimble, melodic fretless bass – add in a saxophone, and you&#x27;d have the drum &#x27;n&#x27; bass equivalent of Weather Report.&quot; Tom Jenkinson has stated that his music on &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; was not influenced by jazz fusion but by funk-oriented music such as Herbie Hancock&#x27;s &quot;Death Wish&quot; soundtrack and 1970s television themes from police and detective shows.

== Artwork ==
The album art for &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; was designed by Jenkinson and Johnny Clayton, who had previously collaborated on the artwork for Jenkinson&#x27;s 1996 debut album as Squarepusher, &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot;. Clayton encouraged Jenkinson to again take inspiration from Jenkinson&#x27;s hometown of Chelmsford, which had also inspired the artwork for &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot;. Given a camera, Jenkinson took photos of various locations in the town, including sheds where illegal raves were held and the local park, which are depicted in the CD packaging, as well as a run-down gas container that features on the album cover. The packaging artwork has a note of dedication to the Chelmsford rave scene.

== Release ==
&quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; was released by Warp on 28 April 1997. It was released on compact disc, double vinyl, cassette and digital download. A single was released for the album for the track &quot;Vic Acid&quot; on 31 March 1997 by Warp on compact disc and 12-inch vinyl.

== Reception ==
&quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; received positive reviews upon release. In a contemporary review, &quot;Muzik&quot; critic Rupert Howe praised &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; as an album of &quot;style, wit and crafty ingenuity&quot;, albeit one that &quot;isn&#x27;t always quite as clever as it would like to think it is&quot;. Writing for &quot;NME&quot;, Andy Crysell noted Jenkinson&#x27;s &quot;passion for jazz that separates him from that other most weirdy and beardy of dance warriors&quot; but called the album &quot;schizophrenic&quot;, expressing frustration at its &quot;high-velocity experimentation&quot; and perceived emphasis on virtuosity.

&quot;NME&quot; placed &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; at number 34 on its list of best albums of 1997. &quot;The Wire&quot; named it among the best albums of the year. In December 1998, &quot;Alternative Press&quot; ranked &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; at number 54 on its list of the 90 best albums of the 1990s.

== Legacy ==
Years after release, &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; has been acclaimed by critics. Retrospectively, Sean Cooper of AllMusic gave &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; five out of five stars, comparing it favourably to similar releases from the music labels Spymania and Rephlex and describing the album as &quot;substantially cleaner and more thought out than previous releases&quot; from those labels. Cooper further praised the album for not &quot;simply relying on the shock value of &#x27;tripping-over-myself&#x27; drum programming and light-speed fretless bass noodling.&quot; In 2003, Todd Burns of &quot;Stylus Magazine&quot; referred to the album as Squarepusher&#x27;s &quot;masterpiece&quot; and wrote that Jenkinson &quot;refrains from such mind numbing repetition and put down his most accomplished work to that point.&quot; In 2004&#x27;s &quot;The New Rolling Stone Album Guide&quot;, critic Douglas Wolk wrote that on the album, Jenkinson &quot;either sublimates [his beats] to tunes like &#x27;Cooper&#x27;s World&#x27; that approximate an early-&#x27;70s sort of funk-jazz hybrid, or makes them carry delirious tracks like &#x27;Chin Hippy&#x27; with almost no help&quot;.

Writing in &quot;Spin&quot;, jazz writer Ken Micallef noted the album for its influence on the drill &#x27;n&#x27; bass subgenre and stated that, with &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; and &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot;, Jenkinson &quot;did to jungle what Frank Zappa did to rock—satirized its excesses with a maze of neurotic, scurrying notes, while adding a nerdy musicality that practically invented a new genre.&quot; In 2017, &quot;Pitchfork&quot; placed &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; at number 24 on its list of &quot;The 50 Best IDM Albums of All Time&quot;.

In 1999, Jenkinson referred to the music on &quot;Feed Me Weird Things&quot; and &quot;Hard Normal Daddy&quot; as &quot;already beginning to sound a bit... It sort of reminds me of being a bit younger in a way. It&#x27;s a bit more (of a) naive approach, a bit more fresh. The sound as well. I&#x27;ve gotten better production&quot;.

==Track listing==
All songs composed by Tom Jenkinson.
== Personnel ==
* Tom Jenkinson – writing, production
* Frank Arkwright – mastering
* John Clayton – visuals

== Charts ==
== See also ==
* 1997 in music
* Music of the United Kingdom (1990s)

== References ==

===Footnotes===
===Sources===


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="56" end="72" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q553861" start="106" end="118" title="Squarepusher" label="Squarepusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="217" end="221" title="Warp (record label)" label="Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="451" end="454" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="471" end="479" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039873" start="562" end="577" title="Stylus Magazine" label="Stylus Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="665" end="674" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="723" end="726" title="Intelligent dance music" label="IDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358555" start="802" end="812" title="Ninja Tune" label="Ninja Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462331" start="814" end="829" title="Rephlex Records" label="Rephlex Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971673" start="831" end="846" title="R&amp;amp;S Records" label="R&amp;amp;S Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="851" end="855" title="Warp (record label)" label="Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="963" end="972" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259016" start="1063" end="1087" title="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass" label="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1137" end="1145" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="1162" end="1185" title="drum and bass" label="drum &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="1327" end="1340" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16188946" start="1354" end="1369" title="J. D. Considine" label="J. D. Considine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="1393" end="1404" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120697" start="1628" end="1642" title="Weather Report" label="Weather Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="1764" end="1768" title="funk music" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="1792" end="1806" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247251" start="1814" end="1847" title="Death Wish (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Death Wish&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139752" start="2126" end="2146" title="Feed Me Weird Things" label="Feed Me Weird Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="2243" end="2253" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="2715" end="2719" title="Warp (record label)" label="Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="2757" end="2769" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="2771" end="2783" title="vinyl records" label="double vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11294186" start="2785" end="2793" title="audio cassette" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473564" start="2798" end="2814" title="Music download" label="digital download"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944449" start="3066" end="3071" title="Muzik" label="Muzik"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="3308" end="3311" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="3727" end="3735" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268417" start="3810" end="3827" title="Alternative Press (magazine)" label="Alternative Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581765" start="4194" end="4202" title="Spymania" label="Spymania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462331" start="4207" end="4214" title="Rephlex" label="Rephlex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039873" start="4549" end="4564" title="Stylus Magazine" label="Stylus Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q751678" start="4796" end="4829" title="The Rolling Stone Album Guide" label="The New Rolling Stone Album Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302119" start="4844" end="4856" title="Douglas Wolk" label="Douglas Wolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38656" start="5018" end="5027" title="jazz-funk" label="funk-jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="5146" end="5150" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="5371" end="5377" title="Jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="5383" end="5394" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="5564" end="5573" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="5663" end="5666" title="Intelligent dance music" label="IDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q553861" start="6069" end="6082" title="Squarepusher" label="Tom Jenkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q553861" start="6102" end="6115" title="Squarepusher" label="Tom Jenkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="6127" end="6137" title="record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="6158" end="6167" title="mastering (audio)" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354899" start="6224" end="6237" title="1997 in music" label="1997 in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942410" start="6240" end="6275" title="Music of the United Kingdom (1990s)" label="Music of the United Kingdom (1990s)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849410" wikidata="Q1808441" url="?curid=849410" title="Strood">
<text>Strood is a town in the unitary authority of Medway in Kent, South East England. The town forms a conurbation with neighbouring towns Chatham, Rochester, Gillingham and Rainham. It lies on the northwest bank of the River Medway at its lowest bridging point.

Strood began as a manor then chapelry of Frindsbury until gaining its own parish status in 1193. Today Frindsbury is effectively, in all but a few associations such as in the Church of England, the northern part of Strood. Strood&#x27;s history has been dominated by the river and facing port-associated towns, particularly its road and rail bridges since the Roman era to Rochester and the two other Medway Towns immediately adjoining and beyond from the north-east quarter of Kent to London and the rest of Britain. It has a mixed retail and leisure area at its heart. Most of its sources of employment are the other Medway towns, their associated commercial, industrial and logistics parks.

Among its broadest named neighbourhoods are the &quot;Earl estate&quot; and Marlowe Park, one named after a house builder, the other after the grounds of a former mansion house.

==History==


===Pre-Conquest===
Strood was part of Frindsbury until 1193. It was named &quot;Strodes&quot; in the &quot;Textus Roffensis&quot;, now kept in Strood in the Medway Archives Centre, though most early records use the spelling &quot;Stroud&quot;. The Old English name &quot;Strōd&quot; refers to a &quot;marshy land overgrown with brushwood&quot;. The Gloucestershire town of Stroud has the same etymology.

The Roman Legions built a stone bridge and laid a road on a causeway across the marshy ground. The foundations were about 8 ft below the level of the 1856 road. The road went up Strood Hill, and was called Watling Street, as it still is today. This is the A2 road. There is further evidence of a causeway-based road leading along the bank towards the Frindsbury Peninsula leading to a villa, was found in 1819. The present road and field pattern suggest that there was a substantial agricultural settlement of the Roman Empire centred near Frindsbury.

In 764 AD Offa King of Mercia and Sigered King of Kent granted to Eardulph lands in Easlingham (Frindsbury). In 840, 994, and 998 AD Strood was pillaged by the Danes. In 960 AD a wooden bridge was built across the Medway.

===Medieval===
A small wooden church was erected at Strood in 1122, as a chapel of ease in the parish of Frindsbury. Land was granted in 1160 to the Knights Templar by King Henry II. The Manor House was used as a Lodging House.

In 1193, Strood became a parish. It was run by the monks of Newark Hospital, and had its own burial grounds. In 1291 there was an affray at Newark Hospital between the Monks of Strood and the locals from Frindsbury.

In 1264 Simon de Montfort laid siege to Rochester Castle from the Strood Side. In the action the wooden bridge was destroyed by fire. After Simon&#x27;s death a heavy fine was levied on Strood because he had stayed there during the siege. The Strood Quay and Strood Wharf had been built by Bishop de Glanville with rents going to Newark Hospital. In 1293 the Rochester wharf was in such disrepair that ships had to use the Strood facilities, however as the bridge was out of use, ferries had to be used to cross the river. In 1309, a harsh winter, the bridge was damaged by ice. In 1312 the Knight&#x27;s Templar were suppressed and the Manor of Strood passed into private hands briefly before being passed on to the Abbess and Sisters Minorites of St. Clare of Denney in Cambridgeshire. In 1387 a stone bridge was built by John de Cobham and Robert Knolles. In 1460 Edward IV appointed a mayor of Rochester with jurisdiction over Strood river frontage and the houses there.

===Early Modern===
Strood was owned by the Rochester monastery from the 18th year of Edward III&#x27;s reign until the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII, after which time as part of the Hundred of Sharnel (Shamwell) which included Cobham, it was passed to George Brooke, Lord Cobham. His grandson Henry Brooke lost his estates to James I in 1603 through a false charge of treason, although he escaped with his life. The Temple Manor thereafter was granted to Sir Robert Cecil, the Earl of Salisbury (son of William, Lord Burleigh), who later became Lord Treasurer of England under Queen Elizabeth, and married Elizabeth, sister of Henry, Lord Cobham.

In 1554 Thomas Wyatt of Allington on hearing that Mary I intended to marry a Catholic gathered an army with the intention of marching on London. He took Rochester Castle and the bridge. According to Marsh there was to have been a battle at Strood, but the Queen&#x27;s men, stationed on Strood Hill, deserted. However, Coulson records that Wyatt defeated the Duke of Norfolk and seized six cannon. Wyatt then marched on Cooling Castle. The rebellion fizzled out, and Wyatt was executed, along with the captain of the deserters.

The parish accounts begin on 12 August 1555. Following the accession and marriage of Queen Mary (known as &quot;Bloody&quot; Mary) the country reconverted to Roman Catholicism and a considerable sum was spent re-converting the church. However just nine years later in 1565 a further five-year period of refurbishment was required to convert the church back to Protestant usage following the accession of Queen Elizabeth I. The parish registers start from this date. Possibly mindful of the changes, the churchwardens waited until 1574 before going to St. Dunstan&#x27;s Fair in Rochester to sell &quot;a cross and other relics of Roman superstition, formerly used in Strood Church&quot;.
In the 1672 the parishes of St. Margaret&#x27;s, Rochester and St Nicholas, Strood jointly applied to the Court of Chancery for a ruling which was decided in their favour to extend the area over which Watts charities could operate. The parish of Strood utilised some of the money to provide a workhouse for the poor. Above the door was set a stone slab which is now displayed in the Guildhall Museum, Rochester. The text is reproduced alongside.

In 1769, under authority of the Paving, etc., of London Act 1768, a tollgate was erected at The Angel Inn on North Street in Strood, to pay for improvements to the parish. Hasted, in his study of Kent (1778–99), said Strood&#x27;s inhabitants were chiefly seafaring or fishermen, and engaged in dredging oysters.

===Nineteenth century===
Between 1804 and 1824 the Thames and Medway canal was dug. See below, under &quot;Transport&quot; for more details.

===Twentieth century===
The ancient City of Rochester merged with the borough of Chatham and part of the Strood Rural District in 1974 to form the Borough of Medway, later renamed the City of Rochester-upon-Medway. In 1998 another merger with the rest of the Medway Towns created the Medway unitary authority.

===Twenty-first century===
21st century Strood has seen significant growth, due to its proximity to London and cheaper housing. Although Strood is a town in its own right with a population in 2019 estimated at 40,000, it is also officially a suburb of Rochester, albeit a very large suburb. Strangely, Strood the suburb is more heavily populated than its post town Rochester on the east side of the River Medway, the total population being around 68,000.

==Geography==
Strood lies on the edge of marshy land alongside the River Medway. The chalk hills of the North Downs have been breached at this point, forming a river cliff rising to 100 ft directly behind.

==Strood Fair==
An annual fair was instituted in 1206 during the seventh year of King John&#x27;s reign to the priory of Rochester, to be held on 26 August, which continued well into the 18th Century, according to Edward Hasted, the Kent historian. It was traditionally held over three days, and associated with Christian celebration of the Assumption (15 August). The Strood Fair was held regularly until 31 October 1982. The land used for the Strood Fair was sandwiched between Grange Road and Station Road, adjacent to Strood railway station. It was for many years part of the Milsted Dairy Farm, though by August 1975 the farm building had been turned into a motor repair business. The brownfield land was passed on to the Fairground Shift Manager who ran the Strood Fair. It was then used by them to stay through the winter months.

The land is still occupied as winter quarters by the Showman&#x27;s Guild with its running costs supported by the Strood Fair on the site, which is facilitated every 12 months. On 15 June 2007 to 18 June 2007, the motor repair building was demolished to be replaced by flats. Today&#x27;s market is held on a Tuesday and Saturday, and a car boot sale or boot fair is held on a Sunday.

==Newark Hospital==

Gilbert de Glanvill, Bishop of Rochester, in 1190, early during the reign of Richard I founded a hospital in Strood, east of the church, which was afterwards called the Newark or Stroud Hospital. Newark Hospital was important in raising the profile of Strood, however there was constant concern about its financial management, and the rivalry between it and the Rochester Priory. In 1539, under King Henry VIII, the hospital was under the control of the Dean and Chapter of Rochester.

The location of the former Newark Hospital is now mainly a car park behind Strood High Street. The 19th century railway embankment carrying the Chatham Main Line cuts across the back of the old hospital site. Strood Market was held on part of this land, but was relocated to make way for a food store, Aldi. An archaeological dig of the site was done in the 1970s.

==Politics==
In 1891 the civil parish had a population of 7982. On 30 September 1894 the parish was abolished and split, the part in Rochester Municipal Borough becoming Strood Extra and the rural part becoming Strood Intra. It is now in the unparished area of Rochester.

===Strood Rural District===

Strood Rural District was a local government district of Kent from 1894 to 1974. It did not include Strood itself (which formed part of Rochester) and covered a wide area. The offices of Strood Rural District Council were in Frindsbury, Strood; they are now a nursing home called Frindsbury Hall.

===Strood representation===
Strood is part of the parliamentary constituency of Rochester and Strood.

Local government was consolidated in the late 1990s into a single tier with the creation of Medway Council.

==Economy==
===Engineering===

Small enterprises were formed to service Chatham Dockyard.

Joseph Collis started as a retail ironmonger in 1777. By 1865 he was a wholesaler specialising in zinc, iron, tinplate and locksmithery. By 1870, he and his partner Stace took over the Pelican Foundry and manufactured structural ironwork, toilet cisterns and manhole covers.
Thomas Aveling built his traction engines at the Invicta Works next to Rochester Bridge from 1861. Later the works were acquired the Collis and Stace&#x27;s Pelican Foundry. Avelings were noted for excellent employment practices, and made their premises available for meetings of co-operative and radical societies. Avelings in turn became Wingets factory, then the Rochester-upon-Medway Civic Centre which passed to Medway Council.

Shorts, the seaplane manufacturer, used a yard on the Strood side for construction of the airframes of F3 and F5 flying boats.

Other employers were Hobourn-Eaton, Kent Alloys, Fishers and the Co-operative bakery.

===Retail===

Settlement geography tells us that a bridging point becomes a route centre and a trading centre. Being a lowest bridging point of a critical prehistoric military route compounds the problem. Towns had to built above the flood plain at a pinch point and flat land on the Rochester side of the river was needed for a walled town with castle and cathedral, in effect sterilising the land that side of the river from future major development. The land was locked by the construction of the London, Chatham and Dover railway in an embankment and arches. Small shops grew up around &quot;The Angel&quot; in Strood forming the town centre. Further small rows were built within the housing along Gun Lane and at Darnley Road.

By 2005 Strood was served by two supermarkets. Tesco acquired and demolished Temple Street and bought the freehold of all the other plots on the block for future expansion. Safeway in the High Street built on the site of small firms and the Budden and Biggs Brewery. Following the takeover by Morrisons the store was closed with a new, larger, site built at the far side of Jane&#x27;s Creek. The town centre store lay empty until autumn 2008 when it was redeveloped by the marginal supermarket retailer Netto and discount chain Wilko (the Netto store has since been remodelled as an Asda following a buyout).

Tesco planned for a brand new store to be built on its acquired land in February 2013, but after a national policy change in March 2013 it announced that it would focus on smaller Express stores. The Tesco Store was to include a community hub and library which would be for Medway Council and would have replaced the annex at the previous Civic Centre site in Strood.

An Aldi supermarket also opened on land opposite the Angel Corner (the former site of Strood Market) in November 2012, three years later than originally planned – with locals opposed to the Tuesday and Saturday markets being relocated to the Commercial Road car park.

Strood Retail Park has grown to include Next, Argos, Poundworld, Carpet Right, Matalan and KFC. The nature of the offer reflects the market&#x27;s interpretation of the local economy.

The Poundland store opened in the Retail Park in February 2015 in the former Paul Simons store. Poundworld went into administration on 11 June 2018 though administrators are hoping for a rescue package.

In March 2015 It was announced that B&amp;Q would be replaced with a gym, cafe and three shops.

In January 2016 It was announced that Brantano would close due to going into administration. The store subsequently closed on 22 March 2016.

A Poundworld store opened in the Retail Park in May 2016 in the former Brantano store.

In early 2017 it was announced that an M&amp;S Foodhall, B&amp;M and a Maplin would open at the former B&amp;Q site. It was then later announced in July 2017 that Starbucks Coffee would be opening amongst the new retail units on Strood Retail Park.

In February 2018 It was announced that Maplin would close due to going into administration, being replaced with an extension of B&amp;M.

In June 2018 Following a £15 million loan, it was announced that Carpetright was to restructure its Kent stores with the Strood store closing and everything being transferred to the Gillingham store.

In August 2023, Wilko went into administration, with the Strood store closing on 25 September. Shoppers could still walk through the corridor to get to the Asda, which was up ahead. In December 2024, the former Wilko site opened as a Poundstretcher.

Strood&#x27;s retail centre serves the villages out to the Isle of Grain and Rochester, as the town has six major supermarkets at its heart (Aldi, Asda, Morrisons, Tesco, Iceland, M&amp;S Food Hall), as well as a plethora of smaller shops and units.

==Transport==


===River===
Transport in Strood was dominated by the river. From the earliest times river transport used Strood, but before the coming of the Romans the area was marshy and not well populated. Once Strood started to be filled in various boatyards and ship repair businesses started up both on the river and in the creeks which drain the marshes.

===Road===
Although Strood must have lain on ancient tracks, the coming of the Romans started to fix the road pattern. The lowest bridging point of the River Medway is between Strood and Rochester, and the first bridge was built soon after the Battle of the Medway. This road from Dover via Longdon towards north Wales became known as Watling Street and forms two of the major highways of the Kingdom. The section from Dover to London became the A2 trunk road.

The 20th century has seen a major expansion in road transport and the consequent building of the M2 motorway. The route roughly parallels the old A2 and has necessitated the building of two high level bridges in Strood to the south of the town.

Beyond the M2 is the M20 motorway leading to the south of London and accessible by major roads from Strood.

Strood is on National Cycle Route 1.

===Canal===

The Thames and Medway Canal was dug between 1804 and 1824 to provide a safe route between the rivers Medway and Thames. Barges were able to avoid the long passage into the Thames estuary and around the Isle of Grain. At the Strood end the canal was entered through a lock into Frindsbury basin and then entered a tunnel. It opened 4 October 1824.

The canal was with headroom and wide, to take , 60-ton Thames Barges. It had a tow path its entire length. Spoil from the tunnel was used to infill the marshland between St Mary&#x27;s Church Strood and the River Medway. Frindsbury Basin could handle vessels to 300 tons. A steam pump was installed there to keep the canal topped up.

Commercially the venture was a failure, because tolls were high to recoup the cost, entry to the basins could only occur at high tides (making it quicker to sail the round the Isle of Grain). With the end of the Napoleonic wars the military justification had also been removed.

In 1844 A single line railway was laid through the tunnel, part on the towpath and part on a timber structure over the canal. The canal was sold in 1845 to the South Eastern Railway (SER), who filled in the canal within the tunnel and laid a double track (see North Kent Line).

===Rail===
The South Eastern Railway terminated at Strood, with passengers taking a steamer or coaches to reach Rochester or Chatham. The station, completed 10 February 1856, was opposite The Railway Tavern. More recently it was called the Old Terminus.

On 18 June 1856, the line was extended along the river bank to Maidstone, and Strood Station we see today, was opened (see Medway Valley Line). Also in 1856 the new road bridge over the Medway was opened, in its present position, back where the Roman bridge had been. In 1857 the mediaeval bridge was demolished the stone being used to build the Strood Esplanade in 1858. In 1860 the SER built the Strood pier.

The East Kent Railway had permission to run a line from Faversham to Chatham, and intended to connect with the South Eastern Railway at Strood. When negotiations failed, the East Kent, now called the London Chatham and Dover (LCDR), linked with the Mid Kent Co. at Bromley (see Chatham Main Line). The East Kent Railway built a bridge over the Medway (1853) and taking their line to the North of the Angel, over Gun Lane, and Watling Street then south to Cuxton where it followed the Bush Valley and hence to Sole Street. The London Chatham and Dover built a station on the A2, adjacent to Canal Road, this was called
*Strood Station, when it was built, then
*Rochester Bridge Station,1 April 1861
*Rochester &amp; Strood, 1 November 1861
*Rochester Bridge (Strood), 1862
*Rochester Bridge, 1905

The South Eastern Railway retaliated by building a parallel bridge (after 1866 and before 1909) and running a separate line into Chatham. To do this the Watermill was demolished and the Mill Pond filled in. Over the pond was built an Oil and Seed Mill with its own sidings.

There was a loop between the lines at Strood, opened 29 March 1859 which closed in 1860. In 1875 Mayor N. E. Toomer forced the two companies to reopen the loop, now nicknamed Toomers Loop. The service resumed 1 April 1877.

The SER and LCDR effectively merged on 1 January 1899 to form the South Eastern and Chatham Railway. Subsequent rationalisation saw the closure of the SER branch to Chatham, and the closure of the LCDR Strood station. The SER bridge over the Medway was retained for the Chatham Main Line, and the LCDR bridge was abandoned (its piers were later used for the second road bridge). The link between the two lines was used to run services from the Chatham line onto the North Kent Line.

For the current railway station see Strood railway station.

==River and the Strood Basin==
All Strood below The Angel Inn, on North Street, near Strood Post Office, was built on marshland which was fed by small creeks, these were excavated to make usable jetties and wharf. Two such creeks are well known, Janes Creek which once extended back to the Cricketers Inn, and Temple Creek. Joining Janes Creek, at a right angle was Pelican Creek which has been in-filled and now forms a car park and the foundations of B &amp; M. Strood frequently flooded and the area around Temple Street (now a car park and a Tesco) was known as the &#x27;Swamp&#x27;.

Significant floods were recorded in Strood in the years 1158, 1235, 1309, 1682, 1735, 1791, 1854, 1874, 1887, 1953, 1968 and 1979. 

William Curel was Medway&#x27;s oldest established barge builder, with two yards on the Strood bank. The Curel&#x27;s Upper Yard was next to the Railway Tavern. In 1900 Gill and Son took over the yard, and it became a sail loft.

==Mills==
There was a windmill on Strood Hill, two on Broom Hill and five in neighbouring Frindsbury.
* The Strood Hill Mill was a smock mill that was demolished in 1860. It was unsuitably sited, and suffered from variable winds The site now forms part of the Cedars Hotel.
* Killicks Mill on Broom Hill cap was blown off for the second time in 1880. It was replaced and worked again for a year in 1890 but was unprofitable and was probably demolished in the 1920s. It had six sides rather than the usual eight.
* Fields Mill on Broom Hill burnt down in 1875. In Dickens&#x27; times, the Miller was a Mr Clark, but the owner was Mr Field. Mr Field was an amateur musician, who kept a piano, a harp and a barrel organ in his sitting room. It is said that the organ was bought from Loose Church, and so fixed that the power from the mill turned the organ&#x27;s handle. Dickens would visit the mill on his walks, and listen to the organ music.

The Frindsbury Mills.
* The oldest was a &quot;tripod – or post mill&quot;. It was called the Quarry Mill and was 100 yards south east of the church. Destroyed in 1850.
The other four mills were all owned by Mr Kimmins.
* On Prospect Hill there were two mills. The first was called Manwaring Mill, or Little Mill. It was a black tarred &quot;smock mill&quot;, and it drove four sets of stones. Little Mill was struck by lightning and demolished in 1886.
* Also on Prospect Hill was Great Mill or Rose&#x27;s Mill. It was the highest in Kent with 40 feet by nine feet sweeps. Together the two mills produced 400 sacks of flour a week. Great Mill was demolished in 1890.
* Kimmin&#x27;s Mill on Frindsbury Hill was a smock mill with no base. The land became a brick field. A man was killed by its sweeps.
* House Mill, also known as Kimmins Mill or Frindsbury Mill, stood on Frindsbury hill and was a black smock mill. It was demolished in 1931.

There was a tidemill. When the tide was rising, water flowed into the mill pond driving a mill, when the tide was falling, water flowed back into the river, driving the mill.

==Horticulture==
The damson cultivar &#x27;Farleigh Damson&#x27; has gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

*&#x27;Farleigh Damson&#x27; (syn. &#x27;Crittenden&#x27;s Prolific&#x27;, &#x27;Strood Cluster&#x27;) is named after the village of East Farleigh in Kent, where it was raised by James Crittenden in the early 19th century. An 1871 letter to the &quot;Journal of horticulture and practical gardening&quot; claimed that the original seedling had been found by a Mr. Herbert, the tenant of a market garden in Strood, who had given it to Crittenden. It has small, roundish, black fruit, with a blue bloom, and is a very heavy bearer. Its heavy cropping led to it being widely planted in England.

==Housing==
The area of Strood around Knight&#x27;s Place and Temple Street, was referred to as the Swamp. On the floods Smetham wrote in 1899 &quot;in that woebegone spot the foul contents of water closets were washed into poor peoples homes, and an indescribable filth permeated the fetid spot for months&quot;. In 1912 there was a typhoid outbreak here, 56 people contracted it, and five died.

In the 1880s, there was a major expansion of houses. Terraced houses were built on the hill, closing the gap between Strood and Frindsbury. The land around St Mary&#x27;s, now drained and close to the station was used. There was a mix of house sizes, from the large detached to the small terraces that opened on the street. They were all built in local yellow brick, with detailing in reds.

Following World War I, the city built 19 houses in Steele St, and 73 on Frindsbury Hill (Murray Road). Following World War II, under the Housing (Financial and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946, and the Housing Subsidies Act 1956 the city continued to build, including the triangle between the A228, Watling Street and the M2.

With continuing population growth and pressure from commuters, more and more land has been developed by the private sector. By 2000, the riverside by the station had been developed. Kingswear Gardens off Canal Road is a social housing estate. Kingswear Gardens is a high crime area, and is prone to flooding. The chalkpit by the A228 at Merral&#x27;s Shaw now has 400 dwellings on it, in spite of the massive infrastructure work needed, (roads and landscaping) this development is called Medway Gate. In 2009, plans were in existence to build over the Temple Marsh. Up to 620 homes are planned to be built and up to 12,300 sq metres of mixed-use employment and retail floorspace to develop. Now renamed as &#x27;Temple Waterfront&#x27;.

There are concerns for the architectural heritage in the area. A sad loss of an Edwardian gem occurred in 2010 when Medway Council demolished the Aveling &amp; Porter building to make way for a car park.

==Education==
Strood Academy is the only secondary school in Strood. For secondary education, many pupils from Strood attend schools in neighbouring towns.

==Churches==
The parish church for Strood is St Nicholas College Yard Strood which is Grade II listed building. St. Nicholas Church is located next to the building which the supermarket Asda and homeware retailer Wilko occupy. The building was previously occupied by Safeway. St Mary&#x27;s (notionally Frindsbury) was opened by Bishop Claughton in 1869 as a Chapel of Ease. It has subsequently closed as an Anglican Church but has been taken over by the New Testament Church of God. The other Anglican Church in the area is St. Francis of Assisi.

There is a historic Roman Catholic Church. English Martyrs Church was rebuilt in 1964 in the style of Brutalist Architecture. In recent years it has been featured in articles and books as an early example of this style used for a Roman Catholic Church.

The Methodist Church in Stonehouse Lane has undergone two changes of name. First the road name changed to Cliffe Road and then the church changed from &quot;Jubilee&quot; to &quot;Peninsular&quot;. During the First World War the church was lent to the St John&#x27;s Voluntary Aid Department as an auxiliary hospital.

Protestant dissenters founded the Zoar Chapel in 1782. There is a Gospel Mission Evangelical Church in Brompton Lane and an Evangelical Church in Darnley Road.

==Media== 
Regional local news and television programmes are provided by BBC South East and ITV Meridian. Television signals are received from the Bluebell Hill TV transmitter.

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Kent on 96.7 FM, Heart South on 103.1 FM, Gold Radio on 1242 AM and KMFM Medway which broadcast from its studios in the town on 100.4 FM.

The town is served by these local newspapers:
* Medway Messenger
* Medway Times
* yourmedway

==Sport and leisure==

Non-League football club Rochester United F.C., formerly Bly Spartans, plays at Bly Spartans Sports Ground in Strood. The club is in the Kent League, at level nine of the English football league system. Gillingham FC, in EFL&#x27;s League One is the local professional team, being located approximately three miles from central Strood. Strood boasts an impressive Sports Centre, complete with astroturf floodlit football pitches.

==People== 
* Lucy Ann Brooks (1835–1926), the temperance advocate, was born in Strood. She was a co-founder and president of the Women&#x27;s Total Abstinence Union.
* Isaac Newell (Strood, 24 April 1853 – Rosario, Argentina, 16 October 1907) a teacher and a pioneer of football in Argentina. He was the founder of the Colegio Comercial Anglicano Argentino and the founder of Argentinean football club Newell&#x27;s Old Boys, which is named in his honour. This club is considered the sixth most important team of Argentina.

* Anne Pratt (1806–1893), the botanist, was born in Strood. She wrote several books in the 19th century covering a wide range of botanical subjects. She was so well respected for her knowledge of wild flowers that she was granted an allowance from the Civil List. A portrait of her was placed in the Rochester museum. Her most famous work is &quot;The flowering plants, grasses, sedges, and ferns of Great Britain and their allies the club mosses, pepperworts, and horsetails&quot;. London: Frederick Warne and Co.
* Charles Roach Smith (1806–1890) notable amateur archaeologist, died in Strood. He was born at Shanklin, Isle of Wight, the youngest of 10 children. In 1826 he moved to London, and established his own business as a chemist in 1834. In 1876 he and his sister bought Temple Place in Cuxton Road, Strood, and some adjoining horticultural land. In London he made the first collection of Roman coins from London excavations which was bought by the British Museum. He subsequently pioneered &#x27;urban site observation&#x27; and his &#x27;Illustrations of Roman London &#x27;(1859) remained the principal work on the subject until 1909. He pioneered the statistic study of Roman coin hoards. He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London (1836), London Numismatic Society (1837) and was founder member of the British Archaeological Association (1843). After his death, four streets in Strood were named in his honour, Charles Street, Smith Street, Roach Street and Antiquarian Street. Three of these still exist in the vicinity of the Tesco supermarket with Antiquarian Street being demolished and the area now being under the Tesco car park.

==See also==
*Gillingham
*Listed buildings in Frindsbury
*Rainham
==References==

Citations

Bibliography
*
* (publication date is approximate)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
* 5 vols 1855 – 1866. A sixth volume was added in 1873, on the grasses sedges and ferns.
*


Notes
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1808441" start="0" end="6" title="Strood" label="Strood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="24" end="41" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q797782" start="45" end="51" title="Medway" label="Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="55" end="59" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="61" end="79" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q729006" start="134" end="141" title="Chatham, Kent" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q507517" start="143" end="152" title="Rochester, Kent" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q610238" start="154" end="164" title="Gillingham, Kent" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576971" start="169" end="176" title="Rainham, Kent" label="Rainham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="215" end="227" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504585" start="300" end="310" title="Frindsbury" label="Frindsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="434" end="451" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528098" start="601" end="608" title="Rochester Bridge" label="bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="619" end="628" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q797782" start="660" end="672" title="Medway Towns" label="Medway Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="745" end="751" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504585" start="1185" end="1195" title="Frindsbury" label="Frindsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799161" start="1254" end="1270" title="Textus Roffensis" label="Textus Roffensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1395" end="1406" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q281749" start="1520" end="1526" title="Stroud" label="Stroud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1578" end="1590" title="Rochester Bridge#Roman" label="stone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="1758" end="1772" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q888603" start="1808" end="1815" title="A2 road (England)" label="A2 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2066" end="2078" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q233573" start="2115" end="2119" title="Offa" label="Offa"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="2128" end="2134" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326688" start="2139" end="2146" title="Sigered of Kent" label="Sigered"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="2265" end="2270" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2284" end="2297" title="Rochester Bridge#Middle Ages" label="wooden bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671684" start="2401" end="2415" title="chapel of ease" label="chapel of ease"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="2496" end="2509" title="Henry II of England" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698615" start="2515" end="2526" title="Temple Manor" label="Manor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="2782" end="2799" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125527" start="2814" end="2830" title="Rochester Castle" label="Rochester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265521" start="3598" end="3612" title="John de Cobham, 3rd Baron Cobham" label="John de Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435589" start="3617" end="3631" title="Robert Knolles" label="Robert Knolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="3641" end="3650" title="Edward IV" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="3835" end="3845" title="Edward III" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3906" end="3916" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q949561" start="3995" end="4001" title="Cobham, Kent" label="Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="4094" end="4101" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="4136" end="4143" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q704171" start="4223" end="4239" title="Sir Robert Cecil" label="Sir Robert Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996518" start="4245" end="4262" title="Earl of Salisbury" label="Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4345" end="4360" title="Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187173" start="4424" end="4436" title="Thomas Wyatt the younger" label="Thomas Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732693" start="4440" end="4449" title="Allington, Kent" label="Allington"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="4466" end="4472" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I"/>
<link wikidata="Q114415247" start="4485" end="4501" title="wedding of Mary I of England and Philip of Spain" label="marry a Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465514" start="4528" end="4559" title="Wyatt&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="intention of marching on London"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="5030" end="5040" title="Mary I of England" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5355" end="5366" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="5739" end="5756" title="Court of Chancery" label="Court of Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532864" start="5834" end="5849" title="Richard Watts Charities" label="Watts charities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6112" end="6144" title="Paving, etc., of London Act 1768" label="Paving, etc., of London Act 1768"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364150" start="6148" end="6156" title="tollgate" label="tollgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q729006" start="6617" end="6624" title="Chatham, Medway" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624788" start="6641" end="6662" title="Strood Rural District" label="Strood Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="6827" end="6844" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="7370" end="7382" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="7407" end="7418" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343359" start="7724" end="7737" title="Edward Hasted" label="Edward Hasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="7851" end="7861" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7879" end="7890" title="Strood Fair" label="Strood Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111455" start="8032" end="8054" title="Strood railway station" label="Strood railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q896586" start="8200" end="8210" title="brownfield" label="brownfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19815" start="8685" end="8698" title="car boot sale" label="car boot sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19815" start="8702" end="8711" title="boot fair" label="boot fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560928" start="8755" end="8774" title="Gilbert Glanvill" label="Gilbert de Glanvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="8832" end="8841" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="9155" end="9165" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087674" start="9385" end="9402" title="Chatham Main Line" label="Chatham Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="9543" end="9547" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="9632" end="9644" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9777" end="9789" title="Strood Extra" label="Strood Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754946" start="9798" end="9803" title="rural district" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9818" end="9830" title="Strood Intra" label="Strood Intra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897276" start="9849" end="9864" title="unparished area" label="unparished area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624788" start="9909" end="9930" title="Strood Rural District" label="Strood Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031975" start="10257" end="10307" title="Rochester and Strood (UK Parliament constituency)" label="parliamentary constituency of Rochester and Strood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068204" start="10491" end="10507" title="Chatham Dockyard" label="Chatham Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10510" end="10523" title="Joseph Collis" label="Joseph Collis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828000" start="10785" end="10799" title="Aveling and Porter" label="Thomas Aveling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10834" end="10847" title="Invicta Works" label="Invicta Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528098" start="10856" end="10872" title="Rochester Bridge" label="Rochester Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11125" end="11132" title="Wingets" label="Wingets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123891" start="11151" end="11172" title="Rochester-upon-Medway" label="Rochester-upon-Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q797782" start="11202" end="11216" title="Medway" label="Medway Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656412" start="11219" end="11225" title="Short Brothers" label="Shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="11231" end="11239" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q628237" start="11322" end="11324" title="Felixstowe F.3" label="F3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403979" start="11329" end="11331" title="Felixstowe F.5" label="F5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11368" end="11381" title="Hobourn-Eaton" label="Hobourn-Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11383" end="11394" title="Kent Alloys" label="Kent Alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381511" start="11448" end="11468" title="Settlement geography" label="Settlement geography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11510" end="11522" title="route centre" label="route centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11529" end="11543" title="trading centre" label="trading centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126611" start="11553" end="11574" title="lowest bridging point" label="lowest bridging point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826042" start="11934" end="11967" title="London, Chatham and Dover Railway" label="London, Chatham and Dover railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="12214" end="12219" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398682" start="12340" end="12347" title="Safeway (UK)" label="Safeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q922344" start="12460" end="12469" title="Morrisons" label="Morrisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q552652" start="12671" end="12676" title="Netto (store)" label="Netto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002536" start="12696" end="12701" title="Wilko (retailer)" label="Wilko"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="12751" end="12755" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="12778" end="12783" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="13150" end="13154" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q246655" start="13456" end="13460" title="Next (clothing)" label="Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789707" start="13462" end="13467" title="Argos (retailer)" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967516" start="13469" end="13479" title="Poundworld" label="Poundworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045782" start="13481" end="13493" title="Carpet Right" label="Carpet Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061509" start="13495" end="13502" title="Matalan" label="Matalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q524757" start="13507" end="13510" title="KFC" label="KFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434528" start="13605" end="13614" title="Poundland" label="Poundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q707602" start="13841" end="13848" title="B&amp;amp;Q" label="B&amp;amp;Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957616" start="13940" end="13948" title="Brantano" label="Brantano"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967516" start="14046" end="14056" title="Poundworld" label="Poundworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957616" start="14115" end="14123" title="Brantano" label="Brantano"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="14171" end="14187" title="M&amp;amp;S Foodhall" label="M&amp;amp;S Foodhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836931" start="14189" end="14196" title="B &amp;amp; M" label="B&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754124" start="14203" end="14209" title="Maplin Electronics" label="Maplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="14295" end="14311" title="Starbucks Coffee" label="Starbucks Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754124" start="14421" end="14427" title="Maplin Electronics" label="Maplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q617650" start="15830" end="15850" title="Battle of the Medway" label="Battle of the Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972039" start="16416" end="16438" title="National Cycle Route 1" label="National Cycle Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724571" start="16857" end="16870" title="Thames sailing barge" label="Thames Barges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="17009" end="17021" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826415" start="17576" end="17597" title="South Eastern Railway (UK)" label="South Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q529213" start="17676" end="17691" title="North Kent Line" label="North Kent Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q729006" start="17820" end="17827" title="Chatham, Medway" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807431" start="18073" end="18091" title="Medway Valley Line" label="Medway Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328702" start="18366" end="18383" title="East Kent Railway" label="East Kent Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000115" start="18418" end="18427" title="Faversham" label="Faversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826042" start="18562" end="18586" title="London Chatham and Dover" label="London Chatham and Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087674" start="18640" end="18657" title="Chatham Main Line" label="Chatham Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961323" start="18817" end="18823" title="Cuxton" label="Cuxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304446" start="19724" end="19757" title="South Eastern and Chatham Railway" label="South Eastern and Chatham Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111455" start="20178" end="20200" title="Strood railway station" label="Strood railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836931" start="20656" end="20665" title="B &amp;amp; M" label="B &amp;amp; M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724571" start="20977" end="20990" title="Thames sailing barge" label="barge builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="21178" end="21186" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534870" start="21287" end="21297" title="smock mill" label="smock mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q180997" start="22158" end="22167" title="post mill" label="post mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q493694" start="23056" end="23064" title="tidemill" label="tidemill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10878191" start="23241" end="23247" title="damson" label="damson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="23300" end="23327" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="23335" end="23356" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="23389" end="23393" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="syn."/>
<link wikidata="Q5328336" start="23492" end="23505" title="East Farleigh" label="East Farleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="23509" end="23513" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="24286" end="24293" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="24403" end="24417" title="Terraced house" label="Terraced house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916058" start="24879" end="24936" title="Housing (Financial and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946" label="Housing (Financial and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24946" end="24972" title="Housing Subsidies Act 1956" label="Housing Subsidies Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900807" start="26028" end="26042" title="Strood Academy" label="Strood Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="26357" end="26361" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002536" start="26384" end="26389" title="Wilko" label="Wilko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508234" start="26438" end="26445" title="Safeway" label="Safeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788452" start="26500" end="26516" title="Thomas Legh Claughton" label="Bishop Claughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="26696" end="26717" title="St. Francis of Assisi" label="St. Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="26822" end="26831" title="Brutalist" label="Brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834972" start="27527" end="27541" title="BBC South East" label="BBC South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="27546" end="27558" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930205" start="27601" end="27614" title="Bluebell Hill transmitting station" label="Bluebell Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q751391" start="27657" end="27671" title="BBC Radio Kent" label="BBC Radio Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="27684" end="27695" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578576" start="27709" end="27719" title="Gold (British radio network)" label="Gold Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333502" start="27735" end="27746" title="KMFM Medway" label="KMFM Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335258" start="27888" end="27898" title="KOS Media" label="yourmedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="27923" end="27942" title="Non-League football" label="Non-League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693" start="27948" end="27969" title="Rochester United F.C." label="Rochester United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="28060" end="28071" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="Kent League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="28094" end="28124" title="English football league system" label="English football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q113197673" start="28368" end="28383" title="Lucy Ann Brooks" label="Lucy Ann Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450334" start="28484" end="28519" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Total Abstinence Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Total Abstinence Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5573926" start="28523" end="28535" title="Isaac Newell" label="Isaac Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q52535" start="28561" end="28568" title="Rosario" label="Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q221882" start="28757" end="28779" title="Newell&amp;#x27;s Old Boys" label="Newell&amp;#x27;s Old Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768731" start="28882" end="28892" title="Anne Pratt" label="Anne Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082092" start="29397" end="29416" title="Charles Roach Smith" label="Charles Roach Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q588146" start="29491" end="29499" title="Shanklin" label="Shanklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q610238" start="30565" end="30575" title="Gillingham, Kent" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403151" start="30577" end="30607" title="Listed buildings in Frindsbury" label="Listed buildings in Frindsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576971" start="30609" end="30616" title="Rainham, Kent" label="Rainham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849412" wikidata="Q3115527" url="?curid=849412" title="Ramanujan graph">
<text>In the mathematical field of spectral graph theory, a Ramanujan graph is a regular graph whose spectral gap is almost as large as possible (see extremal graph theory). Such graphs are excellent spectral expanders. As Murty&#x27;s survey paper notes, Ramanujan graphs &quot;fuse diverse branches of pure mathematics, namely, number theory, representation theory, and algebraic geometry&quot;. 
These graphs are indirectly named after Srinivasa Ramanujan; their name comes from the Ramanujan–Petersson conjecture, which was used in a construction of some of these graphs.

==Definition==

Let formula_1 be a connected formula_2-regular graph with formula_3 vertices, and let formula_4 be the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of formula_1 (or the spectrum of formula_1). Because formula_1 is connected and formula_2-regular, its eigenvalues satisfy formula_9 formula_10.

Define formula_11. A connected formula_2-regular graph formula_1 is a &quot;Ramanujan graph&quot; if formula_14.

Many sources uses an alternative definition formula_15 (whenever there exists formula_16 with formula_17) to define Ramanujan graphs. In other words, we allow formula_18 in addition to the &quot;small&quot; eigenvalues. Since formula_19 if and only if the graph is bipartite, we will refer to the graphs that satisfy this alternative definition but not the first definition &quot;bipartite Ramanujan graphs&quot;. If formula_1 is a Ramanujan graph, then formula_21 is a bipartite Ramanujan graph, so the existence of Ramanujan graphs is stronger.

As observed by Toshikazu Sunada, a regular graph is Ramanujan if and only if its Ihara zeta function satisfies an analog of the Riemann hypothesis.

== Examples and constructions ==

=== Explicit examples ===

* The complete graph formula_22 has spectrum formula_23, and thus formula_24 and the graph is a Ramanujan graph for every formula_25. The complete bipartite graph formula_26 has spectrum formula_27 and hence is a bipartite Ramanujan graph for every formula_2.
* The Petersen graph has spectrum formula_29, so it is a 3-regular Ramanujan graph. The icosahedral graph is a 5-regular Ramanujan graph.
* A Paley graph of order formula_30 is formula_31-regular with all other eigenvalues being formula_32, making Paley graphs an infinite family of Ramanujan graphs.
* More generally, let formula_33 be a degree 2 or 3 polynomial over formula_34. Let formula_35 be the image of formula_33 as a multiset, and suppose formula_37. Then the Cayley graph for formula_34 with generators from formula_39 is a Ramanujan graph.

Mathematicians are often interested in constructing infinite families of formula_2-regular Ramanujan graphs for every fixed formula_2. Such families are useful in applications.

=== Algebraic constructions ===
Several explicit constructions of Ramanujan graphs arise as Cayley graphs and are algebraic in nature. See Winnie Li&#x27;s survey on Ramanujan&#x27;s conjecture and other aspects of number theory relevant to these results.

Lubotzky, Phillips and Sarnak and independently Margulis showed how to construct an infinite family of formula_42-regular Ramanujan graphs, whenever formula_43 is a prime number and formula_44. Both proofs use the Ramanujan conjecture, which led to the name of Ramanujan graphs. Besides being Ramanujan graphs, these constructions satisfies some other properties, for example, their girth is formula_45 where formula_3 is the number of nodes.

Let us sketch the Lubotzky-Phillips-Sarnak construction. Let formula_47 be a prime not equal to formula_43. By Jacobi&#x27;s four-square theorem, there are formula_49 solutions to the equation formula_50 where formula_51 is odd and formula_52 are even. To each such solution associate the formula_53 matrix formula_54If formula_55 is not a quadratic residue modulo formula_30 let formula_57 be the Cayley graph of formula_53 with these formula_49 generators, and otherwise, let formula_57 be the Cayley graph of formula_61 with the same generators. Then formula_57 is a formula_42-regular graph on formula_64 or formula_65 vertices depending on whether or not formula_55 is a quadratic residue modulo formula_30. It is proved that formula_57 is a Ramanujan graph.

Morgenstern later extended the construction of Lubotzky, Phillips and Sarnak. His extended construction holds whenever formula_43 is a prime power.

Arnold Pizer proved that the supersingular isogeny graphs are Ramanujan, although they tend to have lower girth than the graphs of Lubotzky, Phillips, and Sarnak. Like the graphs of Lubotzky, Phillips, and Sarnak, the degrees of these graphs are always a prime number plus one.

=== Probabilistic examples ===
Adam Marcus, Daniel Spielman and Nikhil Srivastava proved the existence of infinitely many formula_2-regular &quot;bipartite&quot; Ramanujan graphs for any formula_71. Later they proved that there exist bipartite Ramanujan graphs of every degree and every number of vertices. Michael B. Cohen showed how to construct these graphs in polynomial time.

The initial work followed an approach of Bilu and Linial. They considered an operation called a 2-lift that takes a formula_2-regular graph formula_1 with formula_3 vertices and a sign on each edge, and produces a new formula_2-regular graph formula_76 on formula_77 vertices. Bilu &amp; Linial conjectured that there always exists a signing so that every new eigenvalue of formula_76 has magnitude at most formula_79. This conjecture guarantees the existence of Ramanujan graphs with degree formula_2 and formula_81 vertices for any formula_82—simply start with the complete graph formula_22, and iteratively take 2-lifts that retain the Ramanujan property.

Using the method of interlacing polynomials, Marcus, Spielman, and Srivastava proved Bilu &amp; Linial&#x27;s conjecture holds when formula_1 is already a bipartite Ramanujan graph, which is enough to conclude the existence result. The sequel proved the stronger statement that a sum of formula_2 random bipartite matchings is Ramanujan with non-vanishing probability. Hall, Puder and Sawin extended the original work of Marcus, Spielman and Srivastava to -lifts.

It is still an open problem whether there are infinitely many formula_2-regular (non-bipartite) Ramanujan graphs for any formula_71. In particular, the problem is open for formula_88, the smallest case for which formula_89 is not a prime power and hence not covered by Morgenstern&#x27;s construction.

== Ramanujan graphs as expander graphs ==
The constant formula_79 in the definition of Ramanujan graphs is asymptotically sharp. More precisely, the Alon-Boppana bound states that for every formula_2 and formula_92, there exists formula_3 such that all formula_2-regular graphs formula_1 with at least formula_3 vertices satisfy formula_97. This means that Ramanujan graphs are essentially the best possible expander graphs.

Due to achieving the tight bound on formula_98, the expander mixing lemma gives excellent bounds on the uniformity of the distribution of the edges in Ramanujan graphs, and any random walks on the graphs has a logarithmic mixing time (in terms of the number of vertices): in other words, the random walk converges to the (uniform) stationary distribution very quickly. Therefore, the diameter of Ramanujan graphs are also bounded logarithmically in terms of the number of vertices.

=== Random graphs ===
Confirming a conjecture of Alon, Friedman showed that many families of random graphs are &quot;weakly-Ramanujan&quot;. This means that for every formula_2 and formula_92 and for sufficiently large formula_3, a random formula_2-regular formula_3-vertex graph formula_1 satisfies formula_105 with high probability. While this result shows that random graphs are close to being Ramanujan, it cannot be used to prove the existence of Ramanujan graphs. It is conjectured, though, that random graphs are Ramanujan with substantial probability (roughly 52%). In addition to direct numerical evidence, there is some theoretical support for this conjecture: the spectral gap of a formula_2-regular graph seems to behave according to a Tracy-Widom distribution from random matrix theory, which would predict the same asymptotic.

== Applications of Ramanujan graphs ==
Expander graphs have many applications to computer science, number theory, and group theory, see e.g Lubotzky&#x27;s survey on applications to pure and applied math and Hoory, Linial, and Wigderson&#x27;s survey which focuses on computer science. Ramanujan graphs are in some sense the best expanders, and so they are especially useful in applications where expanders are needed. Importantly, the Lubotzky, Phillips, and Sarnak graphs can be traversed extremely quickly in practice, so they are practical for applications.

Some example applications include

* In an application to fast solvers for Laplacian linear systems, Lee, Peng, and Spielman relied on the existence of bipartite Ramanujan graphs of every degree in order to quickly approximate the complete graph. 
*Lubetzky and Peres proved that the simple random walk exhibits cutoff phenomenon on all Ramanujan graphs. This means that the random walk undergoes a phase transition from being completely unmixed to completely mixed in the total variation norm. This result strongly relies on the graph being Ramanujan, not just an expander—some good expanders are known to not exhibit cutoff. 
* Ramanujan graphs of Pizer have been proposed as the basis for post-quantum elliptic-curve cryptography.
* Ramanujan graphs can be used to construct expander codes, which are good error correcting codes.

== See also ==

* Expander graph
*Alon-Boppana bound
* Expander mixing lemma
* Spectral graph theory

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Survey paper by M. Ram Murty
*Survey paper by Alexander Lubotzky
*Survey paper by Hoory, Linial, and Wigderson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3180727" start="29" end="50" title="spectral graph theory" label="spectral graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115527" start="54" end="69" title="Ramanujan graph" label="Ramanujan graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q826467" start="75" end="88" title="regular graph" label="regular graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575194" start="95" end="107" title="spectral gap" label="spectral gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q739245" start="144" end="165" title="extremal graph theory" label="extremal graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q776602" start="194" end="212" title="expander graph" label="spectral expanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="324" end="337" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="339" end="360" title="representation theory" label="representation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="366" end="384" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83163" start="433" end="452" title="Srinivasa Ramanujan" label="Srinivasa Ramanujan"/>
<link wikidata="Q630650" start="480" end="510" title="Ramanujan–Petersson conjecture" label="Ramanujan–Petersson conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="690" end="701" title="eigenvalues" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q727035" start="709" end="725" title="adjacency matrix" label="adjacency matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180727" start="747" end="755" title="Spectral graph theory" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q174733" start="1251" end="1260" title="Bipartite graph" label="bipartite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399383" start="1549" end="1565" title="Toshikazu Sunada" label="Toshikazu Sunada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994637" start="1615" end="1634" title="Ihara zeta function" label="Ihara zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="1662" end="1680" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="1750" end="1764" title="complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q913598" start="1882" end="1906" title="complete bipartite graph" label="complete bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q835614" start="2010" end="2024" title="Petersen graph" label="Petersen graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015071" start="2092" end="2109" title="Regular icosahedron" label="icosahedral graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026495" start="2146" end="2157" title="Paley graph" label="Paley graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q859174" start="2475" end="2487" title="Cayley graph" label="Cayley graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q132095" start="2993" end="3001" title="Alexander Lubotzky" label="Lubotzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299250" start="3003" end="3011" title="Ralph S. Phillips" label="Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384983" start="3016" end="3022" title="Peter Sarnak" label="Sarnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q325705" start="3041" end="3049" title="Grigory Margulis" label="Margulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="3158" end="3170" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q630650" start="3207" end="3227" title="Ramanujan conjecture" label="Ramanujan conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q959831" start="3376" end="3381" title="girth (graph theory)" label="girth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527095" start="3548" end="3581" title="Jacobi&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem" label="Jacobi&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667469" start="4337" end="4348" title="prime power" label="prime power"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790741" start="4380" end="4407" title="supersingular isogeny graph" label="supersingular isogeny graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q14492049" start="4661" end="4672" title="Adam Marcus (mathematician)" label="Adam Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93078" start="4674" end="4689" title="Daniel Spielman" label="Daniel Spielman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18629448" start="4694" end="4711" title="Nikhil Srivastava" label="Nikhil Srivastava"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969990" start="5062" end="5068" title="Nati Linial" label="Linial"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741005" start="6589" end="6607" title="Alon-Boppana bound" label="Alon-Boppana bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q776602" start="6848" end="6862" title="expander graph" label="expander graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420759" start="6918" end="6939" title="expander mixing lemma" label="expander mixing lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q856741" start="7043" end="7054" title="random walk" label="random walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771322" start="7088" end="7099" title="Markov chain mixing time" label="mixing time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604341" start="7197" end="7220" title="stationary distribution" label="stationary distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q92927" start="7398" end="7402" title="Noga Alon" label="Alon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831889" start="8097" end="8121" title="Tracy-Widom distribution" label="Tracy-Widom distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q776602" start="8256" end="8268" title="Expander graph" label="applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403121" start="9016" end="9021" title="Yuval Peres" label="Peres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9066" end="9083" title="cutoff phenomenon" label="cutoff phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233576" start="9446" end="9458" title="post-quantum cryptography" label="post-quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048911" start="9459" end="9486" title="elliptic-curve cryptography" label="elliptic-curve cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420758" start="9532" end="9545" title="expander code" label="expander code"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="9563" end="9585" title="Error correction code" label="error correcting codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q776602" start="9606" end="9620" title="Expander graph" label="Expander graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741005" start="9622" end="9640" title="Alon–Boppana bound" label="Alon-Boppana bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420759" start="9643" end="9664" title="Expander mixing lemma" label="Expander mixing lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180727" start="9667" end="9688" title="Spectral graph theory" label="Spectral graph theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849420" wikidata="Q4943253" url="?curid=849420" title="BookmarkSync">
<text>BookmarkSync is an automatic synchronization service that allows users to access their bookmarks or favorites from any computer or web browser. The BookmarkSync client runs as a program within the computer&#x27;s system tray and monitors the bookmarks in the user&#x27;s browser, automatically uploading any changes to a central server. 

==History==
SyncIT.com Inc. was founded by Michael Berneis and Terence Way in November 1998. The website went live in March 1999. After a server failure in September 2003, the entire project was open-sourced. The rights for SyncIT.com were taken over by Jhas Dean, who ran Sync2It.com and BookmarkSync.com. Dean developed a new client for the latest browsers, including Firefox and Mac platform.

==Features==
The BookmarkSync client software enables social bookmarking and bookmark data clustering. The user data input requirements of web-based systems incorporating tagging to build a folksonomy, are eliminated by the automated BookmarkSync client software. Sync2It.com has added bookmark clustering and user bookmark ratios to their search results. Recent updates include BookmarkSync client software include support for Unicode, fast search and locate, local backup and restore functions, local site validation, social bookmark browsing, and multiple language support (German, French, Danish, Dutch, Czech, and Spanish). The BookmarkSync service is free.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4943253" start="0" end="12" title="BookmarkSync" label="BookmarkSync"/>
<link wikidata="Q875110" start="87" end="96" title="Bookmark (digital)" label="bookmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="119" end="127" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="131" end="142" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="178" end="185" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q854840" start="213" end="224" title="system tray" label="system tray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="534" end="545" title="open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="709" end="716" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q216177" start="790" end="808" title="social bookmarking" label="social bookmarking"/>
<link wikidata="Q622825" start="822" end="837" title="data clustering" label="data clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q658349" start="907" end="914" title="Tag (metadata)" label="tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q494291" start="926" end="936" title="folksonomy" label="folksonomy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849428" wikidata="Q1648245" url="?curid=849428" title="Tango n' Vectif">
<text>Tango n&#x27; Vectif is the debut studio album by English electronic music producers Mike Paradinas and Francis Naughton under the stage name μ-Ziq. It was released in November 1993 by Rephlex. The cover photo of the original release was taken by Richard D. James.

&quot;Tango n&#x27; Vectif&quot; was re-released on 1 October 2001 as a double CD with additional tracks that were on the original vinyl and CD releases as well as the &quot;Phi * 1700&quot; single.

==Reception==

In a positive review, Rupert Howe of &quot;Select&quot; stated that &quot;like many of the Rephlex releases, it may sound rough-hewn, but there&#x27;s nothing unsophisticated about the music.&quot;

==Track listing==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="58" end="74" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q446572" start="85" end="99" title="Mike Paradinas" label="Mike Paradinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462331" start="185" end="192" title="Rephlex" label="Rephlex"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="247" end="263" title="Aphex Twin" label="Richard D. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="397" end="402" title="gramophone record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447637" start="524" end="530" title="Select (magazine)" label="Select"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849430" wikidata="Q7331213" url="?curid=849430" title="Rick Baker (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Rick Baker]] (born 1950) is an American special makeup effects artist.

Rick Baker may also refer to:

*Rick Baker (mayor) (born 1956), former mayor of St. Petersburg, Florida
*&quot;The Righteous Maker&quot; Rick Baker (born 1982), American professional wrestler also known as D-Ray 3000

==See also==
* Richard Baker (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7331213" start="0" end="14" title="Rick Baker (disambiguation)" label="[[Rick Baker]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331213" start="74" end="84" title="Rick Baker (disambiguation)" label="Rick Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331214" start="106" end="124" title="Rick Baker (mayor)" label="Rick Baker (mayor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203280" start="179" end="221" title="D-Ray 3000" label="&amp;quot;The Righteous Maker&amp;quot; Rick Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040433" start="307" end="337" title="Richard Baker (disambiguation)" label="Richard Baker (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849436" wikidata="Q5499978" url="?curid=849436" title="Free Protestant Episcopal Church">
<text>The Free Protestant Episcopal Church (FPEC), later named The Anglican Free Communion and now entitled the Episcopal Free Communion, was formed in England on 2 November 1897 from the merger of three smaller churches. Others were to join later.

The ordination of bishops from within the apostolic succession was of major importance to this group, as also was having the church recognized as a lawfully constituted religious denomination. The latter event occurred, at least tacitly, when an archdeacon from the group was exempted from World War I conscription in 1917 due to his clergy status, which would not have been permitted had the group not been considered a lawfully constituted denomination.

==Formation of the church, 1897==

In 1890, Bishop Leon Chechemian, who had been a priest (vardapet) in the Armenian Catholic Church and later emigrated to England, where he was consecrated as a bishop, created the Free Protestant Church of England. In 1897 his church united with two other churches, the Ancient British Church and the Nazarene Episcopal Church, thus creating the Free Protestant Episcopal Church of England, an Anglican church independent of the Church of England. Chechemian was appointed the first primus of the newly formed FPEC.

==History==

The church had traditionally been quite small. There are various reasons for this, but one of them seems to be that clergy had tended to pass through it as a church in which to be ordained by bishops from the historic apostolic succession before moving on to other, larger church bodies. More recently, the communion has evolved and grown, at present having 25 provinces in different US states and countries.

Leadership of the church moved to the United States in 1978 but returned to the United Kingdom in 2015.

===Links with Mar Georgius, 1956–1960===

From 1956 to 1960, the FPEC was formally affiliated to the movement then led by Hugh George de Willmott Newman (Mar Georgius). Formal links ceased in October 1960.

===Schism, circa 1978–2011===

The FPEC has known internal dissension, some based on theological disputes and some on personalities. After a schism (circa 1978) in the communion, one of the factions led by Horst Block was renamed &quot;The International Free Protestant Episcopal Church&quot; (TIFPEC). On 12 February 2008, Block died and Bishop Peter Leers succeeded him as the primus of TIFPEC. In February 2011, Leers dissolved that jurisdiction, ending the division.

The original organization (FPEC) survived. Edwin Duane Follick was primus at the time of the 2011 reconciliation, and thus he became primus of the reunited body.

===Schism of 2020===

In 2020 a group of bishops mostly from Latin America formally declared their intent to remove Archbishop Palmer. This was done without the approval of the other bishops within the communion, and thus this group which continued to use the name Anglican Free Communion are considered a schismatic group by the original communion as can be read on the official website used by the AFC. This schismatic group would eventually add the name &quot;International&quot; to its name becoming the Anglican Free Communion International (AFCI). This group is headed by Archbishop Firestone but is not the original AFC.

===Names===

During the bishops&#x27; synod of 2012 in Bolivia, the organization adopted the new name &quot;The Anglican Free Communion&quot;.

In August 2020 after the schism with the Anglican Free Communion International the communion renamed itself the Episcopal Free Communion, in acknowledgement of the communion original name. 

Other names that have been used during the church&#x27;s history include &quot;Episcopal Apostolic Church of England&quot; and &quot;Ecumenical Church Foundation&quot;.

==Description==

The Free Protestant Episcopal Church (The Anglican Free Communion) is one of the oldest Anglican Communions in existence and is constituted by a large group of Anglicans of all varieties of churchmanship from Anglo-Catholic (High Church), Evangelical (Low Church), Latitudinarian (Broad Church), Charismatic and Liberal.

All of the Provinces of the Communion are autonomous, comprising self-governing churches and families of churches around the world.

As at 2016, Richard Arthur Palmer is the Primus. Richard Arthur Palmer was consecrated in the Liberal Catholic Church in 1997. He has subsequently been involved in the Reformed Liberal Catholic Church (Old Catholic), the Society for Independent Christian Ministry, the Open Episcopal Church and the United Episcopal Church. He was one of the founders of the Open Episcopal Church and for a five-year term he was its primate.

The Free Protestant Episcopal Church is a communion of free Anglican churches around the world, living an Anglican reconciliation and unity.

==Apostolic succession==

The church claims valid apostolic succession derived from the Armenian Catholic Church, the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Church of England (through the Reformed Episcopal Church of the United States of America). These lines were in the jurisdictions that united in 1897 to found the Free Protestant Episcopal Church.

It is doubtful whether the line of succession from the Armenian Catholic Church is carries an un-broken episcopal succession. Leon Chechemain was a vardapet in the Armenian Catholic Church but evidence that he was ever a bishop in that church is lacking.

==Succession of primuses==
* Leon Chechemian (&quot;Mar Leon&quot;) (lived 1848– 1920) served as primus of FPEC from the formation of FPEC on 2 November 1897 until 30 December 1900
* Charles Isaac Stevens (&quot;Mar Theophilus I&quot;) (second patriarch of the Ancient British Church, from 1889 onwards) (lived 1835–1917) served as primus of FPEC from 30 December 1900 until his death on 2 February 1917
* James Martin (&quot;Mar Jacobus I Antipas&quot;) (third patriarch of the Ancient British Church) (lived 1843–1919) served as primus of FPEC from 1917 until his death on 29 October 1919
* Andrew Charles Albert McLagan (&quot;Mar Andries I&quot;) (fourth patriarch of the Ancient British Church) (lived 1851–1928) served as primus of FPEC from 1919 until his death on 16 October 1928
* Herbert James Monzani-Heard (&quot;Mar Jacobus II&quot;) (fifth patriarch of the Ancient British Church)(lived 1861–1947) served as primus of FPEC from 1930 until 18 May 1939 (continued as patriarch of the Ancient British Church until 29 January 1945)
* William Hall (lived 1890–1959) served from 18 May 1945 until his death on 9 October 1959
* Charles Dennis Boltwood (lived 1889–1985) had been elected (circa 1951/1954) to succeed Wm Hall. However, Boltwood did not actually become primus until Hall&#x27;s death on 9 October 1959, then serving until 17 October 1978
* Albert John Fuge (Snr) (lived 1911–1982) served from 1978 until his death on 30 April 1982 (Note: Horst Block led as schismatic group from circa 1978 until his death in 2008; Peter Leers then led this group until the schism was healed in 2011)
* Charles Dennis Boltwood served pro-tem as &#x27;Primus-Emeritus&#x27; for an interim period of nine weeks from Fuge&#x27;s death on 30 April 1982 until 7 July 1982
* Charles Kennedy Moffatt (lived 1907–1989) served from 7 July 1982 until his death on 7 November 1989
* Edwin Duane Follick (born 1935) was the senior serving bishop at the time of Moffatt&#x27;s death. In 1994, Follick was recognised as Primus and as having been Primus from 7 November 1989. Follick retired on 5 February 2015. 
* Richard Arthur Palmer from 5 February 2015
Note: For a full list of patriarchs of the Ancient British Church and Celtic Orthodox Church, refer to the wikipage of the Celtic Orthodox Church.

==External links==
* Episcopal Free Communion – official website
* Free Protestant Episcopal Church – general history
* Free Protestant Episcopal Church – Canada
* Free Protestant Episcopal Church – additional history
* Nazarene Episcopal Ecclesia
* Old Protestant Episcopal Church</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5499978" start="4" end="36" title="Free Protestant Episcopal Church" label="Free Protestant Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499978" start="38" end="42" title="Free Protestant Episcopal Church" label="FPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499978" start="61" end="84" title="Free Protestant Episcopal Church" label="Anglican Free Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499978" start="106" end="130" title="Free Protestant Episcopal Church" label="Episcopal Free Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="286" end="306" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="413" end="435" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="490" end="500" title="archdeacon" label="archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="534" end="545" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="546" end="558" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="578" end="584" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524567" start="752" end="767" title="Leon Chechemian" label="Leon Chechemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781945" start="792" end="800" title="vardapet" label="vardapet"/>
<link wikidata="Q64842" start="809" end="833" title="Armenian Catholic Church" label="Armenian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752803" start="1006" end="1028" title="Ancient British Church" label="Ancient British Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1130" end="1138" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1165" end="1182" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930902" start="1903" end="1933" title="Hugh George de Willmott Newman" label="Hugh George de Willmott Newman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3131" end="3168" title="Anglican Free Communion International" label="Anglican Free Communion International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468349" start="4323" end="4346" title="Liberal Catholic Church" label="Liberal Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096023" start="4450" end="4492" title="Society for Independent Christian Ministry" label="Society for Independent Christian Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096023" start="4498" end="4519" title="Open Episcopal Church" label="Open Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q64842" start="4885" end="4909" title="Armenian Catholic Church" label="Armenian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="4915" end="4937" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q828393" start="5005" end="5030" title="Reformed Episcopal Church" label="Reformed Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524567" start="5297" end="5312" title="Leon Chechemain" label="Leon Chechemain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524567" start="5456" end="5471" title="Leon Chechemian" label="Leon Chechemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079305" start="5610" end="5631" title="Charles Isaac Stevens" label="Charles Isaac Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752803" start="5688" end="5710" title="Ancient British Church" label="Ancient British Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752803" start="7617" end="7639" title="Ancient British Church" label="Ancient British Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586048" start="7644" end="7666" title="Celtic Orthodox Church" label="Celtic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586048" start="7697" end="7719" title="Celtic Orthodox Church" label="Celtic Orthodox Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849437" wikidata="Q430320" url="?curid=849437" title="1997–98 Heineken Cup">
<text>The 1997–98 Heineken Cup was the third edition of the Heineken Cup European rugby union club competition. Competing professional club teams from France, Ireland, Italy, Wales, England and Scotland, were divided into five pools of four, in which teams played home and away matches against each other. The pool winners automatically qualified for the knock-out stages. The five runners-up and the best third placed team entered the play-offs, where they competed for the remaining three quarter final positions.
&#x27;

==Teams==
==Pool stage==
In the pool matches teams received
* 2 points for a win
* 1 points for a draw

===Pool 1===
===Pool 2===
===Pool 3===
===Pool 4===
===Pool 5===
==Seeding==
==Knockout stage==

===Quarter-final play-offs===


===Quarter-finals===


===Semi-finals===


Brive advance to final on try count (two tries to one)

===Final===


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q430320" start="4" end="24" title="1997–98 Heineken Cup" label="1997–98 Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="54" end="66" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="76" end="87" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="145" end="151" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="153" end="160" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="162" end="167" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="169" end="174" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="176" end="183" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="188" end="196" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849442" wikidata="Q736483" url="?curid=849442" title="Bluff Limbo">
<text>Bluff Limbo is the second album of British IDM Producer μ-Ziq and the follow-up to &quot;Tango N&#x27; Vectif&quot;.

==Reception==

&quot;Bluff Limbo&quot; was placed at number 35 on the &quot;NME&quot;&#x27;s list for best albums of 1994.

==Track listing==
===Disc one===

# &quot;Hector&#x27;s House&quot; – 4:26
# &quot;Commemorative Pasta&quot; – 4:37
# &quot;Gob Bots&quot; – 4:50
# &quot;The Wheel&quot; – 6:15
# &quot;27&quot; – 1:18
# &quot;Metal Thing #3&quot; – 5:51
# &quot;Twangle Frent&quot; – 7:06
# &quot;Make It Funky&quot; – 4:38
# &quot;Zombies&quot; – 5:17

===Disc two===

# &quot;Riostand&quot; – 6:18
# &quot;Organic Tomato Yoghurt&quot; – 3:58
# &quot;Sick Porter&quot; – 5:15
# &quot;Sick Porter&quot; – 7:38
# &quot;Dance #2&quot; – 5:46
# &quot;Nettle + Pralines&quot; – 6:29
# &quot;Ethereal Murmurings&quot; – 10:20

== Personnel ==
* Mike Paradinas - Composer, producer

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736483" start="0" end="11" title="Bluff Limbo" label="Bluff Limbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="43" end="46" title="Intelligent dance music" label="IDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q446572" start="56" end="61" title="μ-Ziq" label="μ-Ziq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648245" start="89" end="109" title="Tango N&amp;#x27; Vectif" label="Tango N&amp;#x27; Vectif"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="194" end="197" title="NME" label="NME"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849443" wikidata="Q576359" url="?curid=849443" title="Blue Rodeo">
<text>Blue Rodeo is a Canadian country rock band formed in 1984 in Toronto, Ontario. They have released 16 full-length studio albums, four live recordings, one greatest hits album, and two video/DVDs, along with multiple solo albums, side projects, and collaborations.

==History==
High school friends Jim Cuddy and Greg Keelor began playing music professionally together after completing university. They put together several bands without commercial success in the late 1970s, releasing a single as Hi-Fi&#x27;s in 1980.

Cuddy and Keelor moved to New York City in the early 1980s to further their music careers. There, they met keyboardist and fellow Canadian Bob Wiseman, who, at that time, was working as a producer. Upon returning to Toronto in the summer of 1984, the trio decided to form a band. The name &quot;Blue Rodeo&quot; had already been chosen for the new group when they met former David Wilcox drummer Cleave Anderson and asked him to join. Anderson, in turn, recommended his former bandmate in The Sharks, bassist Bazil Donovan, and the new band&#x27;s lineup was essentially set. On February 7, 1985, Blue Rodeo played their first show together at The Rivoli in Toronto; one week later, they performed at Handsome Ned&#x27;s &quot;Honky Tonk Heart.&quot;

The band quickly earned a following in Toronto and was subsequently signed to Canadian independent record label Risque Disque. They entered the studio in 1986 with Rush producer Terry Brown and recorded several songs that would comprise Blue Rodeo&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Outskirts&quot;. Released in March 1987, &quot;Outskirts&quot; met with moderate success in Canada until &quot;Try&quot; was released as a single in October of that year. The single was an immediate hit, going to number one on the &quot;RPM Country Tracks&quot; chart and number six on the &quot;RPM Top Singles&quot; chart, establishing Blue Rodeo as one of Canada&#x27;s top new bands and carrying &quot;Outskirts&quot; to 4× Platinum status in sales. The music video for the single featured Keelor&#x27;s then-girlfriend Michelle McAdorey, who soon had success with her own band, Crash Vegas.

In 1992, the band&#x27;s song &quot;After the Rain,&quot; written by Cuddy and Keelor, was the most-performed song in Canada. By 1999 the band had sold more than two million albums in Canada.

Cuddy, Keelor, Donovan, Boguski and Cripps have all released solo albums. Glenn Milchem performs his own solo music under the pseudonym &quot;the swallows&quot; and had co-founded, with his twin brother John, the rock duo Starvin Hungry. Keelor has also gone on to produce for other artists, notably alt-country group Cuff the Duke, who have also toured as support for Blue Rodeo.

Blue Rodeo members have collaborated extensively with other notable Canadian artists, including Sarah McLachlan, The Tragically Hip, Burton Cummings, Great Big Sea, Jann Arden, The Sadies, Skydiggers, Cuff the Duke, Crash Vegas, Cowboy Junkies, Sarah Harmer, Jill Barber, and Kathleen Edwards. They have won many Canadian music awards, including twelve Juno Awards and seven SOCAN awards.

On June 16, 2009, it was announced that the band would receive a star on Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame in Toronto. The induction ceremony was held on September 12, 2009. They are the fifth band to receive the honour.

Blue Rodeo was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame at the 41st Juno Awards on April 1, 2012, joining other Canadian music icons including Rush, Leonard Cohen, Neil Young, The Band, Oscar Peterson, Bruce Cockburn, Daniel Lanois, Joni Mitchell, Anne Murray and Tom Cochrane.
According to CARAS, on selecting Blue Rodeo as the 2012 inductee, &quot;Spanning nearly three decades, Blue Rodeo has sold in excess of four million records and won an unprecedented 11 JUNO Awards, establishing themselves as one of the premier groups in Canadian music history.&quot;

In May 2014, the band received a Governor General&#x27;s Performing Arts Award (GGPAA) for Lifetime Artistic Achievement, Canada&#x27;s highest honour in the performing arts. At the Gala honouring GGPAA recipients on May 10, the band delivered the evening&#x27;s surprise finale.

On August 5, 2013, former keyboard player James Gray died as the result of a heart attack. He was 52 years old.

Canadian guitarist Colin Cripps joined Blue Rodeo as a full member in 2013 due to Greg Keelor&#x27;s inability to play electric guitar live anymore because of hearing issues.

In September 2015, Blue Rodeo released the protest song and video &quot;Stealin All My Dreams&quot; which &quot;chronicle the failings of the current government,&quot; referring to the government under Prime Minister Stephen Harper.

The band is a member of the Canadian charity Artists Against Racism.

The City of Toronto named Blue Rodeo Drive, a street in the Riverdale neighbourhood near the band&#x27;s studio, after the band in 2022.

In 2024, Cuddy and Keelor were inducted into the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame. In the same year they were profiled in Dale Heslip&#x27;s documentary film &quot;Blue Rodeo: Lost Together&quot;, which was the winner of the Audience Award at the 2024 Whistler Film Festival.

==Television and film==
* Blue Rodeo&#x27;s song &quot;Flying&quot; appears on the soundtrack to the television show &quot;Due South&quot; as track 10, album released in 1996.
* Blue Rodeo’s song “Lost Together” (from the album of the same name) is featured near the conclusion (and plays over the end credits) of &quot;Resident Alien&quot; season 3, episode 3 (“141 Seconds”).
* The song &quot;Hasn&#x27;t Hit Me Yet&quot; is played in a 2003 episode of the American television series “Ed,” as well as the 2015 British documentary &quot;The Fear of 13&quot; about exonerated death row inmate Nick Yarris. 
* The songs &quot;Try&quot; and &quot;Heart Like Mine&quot; are played in the episode &quot;Cupid&#x27;s Quiver&quot; of the TV show &quot;Friday the 13th The Series&quot;.
* The song &quot;Bad Timing&quot; is played towards the end of the season 4 finale of the hit Canadian show &quot;Corner Gas&quot;.
* Blue Rodeo is the band appearing at the end of the 1990 film &quot;Postcards from the Edge&quot;.
* The song &quot;Try&quot; is played in the background of the bar in the film &quot;Navy SEALs&quot;.
* Greg Keelor, one of the band&#x27;s founding members, composed the soundtrack for the 2010 film &quot;Gunless&quot;. The soundtrack for the Canadian Western comedy also featured an original ballad by Blue Rodeo titled &quot;Don&#x27;t Let the Darkness in Your Head.&quot;

==Concerts==

On August 11, 1988, the band played at the Erie County Fair in Hamburg, New York (a suburb of Buffalo). They were the headliners after a high school battle of the bands competition. The disastrous gig was the inspiration for their 1990 hit, &quot;What Am I Doing Here.&quot;

As part of their 20th Anniversary celebrations in 2004, the &quot;original five&quot; lineup of Jim Cuddy, Greg Keelor, Bazil Donovan, Bob Wiseman and Cleave Anderson reunited for a live performance of five songs: &quot;Heart Like Mine,&quot; &quot;Try,&quot; &quot;Diamond Mine,&quot; &quot;Love and Understanding,&quot; and &quot;Til I Am Myself Again.&quot; The set is included on the DVD &quot;In Stereovision: Blue Rodeo&quot;.

On Canada Day 2008, Blue Rodeo played on Parliament Hill. The band closed the show before the commencement of the fireworks and was joined on stage by several other artists to perform &quot;Lost Together.&quot; On November 28, 2009 the band performed at half-time of the 97th Grey Cup. The band also performed live concerts for the 2010 Olympics in Vancouver.

Cuddy and Keelor performed at the annual Folk on the Rocks music festival in Yellowknife, NT from July 16 to 18, 2010.

On October 19, 2010, Blue Rodeo played the music viral show BalconyTV for a rare acoustic performance on a small Balcony overlooking Dame Street, Dublin.

On July 1, 2011, Blue Rodeo performed at Trafalgar Square as part of the Canada Day celebrations in London.

Blue Rodeo performed at their induction to the Canadian Music Hall of Fame during the Juno Awards of 2012 at Scotiabank Place in the community of Kanata in Ottawa, Ontario on Sunday, April 1, 2012. They took the stage with long-time friend and collaborator Sarah McLachlan and performed their 1992 hit single, &quot;Lost Together.&quot; As the performance ended, the audience rose for a spirited standing ovation recognizing Blue Rodeo as &quot;one of Canada&#x27;s true musical treasures.&quot;

On January 1, 2017, Blue Rodeo took part in CBC&#x27;s The Strombo Show&#x27;s Hip 30, covering &quot;Bobcaygeon&quot;.

Blue Rodeo hosts an annual concert each summer at Budweiser Stage. 2020 was the first time in years the concert did not take place due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Instead, the band performed on Citytv&#x27;s &quot;Budweiser Stage at Home&quot;.

==Personnel==

===Current members===
* Jim Cuddy – vocals, guitar 
* Greg Keelor – vocals, guitar 
* Bazil Donovan – bass 
* Glenn Milchem – drums 
* Michael Boguski – piano, organ 
* Colin Cripps – guitar, backing vocals 
* Jimmy Bowskill – pedal steel, mandolin, guitar 

===Former members===
* Cleave Anderson – drums 
* Bob Wiseman – piano, organ 
* Mark French – drums 
* James Gray – piano, organ 
* Kim Deschamps – pedal steel, mandolin, guitar 
* Bob Packwood – piano, organ 
* Bob Egan – pedal steel, mandolin, guitar 

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Outskirts&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Diamond Mine&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Casino&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Lost Together&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Five Days in July&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Nowhere to Here&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Tremolo&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Days in Between&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Palace of Gold&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Are You Ready&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Small Miracles&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Things We Left Behind&quot; (2009)
* &quot;In Our Nature&quot; (2013)
* &quot;A Merrie Christmas to You&quot; (2014)
* &quot;1000 Arms&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Many a Mile&quot; (2021)

==Videography==
;Video albums
*&quot;Blue Movies&quot; (1991)
*&quot;In Stereovision&quot; (2004) - Certified 3× Platinum by the CRIA.
*&quot;Toronto Rocks (SARSfest)&quot; (2004) - Canadian edition featuring Blue Rodeo.

;Video singles
*&quot;Bulletproof&quot; (from &quot;Watch This!&quot;) (2004)

;Soundtrack appearances
* &quot;I&#x27;m Checkin&#x27; Out&quot; (from &quot;Postcards from the Edge&quot;) (1990)

==See also==

*Canadian rock
*Music of Canada
*Alternative country
*List of alternative country musicians
*List of bands from Canada

==References==
==External links==

*Blue Rodeo Official Website
*Jim Cuddy Official Website
*Greg Keelor Official Website
*CanConRox entry
* 
* Blue Rodeo archives at the University of Toronto Media Commons</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q576359" start="0" end="10" title="Blue Rodeo" label="Blue Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="16" end="24" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="25" end="37" title="country rock" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="61" end="68" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="276" end="287" title="High school" label="High school"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="544" end="557" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934428" start="657" end="668" title="Bob Wiseman" label="Bob Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="734" end="741" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241076" start="893" end="905" title="David Wilcox (Canadian musician)" label="David Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064176" start="914" end="929" title="Cleave Anderson" label="Cleave Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761046" start="1162" end="1172" title="The Rivoli" label="The Rivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656301" start="1219" end="1231" title="Handsome Ned" label="Handsome Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="1434" end="1438" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154207" start="1448" end="1459" title="Terry Brown (record producer)" label="Terry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113013" start="1544" end="1553" title="Outskirts (album)" label="Outskirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848393" start="1655" end="1658" title="Try (Blue Rodeo song)" label="Try"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837150" start="2068" end="2085" title="Michelle McAdorey" label="Michelle McAdorey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182380" start="2127" end="2138" title="Crash Vegas" label="Crash Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676466" start="2556" end="2570" title="Starvin Hungry" label="Starvin Hungry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006768" start="2652" end="2665" title="Cuff the Duke" label="Cuff the Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q224650" start="2812" end="2827" title="Sarah McLachlan" label="Sarah McLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q682030" start="2829" end="2847" title="The Tragically Hip" label="The Tragically Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q783992" start="2849" end="2864" title="Burton Cummings" label="Burton Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424576" start="2866" end="2879" title="Great Big Sea" label="Great Big Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q434915" start="2881" end="2891" title="Jann Arden" label="Jann Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533474" start="2893" end="2903" title="The Sadies" label="The Sadies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537644" start="2905" end="2915" title="Skydiggers" label="Skydiggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182380" start="2932" end="2943" title="Crash Vegas" label="Crash Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138174" start="2945" end="2959" title="Cowboy Junkies" label="Cowboy Junkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422367" start="2961" end="2973" title="Sarah Harmer" label="Sarah Harmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111561" start="2975" end="2986" title="Jill Barber" label="Jill Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618040" start="2992" end="3008" title="Kathleen Edwards" label="Kathleen Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="3069" end="3079" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207432" start="3091" end="3096" title="Society of Composers, Authors, and Music Publishers of Canada" label="SOCAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="3179" end="3205" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362499" start="3354" end="3381" title="Canadian Music Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811346" start="3389" end="3405" title="Juno Awards of 2012" label="41st Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="3469" end="3473" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="3475" end="3488" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="3490" end="3500" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="3502" end="3510" title="The Band" label="The Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="3512" end="3526" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q773830" start="3528" end="3542" title="Bruce Cockburn" label="Bruce Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q935369" start="3544" end="3557" title="Daniel Lanois" label="Daniel Lanois"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="3559" end="3572" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q236543" start="3574" end="3585" title="Anne Murray" label="Anne Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360993" start="3590" end="3602" title="Tom Cochrane" label="Tom Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405815" start="3922" end="3967" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Performing Arts Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Performing Arts Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145020" start="4302" end="4314" title="Colin Cripps" label="Colin Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="4676" end="4690" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338121" start="4823" end="4832" title="Riverdale, Toronto" label="Riverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362498" start="4950" end="4983" title="Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q131455894" start="5024" end="5035" title="Dale Heslip" label="Dale Heslip"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5066" end="5091" title="Blue Rodeo: Lost Together" label="Blue Rodeo: Lost Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q104835833" start="5127" end="5141" title="Whistler Film Festival Audience Award" label="Audience Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922295" start="5154" end="5176" title="Whistler Film Festival" label="Whistler Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5262" end="5317" title="Due South: The Original Television Soundtrack" label="soundtrack to the television show &amp;quot;Due South&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684270" start="5397" end="5423" title="Lost Together (Blue Rodeo album)" label="the album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q104532538" start="5499" end="5513" title="Resident Alien (TV series)" label="Resident Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q930797" start="5666" end="5668" title="Ed (TV series)" label="Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q22252143" start="5717" end="5731" title="The Fear of 13" label="The Fear of 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q26899167" start="5772" end="5783" title="Nick Yarris" label="Nick Yarris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348299" start="5925" end="5951" title="Friday the 13th The Series" label="Friday the 13th The Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276079" start="6073" end="6083" title="Corner Gas" label="Corner Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427222" start="6160" end="6183" title="Postcards from the Edge (film)" label="Postcards from the Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657565" start="6275" end="6285" title="Navy SEALs (film)" label="Navy SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618856" start="6397" end="6404" title="Gunless" label="Gunless"/>
<link wikidata="Q639756" start="7295" end="7305" title="Canada Day" label="Canada Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="7333" end="7348" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818731" start="7563" end="7576" title="97th Grey Cup" label="97th Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="7624" end="7637" title="2010 Olympics" label="2010 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061" start="7730" end="7741" title="Yellowknife" label="Yellowknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="7743" end="7745" title="Northwest Territories" label="NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413243" start="7833" end="7842" title="BalconyTV" label="BalconyTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="7969" end="7985" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362499" start="8084" end="8111" title="Canadian Music Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811346" start="8123" end="8142" title="Juno Awards of 2012" label="Juno Awards of 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327290" start="8146" end="8162" title="Scotiabank Place" label="Scotiabank Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723642" start="8183" end="8189" title="Kanata, Ontario" label="Kanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="8193" end="8199" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q224650" start="8294" end="8309" title="Sarah McLachlan" label="Sarah McLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935786" start="8636" end="8646" title="Bobcaygeon (song)" label="Bobcaygeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896841" start="8705" end="8720" title="Budweiser Stage" label="Budweiser Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532871" start="8847" end="8853" title="Citytv" label="Citytv"/>
<link wikidata="Q106538113" start="8867" end="8890" title="Budweiser Stage at Home" label="Budweiser Stage at Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689075" start="8938" end="8947" title="Jim Cuddy" label="Jim Cuddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606854" start="8968" end="8979" title="Greg Keelor" label="Greg Keelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145020" start="9083" end="9095" title="Colin Cripps" label="Colin Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727614" start="9124" end="9138" title="Jimmy Bowskill" label="Jimmy Bowskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064176" start="9196" end="9211" title="Cleave Anderson" label="Cleave Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934428" start="9223" end="9234" title="Bob Wiseman" label="Bob Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113013" start="9472" end="9481" title="Outskirts (album)" label="Outskirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270870" start="9503" end="9515" title="Diamond Mine (Blue Rodeo album)" label="Diamond Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048835" start="9537" end="9543" title="Casino (Blue Rodeo album)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684270" start="9565" end="9578" title="Lost Together (Blue Rodeo album)" label="Lost Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455884" start="9600" end="9617" title="Five Days in July" label="Five Days in July"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066683" start="9639" end="9654" title="Nowhere to Here" label="Nowhere to Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838124" start="9676" end="9683" title="Tremolo (album)" label="Tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729246" start="9705" end="9724" title="The Days in Between" label="The Days in Between"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126235" start="9746" end="9760" title="Palace of Gold (album)" label="Palace of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788443" start="9782" end="9795" title="Are You Ready (Blue Rodeo album)" label="Are You Ready"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542834" start="9817" end="9831" title="Small Miracles (album)" label="Small Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768762" start="9853" end="9878" title="The Things We Left Behind" label="The Things We Left Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013527" start="9900" end="9913" title="In Our Nature (Blue Rodeo album)" label="In Our Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160088" start="9935" end="9960" title="A Merrie Christmas to You" label="A Merrie Christmas to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q27536750" start="9982" end="9991" title="1000 Arms" label="1000 Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q110192467" start="10013" end="10024" title="Many a Mile (Blue Rodeo album)" label="Many a Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q550619" start="10168" end="10172" title="Canadian Recording Industry Association" label="CRIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427222" start="10417" end="10440" title="Postcards from the Edge (film)" label="Postcards from the Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437821" start="10471" end="10484" title="Canadian rock" label="Canadian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942037" start="10486" end="10501" title="Music of Canada" label="Music of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="10503" end="10522" title="Alternative country" label="Alternative country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605595" start="10524" end="10561" title="List of alternative country musicians" label="List of alternative country musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607083" start="10563" end="10588" title="List of bands from Canada" label="List of bands from Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849448" wikidata="Q3026464" url="?curid=849448" title="MIVA Script">
<text>Miva Script is a proprietary computer scripting language mainly used for internet applications such as e-commerce. As of 2015, it is developed, maintained and owned by Miva Merchant, Inc., based in San Diego, California.
Many web hosting companies support Miva Script on their servers, but it is significantly less widespread than other popular web languages.

==History==
The language was first developed under the name HTMLScript by Joe Austin and others in 1995, and a company, HTMLScript Corporation, was formed the following year.

The origins of Miva Script began in 1993 when David Haldy and Joseph Austin built the first version of HTMLScript. The first version was written in the programming language Perl, which was called Logic Enhanced HTML (LEHTML). Joseph Austin wrote a wrapper for it in the programming language C that let it start off as a root process and then downgrade itself immediately to the ownership and permissions of the owner of the script file. This wrapper made it suitable for use with his hosting service which was called Volant Turnpike at the time. Joseph Austin eventually sold Volant Turnpike to Dave Haldy. Perl allowed self-executing code, so LEHTML did not have its own expression analyzer and just parsed the expression into Perl syntax and then passed it into Perl. Volant Turnpike users liked using LEHTML, so Joseph Austin and Ron Ahern wrote an expression analyzer and re-implemented the LEHTML syntax in the C language. Joseph Austin called the result HTMLScript and registered the name with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Joseph Austin, Troy McCasland and Derek Finley were the founders of the company called HTMLScript Corporation.

HTMLScript did not have the concept of a &quot;WHILE&quot; or &quot;FOR&quot; loop because of the low server processing power at the time. It would be enough to bring the whole server down if even one program ran away. So, Joseph Austin did not implement a loop to make it impossible for an HTMLScript server process to run away. Also, he implemented the &quot;macro&quot; in the first version of HTMLScript so it would allow self-executing code. The macro was powerful, but it eventually had some security issues.

In 1997, Jon Burchmore extensively rewrote the language to make it more syntactically consistent, although the new engine supported both old HTMLScript and new (named mivascript) syntaxes. Jon Burchmore rewrote HTMLScript with syntax that Joe developed with the help of SoftQuad, using the emerging XML standard. Jon Burchmore wrote the replacement for KoolKat which then became Miva Merchant. The new end-product supported both the old HTMLScript syntax and new (named Miva Script) syntaxes.

On October 14, 1997, HTMLScript’s name was changed to Miva Script and the company name was changed to Miva. Soon afterward, Miva Merchant followed suit for the name of the product. The name &quot;Miva&quot; comes from the Egyptian hieroglyphics for the word &quot;cat&quot;. The word for cat is a combination of two symbols: milk basin followed by a quail. The milk basin is pronounced &quot;mee&quot; and the quail is pronounced &quot;waa&quot; which are combined to say cat. Joseph Austin thought this was clever, as they had called KoolKat “an electronic (cat)alog.” Joseph showed it to a German friend who could not pronounce the waa sound and instead kept on pronouncing it as &quot;va&quot;. Joseph Austin registered the domain Miva.com and filed the trademark.

In 1998, the firm was renamed Miva Corporation. In 1998, the first version of Miva Merchant came out. In 2002, the Miva Script compiler was delivered, and the HTMLScript syntax and macros were dropped from the engine. Miva Corporation was sold in 2003 to a mid-cap, public company called FindWhat. Subsequently, FindWhat bought the name Miva.

In 2007, Russell Carroll and a group of investors bought the original Miva technologies and customer base from Miva and started Miva Merchant, Inc.

==Language features==
Miva Script is often described as &#x27;XML-like&#x27; although this is something of a misnomer. It consists of tags which may be interspersed with HTML and XHTML and which all start with &lt;Mv. There are both paired and stand-alone (&quot;empty&quot;) tags. Before version 4.14, Miva Script was interpreted by the Miva Script engine, Empresa. Version 4.00 introduced a compiler, boosting performance significantly.

One of the distinguishing features of Miva Script is the native support for a variation of dBase database platform (DBF III) tables with a proprietary index format and support for SQL. Many installations today are running with MySQL database.

Variables are untyped and are not pre-declared. Miva Script uses the file extensions &quot;.mv&quot;, &quot;.mvc&quot;, and &quot;.mvt&quot; which is the common file extension for runtime compiled template source files.

==Implementations==

===Miva Merchant Empresa===
Empresa is the underlying engine for Miva Script. In versions numbered less than 4.0, Miva Merchant Empresa is a script interpreter available for web servers running *nix and Microsoft Windows operating systems. The most recent interpreter version is 3.9705. Interpreted Miva Script is still widely supported by many web hosts. Versions numbered 3.9x are a transitional form of the language, implementing some (but not all) of the new features found in version 4, such as arrays.

Since 4.0, Miva Merchant Empresa is a Virtual Machine for running compiled Miva Script, again available in versions for *nix and Microsoft Windows.

The current version level 5.x added new language constructs, native SQL support, a new access-methodology for dbase3 tables, called MIVA-SQL, and a new templating syntax that the Empresa virtual machine can compile on the fly. Version 5.08 and later support the GD Graphics Library.

===Miva Merchant Mia===
Miva Merchant Mia is a version of the Empresa engine designed to run on a Windows PC as a localhost server watching a specified port, usually 8000 or 8080. No other server software is needed unless the Post Office Protocol (POP) and SMTP functions are used. This provides a portable, stand-alone development environment.

Miva Merchant Mia is updated with each Miva Merchant Empresa release. Like Empressa, versions pre-4 are interpreters while post-4.0 work only with compiled script. There are a few minor differences between.

===Miva Merchant Script Compiler -- Miva Script===
Miva Merchant Script Compiler was introduced in mid-2002, claiming to offer better performance and the closure of application source code. Compilability required some changes to the language, with support for the old HTMLScript syntax and macros evaluated at runtime (often considered a security risk) dropped. The compiler produces a platform-independent bytecode which runs on the Miva Merchant Empresa and Miva Merchant Mia Virtual Machines Minor variations exist between Empresa and Mia virtual machines.

In May 2005, MIVA Corporation made the Script Compiler available free. In 2011, the built in licensing code was removed simplifying installation.

In August 2007, Miva Merchant was separated from its parent company due to a management buy-out.

Miva Script 5.0 Introduced the a page template compiler command which is the basis for Miva Merchant Storemorph&amp;trade; page template system. This compiler within a compiler offers a simplified subset of the full language, more suitable for end user creation and editing of web page templates. Storemorph&amp;trade; pages allow modular components created in MivaScript, to be added to a template extending its capabilities.

==External links==
*Miva Script resources
*Miva Merchant Developer Resources
*Official Miva Merchant Forum
*Patches and Downloads - Includes Empresa, Mia, Compiler and Miva Merchant Limited Source Kit
*groups.google.com/group/mivascript - Google Miva Script Group

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3026464" start="0" end="11" title="MIVA Script" label="Miva Script"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="38" end="56" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841680" start="168" end="181" title="Miva Merchant" label="Miva Merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="710" end="714" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="828" end="829" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="4038" end="4041" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="4155" end="4160" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q300971" start="4507" end="4512" title="dBase" label="dBase"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="4643" end="4648" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="5105" end="5122" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="5402" end="5408" title="Array data structure" label="arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="5540" end="5557" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485048" start="5822" end="5841" title="GD Graphics Library" label="GD Graphics Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268005" start="6070" end="6090" title="Post Office Protocol" label="Post Office Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="6101" end="6105" title="SMTP" label="SMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="6764" end="6772" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q837330" start="6805" end="6813" title="bytecode" label="bytecode"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="849449" wikidata="Q1648447" url="?curid=849449" title="In Pine Effect">
<text>In Pine Effect is the third studio album by English electronic music producer Mike Paradinas under the stage name μ-Ziq. It was released on 31 October 1995 by Hi-Rise Recordings in the United Kingdom, and later by Astralwerks in the United States.

==Track listing==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="52" end="68" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q446572" start="78" end="92" title="Mike Paradinas" label="Mike Paradinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200368" start="214" end="225" title="Astralwerks" label="Astralwerks"/>
</links>
</doc>
