<doc id="361977" wikidata="Q311604" url="?curid=361977" title="George Mallory">
<text>George Herbert Leigh-Mallory (18 June 1886 – 8 or 9 June 1924) was an English mountaineer who participated in the first three British Mount Everest expeditions in the early 1920s. He and climbing partner Andrew &quot;Sandy&quot; Irvine were last seen ascending near Everest&#x27;s summit during the 1924 expedition, sparking debate as to whether they reached it before they died.

Born in Cheshire, England, Mallory became a student at Winchester College, where a teacher recruited him for an excursion in the Alps, and he developed a strong natural climbing ability. After graduating from Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he became friends with prominent intellectuals, he taught at Charterhouse School while honing his climbing skills in the Alps and the English Lake District. He pioneered new routes and became a respected figure in the British climbing community.

His service in the First World War interrupted his climbing, but he returned with renewed vigour after the war. Mallory&#x27;s most notable contributions to mountaineering were his expeditions to Everest. In 1921, he participated in the first British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition, which established the North Col-North Ridge as a viable route to the summit. In 1922, he took part in a second expedition to attempt the first ascent of Everest, in which his team achieved a world altitude record of using supplemental oxygen. They were awarded Olympic gold medals for alpinism.

During the 1924 expedition, Mallory and Irvine disappeared on Everest&#x27;s Northeast Ridge. They were last seen alive approximately 800 vertical feet (240 metres) from the summit, sparking debate as to whether one or both reached it before they died. Mallory&#x27;s body was found in 1999 by the Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition at 26,760 feet, along with personal effects. The discovery provided clues, but no definitive proof about whether they reached the summit. When asked by a reporter why he wanted to climb Everest, Mallory purportedly replied, &quot;Because it&#x27;s there.&quot;

==Early life and teaching career==
===Childhood===

George Herbert Leigh-Mallory was born at Newton Hall, Mobberley, Cheshire, on 18 June 1886, the first son and second child of the Reverend Herbert Leigh Mallory, rector of the parish. His mother was Annie Beridge Leigh-Mallory. Mallory had two sisters, Mary Henrietta and Annie Victoria (Avie), and a younger brother, Trafford, the Second World War Royal Air Force commander. At the end of 1891, the Mallorys moved from Newton Hall to Hobcroft House, Mobberley. The family resided there until 1904, when they moved to Birkenhead, Cheshire. Mallory exhibited early audaciousness for climbing. Aged 7, he climbed the roof of his father&#x27;s church, St Wilfrid&#x27;s, in Mobberley. His sister Avie recalls, &quot;He climbed everything that it was at all possible to climb.&quot; Included in his climbing escapades were the drainpipes of Hobcroft House and the walls that divided the farmers&#x27; fields.

====1896–1905: Glengorse and Winchester College====

In 1896, Mallory was sent to Glengorse boarding school in Eastbourne on the south coast of England, after the abrupt closure of his first preparatory school in West Kirby, following the death of its headmaster. Mallory won a maths scholarship to Winchester College, an English public school, where he started in September 1900. At Winchester, he was proficient at sports, in addition to his academic ability. He became the best gymnast in the school, the only one capable of performing the giant swing on the horizontal bar. In July 1904, Mallory was a member of the Winchester team who won the Ashburton Shield for rifle shooting at Bisley.

The housemaster of College, the boarding house for scholars, R. L. G. Irving, was an accomplished mountaineer and a member of the Alpine Club. In 1904, Irving was searching for new climbing companions after the death in an accident of the partner with whom he had done most of his climbing. Irving recruited Mallory and fellow pupil and friend, Harry Gibson, for a trip to the Alps. In early August 1904, Irving, Mallory, and Gibson travelled to the Alps for Mallory&#x27;s first high-altitude mountaineering. In his final year at Winchester, Mallory studied history instead of mathematics. After sitting his exams, he was awarded a history scholarship, known as a sizarship, to Magdalene College, Cambridge.

===1905–09: Magdalene College, Cambridge===

In October 1905 Mallory entered Magdalene College to study history; A. C. Benson was his tutor, and became infatuated with Mallory. On 6 February 1907, at Christ&#x27;s College, Mallory dined with Charles Edward Sayle, under-librarian at Cambridge University Library. At Sayle&#x27;s house on Trumpington Street, Mallory met undergraduates with whom he established enduring friendships; painter Jacques Raverat, surgeon and author Geoffrey Keynes were among them. He became good friends with poet Rupert Brooke and psychoanalyst James Strachey. On 12 February 1909, Mallory met Geoffrey Winthrop Young and developed a good friendship. Through James and Geoffrey, Mallory got to know their brothers, Lytton Strachey and John Maynard Keynes, who were members of the Bloomsbury Group. Through the Stracheys, he befriended their cousin, painter Duncan Grant, a Bloomsbury member. His letters attest to the flirtatious, homoerotic aspect of these friendships. Following his engagement in 1914, he wrote to one-time sex partner James Strachey: &quot;It can hardly be a shock to you that I desert the ranks of the fashionable homosexualists (and yet I am still in part of that persuasion) unless you think I have turned monogamist. But you may be assured that this last catastrophe has not happened.&quot;

Mallory developed into an accomplished rower at Magdalene. In October 1906, he was elected secretary of the Magdalene Boat Club and captain of boats from 1907 to 1908. Mallory joined the University Fabian Society, and acted as college secretary on the University Women&#x27;s Suffrage Association committee. The Marlowe Society was established in 1907 and Mallory acted in its first production &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;. 

Academically, in May 1907, Mallory sat Part I of the history tripos, achieving a third class. In 1908, in Part II, he attained a second class degree. Mallory had to consider a future career. In 1907, he had consulted deputy headmaster of Winchester, Howard Rendall, about becoming a teacher there, but Rendall gave him a stern retort; Mallory informed his tutor, A. C. Benson; &quot;He says that as I have nothing to teach and would probably teach it badly, there is not the least chance of ever getting to Winchester.&quot; Rendall suggested he go into the church and Mallory unenthusiastically pondered following in his father&#x27;s footsteps, contemplating &quot;parish work of some kind ... I&#x27;m at variance with so many parsons that I meet. They&#x27;re excessively good, most of them much better than I can ever hope to be, but their sense of goodness seems sometimes to displace their reason.&quot; Benson suggested Mallory return to Magdalene for a fourth year, where he could improve upon his degree, Mallory agreed and settled into rooms at Pythagoras House, a short distance from Magdalene.

In February 1909, Geoffrey Winthrop Young invited Mallory to Wales for a climbing trip at Easter. After Mallory&#x27;s return to Magdalene, Young sent him an application form for the Climbers&#x27; Club, and in May 1909, Mallory was elected a member. The subject for the Members&#x27; Prize Essay in 1909 was James Boswell, biographer of Samuel Johnson; and Mallory decided to enter. He was awarded second place; Benson encouraged Mallory to submit his essay for publication and in 1912, his &quot;Boswell the Biographer&quot;, was published by Smith, Elder &amp; Co. In July 1909, Mallory&#x27;s education at Magdalene was complete.

===1909–10: Interim===
In October 1909, the painter Simon Bussy, whose wife Dorothy was the sister of Lytton and James Strachey, invited Mallory to spend the winter with them at their villa in Roquebrune in the Alpes-Maritimes. Mallory, who had recently received a small family inheritance, accepted their offer and travelled to France in early November to stay with them. He stayed in Paris for a month to improve his French by reading, attending the theatre, music hall, Sorbonne lectures, and conversing.

In April 1910, Mallory returned to Cambridge, contemplating his career prospects. In May he took a temporary teaching post at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, which lasted two weeks. In July, Mallory received a letter from the headmaster of Charterhouse, an English public school, Gerald Henry Rendall, offering a job teaching Latin, mathematics, history, and French, which Mallory accepted.

===1910–14: Charterhouse School===
In September 1910, Mallory began teaching at Charterhouse, as an assistant headmaster. One problem was his youthful appearance, and so he was often mistaken by parents for a student. His teaching methods relied on infectious enthusiasm and avuncular mannerisms rather than imposing his authority. He followed the styles of Irving and Benson, who sought to educate through mutual respect, getting to know pupils as individuals and repudiating the authoritarianism of most British schools. Several colleagues developed a hostile attitude towards him, due to his informal teaching methods, which they considered undermined discipline. He recommended students read literature extensively, write essays on subjects such as hypocrisy, candour, and popularity, and he engaged them in discussion on politics and literature. He took them on excursions to places of aesthetic scenery and architectural landmarks. 

Robert Graves, a student from 1909 to 1914, said Mallory was the best teacher and first genuine friend he ever had. In his autobiography, &quot;Good-Bye to All That&quot;, Graves wrote fondly of Mallory, who encouraged him in poetry and, took him climbing in Snowdon. Irving and Geoffrey Winthrop Young proposed Mallory for the Alpine Club, and in December 1910, he was elected a member. During the summer of 1913, Mallory collaborated with Graves and other students, to produce a magazine called &quot;Green Chartreuse&quot;, intended to rival other school magazines, with its first publication on Old Carthusian Day, 5 July 1913. Mallory presented lectures on Italian painting in spring 1914, engaging students in a &quot;rather philosophical&quot; discussion about Botticelli, Michelangelo, and Raphael.

==Climbing in Europe==

===The Alps===
Mallory embarked on eight expeditions in the Alps and achieved four first ascents. His first climb was on 5 August 1904, when he, Irving, and Gibson ascended Mont Vélan on the Swiss-Italian border, but had to retreat below the summit because Mallory and Gibson suffered from altitude sickness. On 13 August, they reached the summit of Dufourspitze, the third-highest peak in Western Europe. On 26 August, Irving and Mallory summited Mont Blanc, at , the highest mountain in Western Europe, marking Mallory&#x27;s entry into high-altitude mountaineering.

In January 1905, Graham Irving established the Winchester Ice Club; Mallory, Gibson, Harry Tyndale, and Guy Bullock became members. In August, the Ice Club travelled to the Alps. Mallory would not return for another four years, when he achieved a first ascent of the Southeast Ridge of Nesthorn, with Young and Charles Robertson on 4 August 1909. Mallory wrote to his mother, &quot;We were out 21 hours and were altogether pleased with ourselves.&quot; Mallory almost died after missing a hold above an overhang. On 7 August, they crossed the mountain pass Grünhornlücke, followed by the Fiescher Glacier, and climbed to the summit via the Southeast Ridge of the highest mountain in the Bernese Alps, Finsteraarhorn, at , graded approximately 5.8, using the Yosemite Decimal System (YDS). One of Mallory&#x27;s closest friends and climbing companions, whom he met in Switzerland on this trip, was a woman named Cottie Sanders, who became a novelist using the pseudonym of Ann Bridge. Their relationship was elusive; Sanders was either a &quot;climbing friend&quot; or &quot;casual sweetheart.&quot; After Mallory died, Cottie wrote a memoir of him, which was never published but provided much of the material used by later biographers.

At the beginning of August 1911, Mallory returned to the Alps with Irving and Tyndale. On 9 August, they reached the summit of Herbétet, by way of a first ascent of its Western Ridge. On 18 August, Irving, Mallory, and Tyndale reached the summit of Mont Maudit, via the third ascent of its Southeast Ridge, and Mont Blanc. In 1917, Mallory rewrote an impassioned account about the Maudit ascent. It was published in the &quot;Alpine Journal&quot; of 1918 and contained the question, &quot;Have we vanquished an enemy? None but ourselves.&quot;

In August 1912, Mallory undertook his sixth expedition to the Alps, along with Harold Porter and Hugh Pope. On 17 August, they established a new line on the West Face of Dent Blanche, graded 5.6–5.7. On 2 August 1919, Mallory and Porter set out from Montenvers and proceeded up the Mer de Glace to the Glacier de Trélaporte, from where they ascended a new route to the summit of Aiguille des Grands Charmoz, likely graded 5.7. Three days later, they climbed a new route to the summit of Aiguille du Midi, at . This route, rectified by the climber Jean-Louis Urquizar in 1971, is now known as &quot;Rectified Mallory-Porter&quot;, totalling in elevation gain and graded approximately 5.8–5.9.

===Scotland===

On 6 April 1906, Mallory, Irving, and Leach reached the summit of Ben Nevis, climbing in snow via Observatory Gully and Tower Gully on the northeast face. The following day, the trio ascended Stob Bàn, following the corniced main arête to the summit. On 9 April, they climbed to the summit of Càrn Mòr Dearg, which preceded a second successful ascent of Ben Nevis on the same day via North Trident Buttress. On 10 April, they successfully climbed a feature on Ben Nevis—that they termed East Zmutt Ridge after Zmutt Ridge on the Matterhorn—likely graded YDS 5.5–5.6. On 12 April, Mallory, Irving, and Leach attained a successful ascent of Ben Nevis in snow and ice via North-East Buttress. Their achievement was the second recorded winter ascent of this route, after the first in 1896.

On 28 July 1918, Mallory, David Randall Pye, and Leslie Garnet Shadbolt, climbing together, made a new route on the North Face of Sgùrr a&#x27; Mhadaidh on the Isle of Skye, Scotland, graded 5.5–5.6. On 31 July, the trio established another new route with Mallory leading on the Western Buttress of the crag, Sron na Ciche, located in the Cuillin mountains; this route is now known as &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Slab and Groove&quot;, and graded about 5.5.

===Wales===

On 14 September 1907, Mallory accomplished his first two climbs in Wales: &quot;North Gully&quot; and &quot;North Buttress&quot; on Tryfan. On 18 September, Mallory, Keynes, and Wilson climbed &quot;Terminal Arête&quot;, on Lliwedd&#x27;s East Buttress, and inadvertently dislodged a large rock when finishing their climb. Much to their consternation, the rock almost hit James Thomson and partner E.S. Reynolds as they climbed below on a new route, which they aptly named &quot;Avalanche Route&quot;.

On Craig yr Ysfa, the triad climbed two routes: &quot;Great Gully&quot;, at , and &quot;Amphitheatre Buttress&quot;, at , both graded about 5.5. Mallory returned to Snowdonia in August 1908, accompanied by his brother, Trafford. Mallory, climbing solo, established the first ascent of &quot;The Slab Climb&quot; on the East Buttress of Lliwedd, now known as &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Slab&quot;, at , and graded 5.5. The ascent of &quot;The Slab Climb&quot; occurred due to Mallory scaling it to retrieve his pipe, which he had left behind on a ledge known as Bowling Green. In April 1909, Mallory and Geoffrey Winthrop Young journeyed to Pen-y-Pass. On the cliffs of Craig yr Ysfa, Mallory and Young established three new ascents and climbed &quot;The Slab Climb (Mallory&#x27;s Slab)&quot; on the East Buttress of Lliwedd, which Young described as &quot;The hardest rocks I have done.&quot;

In September 1911, Mallory and his sister Mary were joined by Harold Porter, Mallory&#x27;s climbing partner, and stayed at the Snowdon Ranger Inn on the shore of Llyn Cwellyn. Mallory and Porter pioneered new routes that elevated Mallory to the pinnacle of British climbing. On Y Garn, with Porter leading Mallory on the crux, they ascended a new route, now known as &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Ridge&quot;, at , graded 5.9–5.10a. This route defeated James Thomson in 1910, who abandoned it on the most challenging pitch, a sixty-foot segment of vertical rock.

===England===

Mallory&#x27;s first rock climbing experience in England transpired during a nine-day excursion to the Lake District in September 1908 with Geoffrey Keynes, Harry Gibson, and Harold Porter. Their initial climb was &quot;Kern Knotts Crack&quot; on Great Gable, which is graded 5.5. The following day they climbed &quot;Napes Needle&quot;, a rock pinnacle on Great Gable, at , graded approximately 5.5. Also on Great Gable, they climbed &quot;Eagle&#x27;s Nest Ridge Direct,&quot; graded approximately 5.8. They accomplished a successful ascent of &quot;North Climb&quot; on Pillar Rock, graded YDS 5.6.

On 21 September 1908, they claimed two new routes on the Ennerdale face of Great Gable: &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Left-Hand Route&quot;, at , graded YDS 5.5, and &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Right-Hand Route&quot;, at , graded about 5.8. In August 1913, Mallory and Geoffrey Winthrop Young achieved a new route, &quot;Pinnacle Traverse&quot;, at , graded 5.4, on the crag, Carn Lés Boel, in Cornwall. On 7 September 1913, Mallory and Alan Goodfellow, a Charterhouse student, created &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Variation&quot;, a new route on Abbey Buttress, Great Gable, where Mallory finished the route by ascending a twenty-foot slab on tenuous grips, rather than exiting to the right. On 8 September, with Mallory leading Goodfellow, the pair established another new route, this time on the West Face of Low Man, Pillar Rock, at , and graded 5.9–5.10a, which they named &quot;North-West by West&quot; and now known as &quot;Mallory&#x27;s Route&quot;. Climbers have rated Everest&#x27;s Second Step at about 5.9.

==Marriage and the First World War==

Christiana Ruth Turner was a daughter of architect Hugh Thackeray Turner and embroiderer Mary Elizabeth Turner. Mallory and the Turner family developed a close friendship and he regularly visited their dwelling at Westbrook. In April 1914, Mallory joined Thackeray and his daughters on a holiday in Venice, where Mallory and Ruth fell precipitately in love. On 1 May 1914, at Westbrook, Mallory and Ruth became engaged. Thackeray purchased a six-bedroom house for them, named The Holt, in Godalming, Surrey. On 29 July 1914, six days before Britain entered the First World War, Mallory and Ruth were married in Godalming, with Mallory&#x27;s father performing the ceremony and Geoffrey Winthrop Young acting as best man. Mallory and Ruth had two daughters and a son: Frances Clare (1915–2001), Beridge Ruth, known as &quot;Berry&quot; (1917–53), and John (1920–2011).

Mallory enlisted in the war effort and started artillery training at Weymouth Camp in January 1916. Frank Fletcher, headmaster of Charterhouse, had initially challenged Mallory&#x27;s inquiries about enlisting and asked the government about policies regarding schoolmasters enlisting. Mallory received additional training at the School of Siege Artillery at Lydd Camp. He arrived in France in May 1916 and fought at the Battle of the Somme in the 40th Siege Battery. Later that year, he was granted leave, spending ten days at Westbrook House with Ruth and daughter Clare before returning to France on Boxing Day.

He was reassigned as an orderly officer, serving as a colonel&#x27;s assistant at the 30th Heavy Artillery Group headquarters, three miles behind the front line, for the first weeks of 1917. At the beginning of February 1917, the command recommended Mallory for a staff lieutenancy; he rejected it and was instead assigned a liaison officer position to a French unit. At the end of March, he applied to rejoin the 40th Siege Battery, which had moved to a new location. On 7 April, during the prelude to the Battle of Arras, he was back at the front with the 40th Siege Battery in an exposed observation post, directing artillery fire.In September Mallory was sent, under new orders, to Avington Park Camp near Winchester, and was transferred from the Siege Battery to a Heavy Battery. Mallory trained at the camp with the Royal Artillery&#x27;s new generation of 60-pounder heavy guns.

In October 1917, Mallory was promoted lieutenant and commenced a training course for newly promoted officers at Avington Park Camp. On 23 September 1918, Mallory was reassigned to the 515th Siege Battery, stationed between Arras and the French coast. On the evening of 11 November, at the officers&#x27; club in Cambrai, Mallory celebrated peace with his brother Trafford. Due to the British requirement to demobilise more than a million men and the dearth of ships, Mallory did not return to England until January 1919.

==The lure of Everest==
Following his return from France, Mallory and his family re-established themselves in their previous residence, The Holt in Godalming, Surrey. At the end of January 1919, Mallory resumed his teaching position at Charterhouse, where he taught English and history. Mallory felt dissatisfied as a schoolmaster, devoting more attention to mountaineering issues, the direction of international politics, and the fundamental objectives of education, and pondering how he could find more time for writing.
In January 1921, representatives of the Royal Geographical Society and the Alpine Club jointly established the Mount Everest Committee to organise and finance an expedition to Mount Everest. The committee consisted of four RGS members and four Alpine Club members; from the RGS were Sir Francis Younghusband, Arthur Robert Hinks, Edward Lygon Somers-Cocks, and Colonel Evan Maclean Jack; from the Alpine Club were Professor John Norman Collie, John Percy Farrar, Charles Francis Meade, and John Edward Caldwell Eaton. The committee&#x27;s primary objective in 1921 was a thorough reconnaissance of the mountain and its approaches to determine the most viable route to the summit, and in 1922 to return for a second expedition, using this route for an all-out attempt to reach the summit. On 23 January 1921, Mallory received written correspondence from John Percy Farrar, secretary of the Alpine Club, its former president and the nascent Mount Everest Committee member. In the letter, Farrar asked Mallory if he would be interested in participating in an expedition to Everest: &quot;It appears an attempt on Everest will occur this summer. The party would depart in early April and return in October. Any ambitions?&quot;

Although grateful for the invitation, Mallory initially felt reluctant to accept it, knowing that his participation would mean a lengthy separation from his wife and young children, and he also expressed scepticism regarding the viability of the expedition. Geoffrey Winthrop Young visited him at the Holt, Godalming when he learned of his hesitance and swiftly persuaded him and Ruth not to disregard the opportunity, saying that it would be an incredible adventure and earn him reputable renown for prospects in future professions as an educator or writer. Young&#x27;s arguments convinced Ruth, and she concurred that Mallory should join the expedition; realising it was &quot;the opportunity of a lifetime,&quot; Mallory decided to participate. On 9 February 1921, in Mayfair, London, Mallory met with Sir Francis Younghusband, chairman of the Mount Everest Committee; John Percy Farrar, a committee member; and Harold Raeburn, the assigned mountaineering leader of the 1921 British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition. At the meeting, Younghusband formally invited Mallory to join the expedition and was surprised to observe that he accepted without any evident emotion and exhibited no indication that he was brimming with enthusiasm. In February 1921, Mallory officially tendered his resignation from his mastership at Charterhouse, changing his previous intended decision of resigning at the end of the summer term.
On 8 April 1921, Mallory departed from the Port of Tilbury in Essex, England, on board SS &quot;Sardinia&quot;, and brought the final shipment of expedition supplies. It was a solitary voyage, as the other expedition members had already departed or were in India.

==Everest expeditions==
===1921 British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition===
The first Everest expedition in 1921 had the express objective of undertaking a reconnaissance of the mountain and its approaches to discover the most accessible route to its summit. Expedition surveyors Henry Morshead, Oliver Wheeler and Indian surveyors, produced the first accurate maps of the region. On 18 August at 3am, after an arduous two-month-long reconnaissance of Everest&#x27;s northern and eastern approaches, Mallory, Guy Bullock, Henry Morshead, and a porter left their high camp at approximately . From the western head of the Kharta Glacier, they ascended to the col of Lhakpa La, at . From the col of Lhakpa La, directly below them, was the head of the East Rongbuk Glacier, across which rises a wall of snow and ice leading to Everest&#x27;s North Col, at , from where mountaineers can attain the summit via the North Col-North Ridge-Northeast Ridge route. Their preliminary reconnaissance was complete: they had discovered the gateway to the mountain. On 23 September Mallory, Bullock, Wheeler, and ten porters left their camp on Lhakpa La, descended into the East Rongbuk Glacier, and pitched camp at an elevation of , from the beginning of the ascent to the North Col. On 24 September, the three expedition members and three porters, departed their camp, traversed across the East Rongbuk Glacier to the foot of the precipitous wall of snow and ice, which they arduously ascended, and reached the North Col. On the col and above, gale force winds blew from the northwest, which made progress impossible, and they descended to their camp on the East Rongbuk Glacier. Wheeler suffered from frostbite in his lower extremities, and Bullock was exhausted. The next day, the severe winds had not abated and the porters were at the limits of their physical reserves, so Mallory decided to end the expedition.

On 29 October, Mallory departed from Bombay, India, on board SS &quot;Malwa&quot;. On 9 November, Younghusband wrote to Mallory requesting he participate in the second expedition in 1922. He expressed that waiting until 1923 was unviable as they could not afford to squander the opportunity the current benevolence of the Tibetans presented. The letter awaited Mallory in Marseille, France. Mallory wrote to his sister Avie, expressing reservations about returning to Everest in 1922. His wife Ruth awaited him in Marseille, where they spent a holiday touring Provence. They discussed his participation in the 1922 expedition and concluded he should not decline the opportunity. On 25 November, they arrived home, a few days afterwards Mallory met Hinks in London and, within a week was included on a list of mountaineers who assented to participate in the 1922 expedition.

===Lectures, writing, and preparation for the 1922 expedition===

On 20 December, in the Queen&#x27;s Hall, London, Mallory and Charles Howard-Bury delivered a narrative on the 1921 expedition at a combined meeting of the Royal Geographical Society and Alpine Club. In exchange for a quarter of the revenue earned, the Mount Everest Committee requested Mallory deliver lectures throughout Britain and contribute to the official expedition book, &quot;Mount Everest: The Reconnaissance, 1921&quot;. On 10 January 1922, Mallory delivered his initial public speech in the Queen&#x27;s Hall and then journeyed extensively around Britain, filling 30 lecture engagements. The financial results were lucrative, as his 25% per cent share earned him £400, which exceeded his annual salary as a Charterhouse teacher. Preceding his departure for the 1922 British Mount Everest expedition, Mallory completed his written contribution to &quot;Mount Everest: The Reconnaissance, 1921&quot;, titled &quot;The Reconnaissance Of The Mountain&quot;, consisting of six chapters: &quot;The Northern Approach&quot;, &quot;The Northern Approach (continued)&quot;, &quot;The Eastern Approach&quot;, &quot;The Assault&quot;, &quot;Weather And Conditions Of Snow&quot; and &quot;The Route To The Summit&quot;. He reviewed expedition equipment and assisted the Committee in preparations for the 1922 expedition.

===1922 British Mount Everest expedition===
Mallory returned to the Himalayas as a member of the 1922 British Everest expedition. The expedition&#x27;s objective was to become the first to summit Everest. On 2 March, Mallory, Howard Somervell, John Noel, Edward Strutt, George Finch, and Arthur Wakefield, crossed the English Channel, travelled by train to Marseille and departed on board the passenger liner &quot;Caledonia&quot; on 3 March. Mallory engaged in deck tennis with Somervell and Wakefield and attended Finch&#x27;s oxygen class, which enabled him to overcome his ambivalence about its implementation. After docking in Bombay, they arrived in Darjeeling on 20 March, where they coalesced with the rest of the expedition. Members left in groups for the march to Phari. Mallory&#x27;s group departed under expedition leader General Charles Granville Bruce, arriving in Phari on 6 April and joined the following day by the remainder of the expedition. They arrived at the Rongbuk Monastery on 30 April. On 1 May, the expedition pitched Base Camp at an altitude of , below the junction of the Rongbuk Glacier and East Rongbuk Glacier.

====First summit attempt, Mallory, Somervell, Norton, and Morshead====
On 20 May, at 7:30am, Mallory, Howard Somervell, Edward Norton, Henry Morshead, and four porters began their day at Camp IV, on the North Col at an elevation of . At 8am, after getting roped up, the eight men commenced their ascent without supplemental oxygen. They aimed to climb the North Ridge and establish Camp V at an altitude of , from where they planned an attempt to reach the summit. At 11:30am, they attained an elevation of , a gain of from the North Col, in  hours, a vertical climbing rate of per hour, including stops. Mallory estimated that from their present position, it would necessitate three hours to ascend and pitch Camp V there, which left little time for the porters to return to Camp IV on the North Col before nightfall, and was uncertain of finding a well-sheltered area from the strong winds on the lee-side of the North Ridge above them. Therefore, they abandoned their initial plan and erected Camp V at their current altitude of . The four porters departed for the North Col camp at 3pm, and Mallory, Somervell, Norton, and Morshead spent the night at Camp V.

The next day, at 8am, the four mountaineers were roped up and commenced their attempt to reach the summit from Camp V. After a few steps, Morshead, suffering from frostbite, declared he was unable to continue and stayed behind at Camp V. Adverse weather conditions prevented the climbers from beginning their ascent at 6am as planned, leaving them behind schedule. Other than possible mountaineering difficulties, their bid depended predominantly on time and speed. Mallory&#x27;s arithmetical computation estimated their vertical ascent rate at an unsatisfactory per hour, not including stops, from which it was apparent they would be climbing after nightfall, a risk they were unwilling to take, and decided that 2:30pm was their retreat time. At 2:15pm, Mallory, Somervell, and Norton halted and lay against rocks on the North Ridge, where they remained for fifteen minutes and ate. Their aneroid barometer read , a height later rectified and confirmed by a theodolite as , a new world altitude record. They began their descent, and at 4:00pm reached Camp V, where Morshead was waiting to join them for the return to Camp IV. The four climbers roped up and recommenced their descent to . As they descended, Morshead, who was third on the rope, slipped, and his impetus dragged Somervell and Norton down a slope leading directly to the East Rongbuk Glacier, several thousand feet below. Mallory, who was leading, immediately reacted by forcing the pick of his ice axe into the snow and hitching the rope around the axe&#x27;s adze. He stood in a secure position and held the rope in his right hand above the hitch, pressed downward with his left on the axe&#x27;s shaft, and, using his entire weight, leaned towards the incline, securing the pick of his axe in the snow. Commonly, in such circumstances, the belay will not hold when applying this technique, or the rope will snap. Fortunately, the axe and rope held because their bodies&#x27; combined weight and momentum did not come upon the rope at once, which saved the lives of Somervell, Norton, and Morshead. They regained their positions and reached their tents after nightfall, exhausted, hungry, frostbitten, and dehydrated.

====Second summit attempt, Finch and Bruce====

On 27 May, George Finch, Geoffrey Bruce, and Tejbir Bura departed from Camp VI at on the North Ridge, using supplemental oxygen for another attempt. They took Bura, shouldering two spare oxygen cylinders, as far as the Northeast Shoulder at , where he descended, as part of the plan. Finch and Bruce loaded up the extra cylinders, and dispensed their climbing rope to advance faster. When they reached , they changed course and climbed towards a point on the Northeast Ridge, halfway between the Northeast Shoulder and the summit. Not long after, Bruce, about below Finch when his oxygen apparatus failed, struggled upwards as his partner came to his aid, and they repaired the equipment. It was approximately midday, and their aneroid barometer registered an elevation of , surpassing the previous attempt by , a new world record. Weakened by hunger and exhaustion, they were unable to continue, and descended to Camp VI.

====Third summit attempt, Mallory, Somervell, Crawford and the North Col avalanche====
At the beginning of June, the expedition arranged a third attempt. The plan was to ascend to their old Camp V at without using supplemental oxygen and then, using a cylinder each, continue to an elevation of where they would establish the new Camp V. From there the team would use the supplemental oxygen to attempt to reach the summit. On 7 June at 8am, Mallory, Somervell, Colin Crawford, and 14 porters left Camp III at and traversed the head of the East Rongbuk Glacier. The team reached the base of the wall of snow and ice rising to the North Col at 10am and 15 minutes later Somervell, Mallory, Crawford, and one of the porters began the climb. At 1:30pm the group halted about below Camp IV to allow the other porters to join them. At about 1:50pm, soon after the team continued the ascent, an avalanche began on an ice cliff above them and swept over the entire group. Somervell, Mallory, Crawford and the porter managed to dig out from beneath the snow and saw a group of four porters approximately below them gesturing down the slope. The avalanche had swept the other 9 porters into a crevasse. The remaining team members, later joined by expedition members John Noel and Arthur Wakefield, immediately began a search and rescue effort, finding eight of the nine porters. Only two had survived. A memorial cairn was constructed at Camp III in honour of the seven who perished: Lhakpa, Narbu, Pasang, Pema, Sange, Temba, and Antarge. This marked the end of the 1922 expedition. On 5 August, Mallory departed from India by ship, and arrived in England in mid-August.

===Announcement of a third expedition, lectures and writing===

The announcement that the Tibetan government had formally authorised the third expedition to Everest came on 16 October 1922 at a combined meeting of the Royal Geographical Society and Alpine Club at Central Hall, London. The Everest Committee resolved that the third expedition would commence in spring 1924. The committee was eager to generate money to cover some of the 1924 expedition&#x27;s costs and discussed terms for a lecture programme. A large-scale lecture tour was organised, with Mallory and George Finch selected as the two speakers. On 20 October 1922, Mallory and Finch at the Central Hall, City of Westminster, delivered their first public lectures concerning the 1922 expedition, including photo illustrations. During the winter, Mallory presented a round of talks throughout Britain and Ireland, filling engagements in places such as Aberdeen, Brighton and Dublin, receiving 30% of the proceeds. In addition to authoring Everest and Himalaya-related articles for periodicals and encyclopaedias to supplement his income, the committee requested he contribute to the official book of the 1922 expedition, &quot;The Assault on Mount Everest: 1922&quot;.

===North America lecture tour and writing===

The Everest Committee arranged for Mallory to travel to North America on a three-month lecture tour. Mallory and Ruth concurred he should strive for steady employment when he returned. Mallory docked in New York on 17 January 1923. After meeting lecture agent Keedick, Mallory was dismayed he had arranged only a meagre number of lectures, and had to wait 9 days to deliver his first speech. He amended his lecture materials and wrote his finalised contribution to the 1922 expedition book, &quot;The Assault on Mount Everest: 1922&quot;. His first contribution was titled &quot;The First Attempt&quot;, consisting of chapters: &quot;The Problem&quot;, &quot;The Highest Camp&quot;, and &quot;The Highest Point&quot;, and his second had chapters: &quot;The Third Attempt&quot; and &quot;Conclusions&quot;. On 26 January, in Washington, D.C., Mallory delivered two lectures, which grossed $1000. His next engagement was in Philadelphia, where he delivered two lectures for a combined audience of approximately 3000, grossing $1500. After an evaluation by medical professionals at the NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, they determined his lung capacity was twice that of the average person. On 4 February, Mallory gave a lecture at the Broadhurst Theatre, New York, in front of an audience of 550, filling only half the seating capacity. The next day, &quot;The New York Times&quot; ran a story under the headline, &quot;SAYS BRANDY AIDED MT EVEREST PARTY; A Swig 27,000 Feet Up &#x27;Cheered Us All Up Wonderfully,&#x27; Mallory Tells Audience&quot;, which diverted its coverage of the tour into anti-prohibition propaganda. A Toronto appointment resulted in a cancellation, and a Montreal appearance grossed a meagre $48. In Boston, he delivered a lecture to the Appalachian Mountain Club, gave a speech in Cambridge, made a second visit to Philadelphia, where at the University Museum, he spoke to an audience of 1200, and delivered lectures in Toledo, Rochester, Iowa City, and Hanover, before a second engagement in Boston. Under the headline, &quot;CLIMBING MOUNT EVEREST IS WORK FOR SUPERMEN&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot; of 18 March quoted Mallory as having replied to the question, &quot;Why did you want to climb Mount Everest?&quot; with the retort, &quot;Because it&#x27;s there.&quot; The expression describes an existential desire to accomplish a physical and spiritual goal that mountaineers share. Questions have arisen over the quote&#x27;s authenticity and whether Mallory said it. Some suggest it was an innovative paraphrase created by the reporter. The tour was a financial failure; Mallory regretted that he, Ruth, and the children would have to live on less than he had anticipated, because he had no immediate prospects for permanent employment. Mallory docked in Plymouth in early April.

===Cambridge lecturer and Olympic medal===

David Cranage, Secretary of the Board of Extra-Mural Studies at Cambridge University, and Arthur Robert Hinks of the Everest Committee travelled together on a train from London to Cambridge while Mallory was still in America, and discussed a vacancy that solved Mallory&#x27;s situation. Cranage advertised a vacancy for a history lecturer to educate in towns and villages outside of Cambridge and assist organising other courses. They would conduct lectures in cooperation with the Workers&#x27; Educational Association, established to support working people who had missed the opportunity for education in favour of the privileged. Cranage apprised Hinks about the job and questioned whether he knew possible candidates, Hinks suggested Mallory. Hinks informed Mallory soon after he arrived back in England. Mallory applied and following a successful interview was appointed on 18 May. The occupation provided an annual income of £350, supplemented by lecture fees of £150 yearly. He found a suitable residence for the family at Herschel House on Herschel Road, Cambridge. Mallory immersed himself in his new employment with zeal, assisted organising the Golden Jubilee of Cambridge Local Lectures in July, and helped arrange summer schools during the Long Vacation. In the fall of 1923, he commenced lectures in Hunstanton on the emergence of democracy in the 17th century; in Raunds, tutorial classes in modern history; and conducted classes in Halstead. On 18 October, Hinks wrote to Cranage, requesting Mallory obtain leave to participate in the 1924 expedition. The Lecture Committee recommended six months&#x27; leave at half pay.
On 6 November, after a medical examination by a physician recommended by the Everest Committee, Mallory was declared &quot;fit in every respect,&quot; eliminating the last potential obstacle between him and participation in the expedition. On 5 February 1924, at the closing ceremony of the inaugural Winter Olympics in Chamonix, France, Pierre de Coubertin presented 13 gold medals, including for Mallory, for alpinism in recognition of the achievements of the 1922 Everest expedition members to Lt Col Edward Strutt, deputy expedition leader.

===1924 British Mount Everest expedition===
The expedition members included leader General Charles Bruce, Edward Norton as second-in-command and mountaineering leader; mountaineers Andrew Irvine, Howard Somervell, Geoffrey Bruce, Bentley Beetham, and John de Vars Hazard; mountaineer and oxygen officer Noel Odell; photographer and cinematographer John Noel; naturalist and medical officer Richard Hingston; and transportation officer Edward Shebbeare. On 29 February, Mallory and three other expedition members, Irvine, Beetham, and Hazard, departed from Liverpool on board SS &quot;California&quot;. During the voyage to India, Mallory read Maurois&#x27;s &quot;Ariel&quot;, studied Hindustani, and worked through the logistics of supplies and aspects of the organisation for the expedition. Determined to remain physically healthy, he exercised regularly in the gymnasium, threw a medicine ball with Irvine and Beetham, and periodically ran ten laps around the deck. In mid-March, &quot;California&quot; arrived at her destination, berthing in Bombay. Mallory, Irvine, Beetham, and Hazard travelled to Darjeeling, where they rendezvoused with the other participants. On 25 March, the entire expedition departed Darjeeling for the march to Everest Base Camp. The trek of took them from Darjeeling to Kalimpong, Guatong, Jelep La, Yatung, Phari, Tang La, Donka La, Kampa Dzong, Tinki Dzong, Tinki La, Chiblung, Shekar Dzong, Chödzong, and Rongbuk, and they arrived at Base Camp on 29 April, at an altitude of . On 9 April, General Bruce had collapsed due to recurrent malaria and had ongoing cardiovascular issues during the trek to Base Camp. Norton took charge, appointed Mallory as deputy and mountaineering leader, and Charles Bruce returned to India.

====Mallory and Bruce&#x27;s attempt====
On 1 June, at 6am, Mallory and Geoffrey Bruce, without supplemental oxygen, and eight porters commenced their ascent from Camp IV on the North Col at . They planned to climb the North Ridge and establish Camp V at approximately , where they would sleep overnight; the following day, they would ascend to about , where they would pitch Camp VI, sleep overnight, and on 3 June, attempt to reach the summit without oxygen. The precise elevation for establishing Camps V and VI depended on the porters&#x27; abilities to carry heavy loads in the rarefied air and weather conditions. As the two climbers and eight porters ascended the North Ridge with an average gradient of 45 degrees, they were exposed to a penetrating northwest wind. At approximately , four of the porters could not ascend any further after reaching the limits of their endurance. Mallory, Bruce, and the four remaining porters progressed to an elevation of , where they established Camp V. Five porters descended to Camp IV, leaving three to shoulder loads the following day up to the location where the expedition intended to pitch Camp VI. Mallory, Bruce, and the three porters slept at Camp V that night, and on the next day, only one porter was able to proceed, and two declared themselves sick and physically unable to carry loads. Without enough porters to assist, the attempt was abandoned immediately, and the party returned to the North Col.

On 2 June Somervell and Norton began a second attempt. On 4 June Somervell and Norton left Camp VI and commenced their ascent to reach the summit. At midday, as they neared , Somervell, who was suffering from an extremely sore throat and a severe cough, felt it impracticable to continue. Somervell sat on a ledge while Norton proceeded solo. At 1pm, suffering from temporary visual impairment due to oxygen deficiency, exhausted from his efforts, and knowing that from his location and the current time, he stood no chance of reaching the summit and returning safely, Norton retreated from where he had attained a new world altitude record of . At 9:30pm, Somervell and Norton reached Camp IV.

====Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s last climb====
On 4 June, at 2:10pm, Mallory and Irvine, using supplemental oxygen for the final half of their ascent, left Camp III at and reached Camp IV on the North Col at in 3 hours, at 5:10pm, including about 30 minutes at a dump choosing and testing oxygen cylinders. That night, Mallory shared a tent with Norton, who had just returned from his summit attempt with Somervell, and informed Norton that if his summit bid with Somervell had failed, he had planned to make one further attempt with supplemental oxygen. Mallory elucidated that he went down to Camp III and recruited enough porters with Bruce&#x27;s assistance for another endeavour. He chose Irvine as his climbing partner because of the initiative and mechanical expertise he exhibited with the oxygen apparatus. On 6 June, at 8:40am, Mallory and Irvine, set off in excellent weather from Camp IV, for Camp V on the North Ridge at , accompanied by eight porters. Both mountaineers shouldered modified oxygen apparatus, each carrying two cylinders apiece, and their eight porters, not using oxygen, took provisions, bedding, and extra cylinders. They progressed steadily and attained Camp V in good time, and shortly after 5pm, four of their porters arrived back at Camp IV, with a note from the climbing party stating, &quot;There is no wind here, and things look hopeful.&quot; The two climbers and their four remaining porters spent the night at Camp V. On 7 June, Mallory, Irvine, both using oxygen for part of their climb, and the four porters ascended to Camp VI at on the North Ridge. That same day, expedition member Noel Odell and his porter Nema, in support of Mallory and Irvine, climbed to Camp V. Soon after they attained Camp V, Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s four remaining porters reached it from Camp VI, and gave Odell a note from Mallory.

Odell&#x27;s porter, Nema, was suffering from altitude sickness, so that evening Odell sent him down, along with the other four porters, to Camp IV. When they reached Camp IV, a porter known as Lakpa gave John Noel a second note from Mallory. Noel&#x27;s filming location was above Camp III, on the ledge of a buttress at on the Eastern Ridge of Changtse, which he called &quot;Eagle&#x27;s Nest Point.&quot; From this vantage point, Noel had a clear view across the head of the East Rongbuk Glacier, the ice slope leading to the North Col, the Northeast Ridge, and the North Face. Lakpa informed him that Mallory and Irvine were in good health, had reached Camp VI, and the weather was fine. Mallory&#x27;s message reminded Noel of the locations and approximate time of where and when to look for them during their summit attempt, which they had previously discussed and organised. Mallory erroneously wrote 8:0P.M.; he meant A.M.

The following morning, 8 June, at 8 am, after spending the night alone at Camp V, Odell, again supporting Mallory and Irvine, commenced his ascent up to Camp VI and, on his way, intended to conduct a geological study. That same morning, Noel perched himself at &quot;Eagle&#x27;s Nest Point,&quot; where he directed the long lens of his motion picture camera towards the summit to film Mallory and Irvine. He had two assistant porters, peering through a telescope in turns, who saw nothing; 8 am arrived and went without sighting the mountaineers, and by 10 am, cloud and mist had enshrouded their view of the entire summit ridge. As Odell ascended to Camp VI, in a limestone band at approximately , he discovered the first definite fossils on Everest. When he reached an elevation of about , Odell climbed a small crag close to in height, and above him, as he reached its top at 12:50pm, he witnessed a rapid clearing of the atmosphere and consequently saw the entire summit ridge and final peak of Everest revealed, and he sighted Mallory and Irvine on a prominent rock step on the ridge.

The location of Odell&#x27;s initial reported final sighting of Mallory and Irvine—before they disappeared into the clouds and was to become the last time the pair were seen alive—was at the top of the Second Step and determined by expedition member John de Vars Hazard using a theodolite to be at an elevation of . At approximately 2pm, as Odell reached Camp VI at , snow began to fall, and the wind strengthened. Inside Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s tent, he discovered spare clothes, food scraps, sleeping bags, oxygen cylinders, and parts of the oxygen apparatus; outside, he found parts of the oxygen apparatus and the duralumin carriers. They left no note specifying when they had commenced their attempt or what might have transpired to create a delay. Odell departed from Camp VI, ascended about in the direction of the summit in sleet and poor visibility of no more than a few yards, and whistled and yodelled in an attempt to direct Mallory and Irvine towards Camp VI in case they happened to be within hearing distance, but to no avail. Within one hour, he retreated, and at approximately 4pm, as he re-attained Camp VI, the weather cleared; the entire North Face became bathed in sunshine, and the upper crags became observable, but there was no sign of Mallory or Irvine. Odell left Mallory&#x27;s compass, which he had retrieved from Camp V, inside the tent at Camp VI and, at about 4:30pm, descended to Camp IV.

On the morning of 9 June, Odell and Hazard thoroughly inspected Camps V and VI using binoculars, with no sign of either mountaineer. Odell and two porters, left Camp IV and, at 3:30pm, reached Camp V, where they spent the night. The following morning, he sent his porters back to Camp IV, as they were unable to ascend to Camp VI. In a strong, bitter westerly wind, Odell climbed alone to Camp VI, which he reached about 11am. It was immediately apparent Mallory and Irvine had not returned, as everything was as he had left it two days previously. Odell discarded his oxygen apparatus and set off along the presumed route, which both climbers might have taken, to search within the limited time available. After trudging for two hours with no sign of Mallory or Irvine, he ascertained that the likelihood of finding them was remote in the expanse of crags and slabs, and an extensive search towards the final pyramid necessitated a larger party. Odell returned to Camp VI and hauled two sleeping bags up to a precipitous snow-patch, where he positioned them in the shape of a T, communicating that there was no trace of Mallory or Irvine. At 2:10p.m., Hazard, below at Camp IV, saw the T-shaped signal and knew what it meant, as he and Odell had previously drawn up a code of signals before Odell had left the North Col on 9 June. At approximately 2:15p.m., Hazard placed six blankets in the shape of a cross on the snow surface, which relayed a signal of death, to the watchers at Camp III. After being informed about the situation, expedition leader Norton ordered a response for Hazard on the North Col. Richard Hingston positioned three lines of blankets arranged apart on the glacier a short distance beyond Camp III, conveying the message, &quot;Abandon hope and come down.&quot; After retrieving Mallory&#x27;s compass and an oxygen apparatus at Odell descended to Camp IV.

On 8 June, the same day that Mallory and Irvine were last seen alive, Mallory&#x27;s wife Ruth and their children were on holiday in Bacton, Norfolk. On 13 and 14 June, Howard Somervell and Bentley Beetham oversaw the carving and building of a memorial cairn at Base Camp in memory of those who perished in the 1921, 1922, and 1924 expeditions, with the inscription: In Memory Of Three Everest Expeditions; 1921, Kellas; 1922, Lhakpa, Narbu, Pasang, Pema, Sange, Temba, Antarge; 1924, Mallory, Irvine, Shamsher, Manbahadur. On 19 June, Arthur Robert Hinks, who was then in London, received a coded telegram that read, &quot;Mallory Irvine Nove Remainder Alcedo,&quot; sent from expedition leader Edward Norton. &quot;Nove&quot; expressed the message that Mallory and Irvine had died, and &quot;Alcedo&quot; meant everyone else was unharmed. That same day, Hinks sent a telegram to Cambridge, where shortly after 7:30pm, a delivery boy arrived with it at the Mallory residence, Herschel House, Cambridge, to communicate the tragic news and the condolences of the Mount Everest Committee to Ruth.

====Message from the King and memorial service at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral====

On 24 June, a message sent from King George V to Younghusband of the Everest Committee appeared in &quot;The Times&quot;, in which the King conveyed &quot;an expression of his sincere sympathy&quot; to the families and committee concerning the deaths of the &quot;two gallant explorers&quot;. On 17 October, a solemn memorial service at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, was held in honour of the two climbers, at which the Right Reverend Henry Paget, Bishop of Chester, from whose diocese both men had come, delivered the sermon. The parents of both mountaineers, Ruth, relatives and close friends, members of the expeditions and Mount Everest Committee, the Alpine Club, Royal Geographical Society, and other explorers and scientists attended. Additionally present were representatives of the royal family; Sir Sidney Greville represented the King; Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Piers Legh, the Prince of Wales; Lieutenant Colin Buist, the Duke of York. Mallory&#x27;s will was proven on 17 December; he bequeathed his estate of £1706 17s. 6d. (equivalent to £ in ) to his wife.

==Lost on Everest for 75 years==
===Discovery of the ice axe, 1933===
On 30 May 1933, during the 1933 British Mount Everest expedition, Percy Wyn-Harris and Lawrence Wager commenced their summit attempt from Camp VI, at , on the Yellow Band, below the Northeast Ridge. After approximately one hour of climbing, Wyn-Harris, who was leading, found an ice axe located about below the crest of the Northeast Ridge and east of and below the First Step, at an elevation of . Wyn-Harris and Wager left the axe where they had discovered it, and after retreating from a failed summit attempt, Wyn-Harris retrieved the axe and presumably left his own in its place. 

The axe was ascertained to be either Mallory or Irvine&#x27;s, to the exclusion of all others. During his descent with Edward Norton on 4 June 1924, Howard Somervell had dropped his ice axe in the Yellow Band near the Norton Couloir, further west from where Wyn-Harris had found the ice axe, and no mountaineers from the expeditions before 1933, other than Mallory and Irvine, were at the location where Wyn-Harris discovered the axe. Although it is definitive that the axe found by Wyn-Harris was Mallory&#x27;s or Irvine&#x27;s, there was no decisive evidence to prove which mountaineer owned it. In 1934, Noel Odell inspected the axe when shown to him by Wyn-Harris and saw three parallel horizontal nick marks on its shaft, which neither Harris nor Wager had seen. He thought it might have been a mark used by Irvine on some of his equipment, although not verified by visual inspection of such items returned to Irvine&#x27;s family, some of whom seemed to remember seeing a similar marking.

Mallory&#x27;s widow Ruth informed Odell that, &quot;as far as she was aware&quot;—which may indicate she was unsure—Mallory never marked his equipment with triple marks or other type of mark, and assumed the axe belonged to Irvine. To Odell, Wyn Harris suggested a porter may have cut the triple mark to identify individuals&#x27; property during the 1924 expedition, though such was not the practice of many, if any, of the 1924 porters. Wyn Harris assured Odell that his porter Pugla cut the X mark, seen lower down on the shaft of the axe found in 1933, during the return journey from the 1933 expedition. Several 1933 expedition members considered it likely the axe belonged to Mallory because it had a Swiss manufacturer, Willisch of Täsch, stamped on it, and Mallory had journeyed to the Alps shortly before the 1924 expedition, when he may have acquired it. They were unaware this manufacturer had supplied all members of the 1924 expedition with light axes, and Mallory or Irvine might have used them during their fatal summit attempt. In 1962, a brother of Irvine found a military swagger stick, presumed to have belonged to Irvine, and on it are three horizontal identification nick marks resembling those on the axe discovered by Wyn-Harris in 1933; therefore, the axe is possibly Irvine&#x27;s.

In 1977, Walt Unsworth, author of &quot;Everest: The Ultimate Book of the Ultimate Mountain&quot;, examined the axe discovered in 1933 and observed four sets of marks on its shaft. In addition to the three marks seen by Odell and the cross mark cut by Pugla, he saw a single horizontal nick mark above the three observed by Odell and another three nick marks, though fainter in appearance, on the other side of the shaft opposite the cross mark.

===Smythe&#x27;s sighting, 1936===
In 1937, Frank Smythe wrote to Edward Norton in reply to Norton&#x27;s approbation of Smythe&#x27;s book &quot;Camp Six&quot;, an account of the 1933 expedition. Noted in his letter was the discovery of the ice axe in 1933 found below the crest of the Northeast Ridge, where Smythe felt certain it marked the scene of an accident to Mallory and Irvine. Smythe disclosed that during the 1936 British Mount Everest expedition, he scanned Everest&#x27;s North Face with a high-powered telescope from Base Camp and spotted an object, which he presumed was the body of either Mallory or Irvine and it was not to be written about because he feared press sensationalism.

Smythe&#x27;s sighting was unknown to the public until his son Tony revealed the information in his 2013 book, &quot;My Father, Frank: Unresting Spirit of Everest&quot;; the author discovered a copy of the letter in the back of a diary.

===Holzel, Everest historian===
Everest historian, Tom Holzel, the co-author with Audrey Salkeld of &quot;The Mystery of Mallory and Irvine&quot;, first became interested in the Mallory and Irvine enigma after reading about it in a 1970 edition of &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. Holzel devised a theory regarding the mystery, published in a 1971 edition of &quot;Mountain&quot; magazine. His theory was that the two mountaineers split up soon after Odell had sighted them ascending the Second Step at 12:50pm, and when successfully climbed, each had only  hours of supplemental oxygen remaining, insufficient for both to reach the summit in two or three hours. Holzel argued that given this dilemma, Mallory took Irvine&#x27;s oxygen equipment, belayed him down the Second Step, from where he descended towards Camp VI at , and with the additional oxygen, Mallory attempted to reach the summit alone. He further surmised that as the exhausted Irvine descended, the &quot;rather severe blizzard&quot; described by Odell, which lasted from approximately 2 to 4pm, covered the mountain with snow, turned his descent into a deadly endeavour, and caused him to slip and fall to his death. Holzel added that Mallory presumably reached the summit in the late afternoon. He theorised that where the ice axe was found—presumably the scene of an accident—in 1933, a body tumbling down the North Face from the area of its discovery would come to a halt on a snow terrace below at approximately .

In 1980, Holzel received a letter from Hiroyuki Suzuki, foreign secretary of the Japanese Alpine Club. Suzuki&#x27;s letter was in reply to Holzel, who had written to the Japanese inquiring about their 1979 Sino-Japanese Everest reconnaissance expedition and requesting they look out for Irvine&#x27;s body—which Holzel had prognosticated might be discovered on a snow terrace at about —and the camera he may have carried. Suzuki&#x27;s letter contained grievous news. He wrote that on 12 October 1979, as their reconnoitring party attempted to reach the North Col, an avalanche occurred that swept three Chinese including Wang Hongbao, into a crevasse, resulting in their deaths. Suzuki told Holzel that on 11 October—the day before the avalanche caused his death—Hongbao informed their expedition climbing leader, Ryoten Hasegawa, that during the 1975 Chinese Mount Everest expedition, he had seen &quot;two deads.&quot; One he had seen close to a side moraine in the East Rongbuk Glacier below the 1975 expedition Camp III, and the other was on the Northeast Ridge route at an altitude of . Suzuki expressed that Hongbao was a non-English speaker but repeated the word &quot;English, English&quot; to Hasegawa. Suzuki added that the first was possibly Maurice Wilson, questioned who the second he saw at was, and informed Holzel that Hongbao touched the latter&#x27;s torn clothes, some of which the wind had blown away, and buried the corpse by placing snow on it.

===1986 Mount Everest North Face Research Expedition===
On 25 August 1986, the Everest North Face Research Expedition, which Holzel instigated, congregated at North Base Camp. The expedition aimed to resolve the enigma surrounding Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s disappearance. Their primary objective was to ascend to the snow terrace, where they intended to locate the remains of the &quot;English dead&quot; Hongbao had sighted during the 1975 Chinese expedition. They assumed that if found, the cameras both mountaineers may have carried would resolve the mystery of whether or not they attained the summit. Their secondary objective was to search the area immediately above the Second Step, where they hoped to discover Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s empty oxygen cylinders, proving they had reached that elevation and thus possibly gained the summit. They successfully established Camp V on the North Ridge at an elevation of but were hampered by snowstorms and avalanches, which prevented them from reaching , where they had planned to establish Camp VI, from which they intended to search for Mallory and Irvine. Despite this, they discovered two oxygen cylinders from the 1922 expedition.

During the expedition, their liaison officer, Zhiyi Song, also a 1975 Chinese Everest expedition member, on which Hongbao had seen &quot;two deads,&quot; informed Holzel that he heard about Hongbao&#x27;s story and declared, &quot;None of it is true. Wang never reported finding an English mountaineer.&quot; Holzel asked Song if it was conceivable Hongbao had discovered an English body and did not officially report it and only informed his friends. Song knowledgeably replied, &quot;If that is so,&quot; he knew who Hongbao&#x27;s mountaineering partners were and Holzel could meet them on the return to Peking. In Lhasa, Tibet, Song introduced Holzel to Chen Tianliang, Hongboa&#x27;s 1975 climbing leader. Tianliang denied Hongbao had discovered an English body at and asserted he would know because he was with Hongbao the entire time they were at high altitudes. Tianliang was positive that if Hongbao had come across mortal remains, it must have only been those of a missing Chinese mountaineer whom Tianliang was assigned to search for and who was located a few days later. As the interview continued, Tianliang agreed with Holzel that Hongbao could not have found the remains of the missing Chinese climber, because he would have identified and reported his find immediately. Holzel asked Tianliang if there were anything he would like to add, and Tianliang declared that during a rest period at Camp VI, he received a radio call instructing him to ascend to Camp VII to search for the missing climber. Tianliang ascended, leaving two climbers at Camp VI, Hongbao and Zhang Junyan. Holzel asked Tianliang if he thought it possible Hongbao might have found an English body after he departed, and Tianliang conceded it was conceivable and added that Zhang Junyan now resided in Peking. Song arranged a meeting with Junyan. Through his interpreter, Holzel questioned Junyan about what had occurred at Camp VI after Tianliang left. Junyan stated he remained in his sleeping bag, and Hongbao exited the tent to go for a walk; he was gone for approximately 20 minutes, and later, Hongbao informed him that he had discovered the remains of a foreign mountaineer and Hongbao had mentioned this to other climbers.

===1999 Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition ===
The goal of the 1999 Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition was to discover whether Mallory and Irvine had been the first to summit Everest. Objectives included finding Irvine’s body and retrieving a camera that might hold proof of any summit success. It was organised by expedition leader Eric Simonson and advised by researcher Jochen Hemmleb, with mountaineers Conrad Anker, cameraman Dave Hahn and others.

After he had re-examined the historical record of Everest North Face expeditions, Jochen Hemmleb recognised the only seemingly factual information about Mallory and Irvine—other than artefacts such as the ice axe, found in 1933—was that during the 1975 Chinese Everest expedition, Wang Hongbao had discovered a body he had insisted was &quot;English, English!&quot; during a twenty-minute walk from Camp VI. The initial challenge was to identify the location of Chinese Camp VI and use it as the centre point of a circular search zone with a twenty-minute walk radius. From a photo of Camp VI, Hemmleb determined it was on an ill-defined rib of rock that bisects the snow terrace on the North Face.

On 1 May 1999, at approximately 10am, Anker, Hahn, Norton, Politz, and Richards reached , where they were to establish Camp VI. From there, they set out for the &quot;ill-defined rib&quot; and traversed west over the North Face&#x27;s precipitously angled terrain. Anker searched on intuition and descended to the lower margin of the snow terrace, where it drops away approximately to the head of the central Rongbuk Glacier and soon after zig-zagging back up in the direction of Camp VI, he looked west and saw a &quot;patch of white,&quot; which he proceeded towards, and ascertained it was an old body; it was 11:45am, and was the elevation where the corpse lay. The body was partially frozen into the scree and well preserved due to the cold, dry air and constant freezing temperatures. Tied to the corpse&#x27;s waist were the remnants of a braided cotton climbing rope, tangled around the body, from which its broken, frayed end trailed.

The prevalent assumption was Irvine had fallen in 1924 from where, in 1933, Percy Wyn-Harris had discovered the ice axe, presumably Irvine&#x27;s; therefore, Anker, Hahn, Norton, and Richards expected the body to be his, but Politz said, &quot;This is not him.&quot; Norton found a label reading, &quot;G. Mallory.&quot; They discovered another label with &quot;G. Leigh. Ma,&quot; and a third label. The expedition members realised, to their astonishment, that they had not found Irvine as expected, but Mallory. Because the corpse had frozen into the surrounding scree, the mountaineers used their ice axes and pocketknives to excavate the site to find crucial artefacts and, most importantly, Somervell&#x27;s Vest Pocket Kodak camera he &quot;allegedly&quot; lent Mallory for his attempt. If they discovered the camera, it might have solved the mystery of whether or not the summit was reached for the first time in 1924, 30 years before the first confirmed summit in 1953. Experts from Kodak said it might be possible to develop images from the film and have drawn up specific guidelines for an expedition that might discover the camera. Personal possessions were discovered on Mallory&#x27;s body including letters addressed to him. To the expedition members&#x27; dismay the most sought-after object, the camera, was not found after a thorough search. The mountaineers buried Mallory, covering his remains with rocks, and Politz read a Church of England committal ceremony provided by the Bishop of Bristol.
The discovery of the body revealed circumstantial evidence that suggests Mallory might have reached the summit: firstly, Mallory&#x27;s daughter always said Mallory carried a photo of his wife with the intention of leaving it on the summit, and no such photo was found on the body. Given the excellent preservation of the body and personal possessions, the absence of the photo suggests he may have reached the summit and deposited it there. Secondly, Mallory&#x27;s snow goggles were in his pocket, indicating he may have died at night; that he and Irvine had made a push for the summit and were descending very late in the day. Given their known departure time and movements, had they not made the summit, it is unlikely they would have still been out by nightfall.
Hillary enthusiastically welcomed the discovery of Mallory&#x27;s body and described it as &quot;very appropriate&quot; that Mallory might have summited decades earlier. &quot;He was really the initial pioneer of the whole idea of climbing Mount Everest,&quot; Hillary said. Mallory&#x27;s son John said, &quot;To me the only way you achieve a summit is to come back alive; the job&#x27;s half done if you don&#x27;t get down again.&quot;

===Further expeditions===
The 2001 Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition retraced Mallory and Irvine’s route and attempted to find artifacts from the early attempts. Jake Norton and Brent Okita discovered the remnants of the 1924 Camp VI at an altitude of , from which Mallory and Irvine had departed on 8 June. Norton discovered a woollen mitten of unknown origin on the Northeast Ridge at an altitude of ; it may have belonged to Mallory or Irvine. There were research initiatives in 2004, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2018, 2019 and the 2007 Altitude Everest expedition retraced Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s footsteps.

==Timeline==
* 1893: Aged 7, climbed the roof of a church.
* 1904: Aged 18, made his first significant climb by summiting Mont Blanc, the highest peak in Western Europe.
* 1909: First ascent of the Southeast Ridge of Nesthorn (3,822 m)
* 1911: First ascent of the Western Ridge of Herbétet (3,778 m) and third ascent of the Southeast Ridge (Frontier Ridge) of Mont Maudit (4,465 m).
* 1912: Established a new route on the West Face of Dent Blanche, marking a first ascent of this face.
* 191518: Officer in the First World War
* 1919: First ascent of a new route on the Aiguille des Grands Charmoz (3,445 m) and Aiguille du Midi (3,842 m), later named the &quot;Rectified Mallory-Porter Route&quot;.
* 1920: Summiting the Matterhorn (4,478 m) and Zinalrothorn (4,221 m).
* 1921: First British reconnaissance expedition to Everest, helping to map out potential routes to the summit.
* 1922: Second British expedition to Everest, where his team set a world altitude record of 27,300 feet (8,230 m) without supplemental oxygen.
* 1924: Disappeared near the summit along with Andrew &quot;Sandy&quot; Irvine, leading to one of the greatest mysteries in mountaineering.
* 19241950s: Speculation about whether Mallory and Irvine reached the summit, adding to the mystery surrounding their disappearance.
* 1953: Hillary and Norgay became the first climbers to confirm reaching the summit of Everest, renewing interest in Mallory and Irvine.
* 1975: A Chinese climber reported finding the body of an &quot;old English dead&quot; climber on the north face of Everest, likely either Mallory or Irvine.
* 1986: Climbers Conrad Anker and David Roberts examined the route Mallory might have taken and considered the possibility of successful ascent.
* 1995: Publication of &quot;The Ghosts of Everest&quot; brought renewed attention to the mystery of Mallory and Irvine
* 1999: Mallory&#x27;s remains and personal effects were discovered, but whether he reached the summit remains unknown.
* 2007: Conrad Anker, who helped discover Mallory&#x27;s body, completed a replica climb of Everest using period gear similar to that Mallory would have used.
* 2010: Advances in DNA analysis further confirmed the identity of Mallory&#x27;s remains.
* 2013: The film &quot;The Wildest Dream&quot; highlighted both his life and modern efforts to uncover the truth.

==Theories==
===&quot;Second Step&quot;===
As Mallory and Irvine used the Northeast Ridge route, they would have had to free-climb the formidable Second Step. Of the Three Steps on the upper Northeast Ridge, the Second and most prominent, rising approximately and consisting of precipitous, brittle rock at an extreme altitude of , is the most demanding. The final upper section of this step is its crux, a nearly vertical headwall slab to which the 1975 Chinese expedition affixed a aluminium ladder. Although disputed, the first successful ascent of the Second Step occurred during the 1960 Chinese Mount Everest expedition, as all four mountaineers were breathing supplemental oxygen. They used a technique called &quot;short ladder&quot; in which Chu Yin-hau stood on Liu Lianman&#x27;s shoulders to climb to the top of the crux. Chu Yin-hau then belayed himself to a rock at the top of the Step and brought others up on the rope. It took 3 hours for 4 mountaineers to ascend the crux, and they used pitons, which neither Mallory nor Irvine had.

In 1985, during full-monsoon conditions and without supplementary oxygen, Òscar Cadiach, climbing on lead, achieved the first successful free-climb of the Second Step, ascending the crux on belay with a sling tied to one of the rungs of the Chinese ladder. He graded the vertical crack, that forms the crux, at about 5.8. In 2001, Theo Fritsche free-soloed the crux without supplementary oxygen, and assessed it as about 5.7. In 2003, Nickolay Totmjanin free-climbed it without supplementary oxygen. On the 2007 Altitude expedition, Anker and Leo Houlding successfully free-climbed the crux headwall, having first removed the ladder, both rating it about 5.9. Everyone known to have free-climbed this step believes it was within Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s capability, but other question marks remain, e.g. concerning oxygen.

===Western disturbance===
Research published in 2010 indicates an extreme storm may have contributed to the deaths of Mallory and Irvine. Physicist George Moore discovered meteorological data from the 1924 expedition at the Royal Geographical Society&#x27;s library in London. The data consisted of daily barometric pressure and temperature measurements recorded at Base Camp at . Temperature measurements were also recorded at higher camps. The data collected, together with an analysed sea-level pressure map hand-drawn by the India Meteorological Department, were used to show that Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s summit attempt occurred when there was a drop in barometric pressure and temperature, which was likely the result of the passage of an upper-level trough. This is known locally as a western disturbance. The authors hypothesised that the passage of the disturbance possibly triggered an outbreak of convective activity that resulted in the blizzard, witnessed by observation, engulfing Everest during the attempt. Odell described the morning of 8 June as &quot;clear and not unduly cold&quot;, with snowfall and increasing winds beginning at approximately 2pm, which he described as a &quot;rather severe blizzard,&quot; lasting about two hours and possibly severe enough to force Mallory and Irvine to abandon their bid. Records show a drop in barometric pressure at Base Camp of 18 millibars during the attempt. A drop of a similar magnitude possibly occurred at higher altitudes on the Himalayan peak. This decrease in barometric pressure likely induced aggravation of their hypoxic state. Also, if they had run out of supplemental oxygen during the early afternoon, this would have exacerbated their hypoxic condition. The cumulative effects of hypoxia, fatigue and bitter cold during a severe blizzard would have left Mallory and Irvine at their limits of endurance. The authors believe there is persuasive evidence the severe weather they experienced may have been more extreme than previously thought. This harsh weather and decreased barometric pressure may have contributed to their demise.

==Legacy==

At Winchester College there is a memorial to him in the cloister adjacent to the college chapel. Mallory was honoured by having a court named after him at Magdalene College, with an inscribed stone commemorating his death set above the doorway to one of the buildings. To commemorate Mallory&#x27;s position as Magdalene Boat Club Captain, the Friends of Magdalene Boat Club changed their name to the Mallory Club. A plaque commemorates him in the South African Cloisters at Charterhouse. A stained-glass triptych window at St Wilfrid&#x27;s Church, Mobberley, Cheshire, portraying three figures from English mythology, Saint George, King Arthur and Sir Galahad, also has two panels with inscriptions commemorating Mallory. In addition to his father, Herbert Leigh Mallory, the rector of Mobberley, Mallory&#x27;s grandfather, George Leigh Mallory, was the parish&#x27;s rector. In the cloisters of Chester Cathedral, there is a memorial window commemorating Mallory and Irvine. Two high peaks in California&#x27;s Sierra Nevada, Mount Mallory and Mount Irvine, are named after them.
Tragedy in the mountains has proved a recurring theme in the Mallory line; his brother, Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory, met his death on a mountain range when the Avro York carrying him crashed in the French Alps in 1944, killing all on board. Mallory&#x27;s daughter, Frances Clare, married physiologist Glenn Allan Millikan, who was killed in a climbing accident in 1947 at Buzzard&#x27;s Roost in Fall Creek Falls State Park, Tennessee.

Frances Mallory&#x27;s sons, Richard and George Millikan, became respected climbers in the 1960s and 70s. In July 1963, Richard Millikan and other members of the Harvard Mountaineering Club, made the first ascent of the central rib of the Wickersham Wall on the north face of Denali, reaching North Peak at . In 1995, together with six other climbers, George Mallory, grandson of Mallory, reached the summit of Everest via the North Col-North Ridge-Northeast Ridge route as part of an American Everest expedition and evoked a sense of &quot;unfinished business&quot; by leaving a photo of his grandparents on the summit.

Mallory was filmed by expedition cameraman John Noel, who released his film of the 1924 expedition, &quot;The Epic of Everest&quot;. Film director George Lowe used footage from &quot;The Epic of Everest&quot; in the 1953 documentary, &quot;The Conquest of Everest&quot;. A documentary on the 2001 Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition, &quot;Found On Everest: Detectives on the Roof of the World&quot;, was produced by Riley Morton. Brian Blessed played Mallory in &quot;Galahad of Everest&quot;, a 1991 re-creation of his last climb. In Anthony Geffen&#x27;s 2010 documentary about Mallory&#x27;s life and final expedition, &quot;The Wildest Dream&quot;, Conrad Anker and Leo Houlding attempt to reconstruct the climb, dressed and equipped like Mallory and Irvine.

Mallory and Irvine inspired Baku Yumemakura to author the 1998 novel &quot;The Summit of the Gods,&quot; which in turn inspired a manga series published from 2000–03, which was adapted into an anime-influenced animation film, &quot;Le Sommet des Dieux&quot;, in 2021. &quot;Everest&quot;, a proposed Hollywood version of the 1924 attempt, adapted from Jeffrey Archer&#x27;s novel &quot;Paths of Glory&quot;, to be directed by Doug Liman, had Ewan McGregor slated to play Mallory. it was not in production.

In September 2009, a temporary exhibition detailing Mallory and Irvine&#x27;s lives opened at the Salt Museum (now Weaver Hall Museum and Workhouse), Northwich. The exhibition, &quot;Above the Clouds – Mallory and Irvine and the Quest for Everest,&quot; featured items discovered on Mallory&#x27;s body, as well as artefacts and photos from the 1924 expedition.

Mallory was referenced by President John F. Kennedy in 1962, in his &quot;We choose to go to the Moon&quot; speech, regarded as one of the great speeches of the 20th century: &#x27;the great British explorer George Mallory, who was to die on Mount Everest, was asked why did he want to climb it. He said, &quot;Because it is there.&quot; Well, space is there, and we&#x27;re going to climb it...&#x27;

==See also==
* List of people who died climbing Mount Everest
* List of solved missing person cases: pre-1950
* List of unsolved deaths

==Footnotes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
====Books====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Journals====
* 
* Alt URL
* Alt URL
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Alt URL
* Alt URL
* 
* 
* Alt URL
* Alt URL
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Magazines====
* Alt URL

==External links==
* Peter H. Hansen: Mallory, George Herbert Leigh (1886–1924) – Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. 
* Mike Parsons and Mary B. Rose. Mallory Myths and Mysteries: The Mallory Replica Project – Mallory Myths.
* Mallory and Irvine Memorials – Mount Everest The British Story.
* The George Mallory Award – Wasatch Mountain Film Festival.
* Everest Dream – Kelly Joyce Neff.
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311604" start="0" end="28" title="George Mallory" label="George Herbert Leigh-Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="78" end="89" title="Mountaineering" label="mountaineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="134" end="147" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q451007" start="204" end="235" title="Andrew Irvine (mountaineer)" label="Andrew &amp;quot;Sandy&amp;quot; Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207326" start="281" end="287" title="summit" label="summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q918286" start="299" end="314" title="1924 British Mount Everest expedition" label="1924 expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="389" end="397" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="436" end="454" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="510" end="514" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="590" end="618" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="687" end="706" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="768" end="781" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="892" end="907" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182596" start="1116" end="1163" title="1921 British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition" label="British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611798" start="1187" end="1196" title="North Col" label="North Col"/>
<link wikidata="Q839199" start="1269" end="1286" title="1922 British Mount Everest expedition" label="second expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194369" start="1302" end="1314" title="first ascent" label="first ascent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1362" end="1377" title="World altitude record (mountaineering)#British Everest expeditions" label="altitude record"/>
<link wikidata="Q121191746" start="1387" end="1406" title="Bottled oxygen (climbing)" label="supplemental oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111314" start="1426" end="1458" title="Alpinism at the Olympic Games" label="Olympic gold medals for alpinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822857" start="1759" end="1797" title="Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition" label="Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262200" start="2153" end="2164" title="Newton Hall, Mobberley" label="Newton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q841594" start="2238" end="2250" title="the Reverend" label="the Reverend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="2274" end="2280" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q503384" start="2430" end="2438" title="Trafford Leigh-Mallory" label="Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2461" end="2476" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q746718" start="2630" end="2640" title="Birkenhead" label="Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595651" start="2761" end="2778" title="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s Church, Mobberley" label="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869974" start="3100" end="3109" title="Battle Abbey School" label="Glengorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="3129" end="3139" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="3209" end="3227" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q633627" start="3231" end="3241" title="West Kirby" label="West Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="3317" end="3335" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="3348" end="3361" title="public school (United Kingdom)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="3499" end="3506" title="Gymnastics" label="gymnast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152413" start="3561" end="3572" title="Giant (gymnastics)" label="giant swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q623270" start="3580" end="3594" title="horizontal bar" label="horizontal bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q114666734" start="3666" end="3682" title="Ashburton Shield" label="Ashburton Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="3687" end="3701" title="Shooting sports" label="rifle shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q21474154" start="3705" end="3711" title="National Shooting Centre" label="Bisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346967" start="3775" end="3790" title="Robert Lock Graham Irving" label="R. L. G. Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="3812" end="3823" title="Mountaineering" label="mountaineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q795275" start="3844" end="3855" title="Alpine Club (UK)" label="Alpine Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="4091" end="4095" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533398" start="4379" end="4384" title="sizar" label="sizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="4393" end="4421" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q708934" start="4537" end="4549" title="A. C. Benson" label="A. C. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="4624" end="4645" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077301" start="4666" end="4686" title="Charles Edward Sayle" label="Charles Edward Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028334" start="4707" end="4735" title="Cambridge University Library" label="Cambridge University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847831" start="4762" end="4780" title="Trumpington Street" label="Trumpington Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218128" start="4864" end="4879" title="Jacques Raverat" label="Jacques Raverat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503011" start="4900" end="4915" title="Geoffrey Keynes" label="Geoffrey Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q366086" start="4966" end="4979" title="Rupert Brooke" label="Rupert Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681142" start="4998" end="5012" title="James Strachey" label="James Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q472970" start="5047" end="5070" title="Geoffrey Winthrop Young" label="Geoffrey Winthrop Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q540427" start="5168" end="5183" title="Lytton Strachey" label="Lytton Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="5188" end="5207" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q603529" start="5233" end="5249" title="Bloomsbury Group" label="Bloomsbury Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q766166" start="5310" end="5322" title="Duncan Grant" label="Duncan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069508" start="5384" end="5394" title="homoeroticism" label="homoerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="5808" end="5813" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729925" start="5877" end="5896" title="Magdalene Boat Club" label="Magdalene Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="5967" end="5981" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435868" start="6032" end="6053" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772003" start="6077" end="6096" title="The Marlowe Society" label="The Marlowe Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q50919" start="6169" end="6183" title="Doctor Faustus (play)" label="Doctor Faustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374550" start="6254" end="6260" title="tripos" label="tripos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6335" end="6341" title="Academic degree#United Kingdom" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="6431" end="6441" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q708934" start="6556" end="6568" title="A. C. Benson" label="A. C. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525039" start="7249" end="7265" title="School of Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras House"/>
<link wikidata="Q472970" start="7319" end="7342" title="Geoffrey Winthrop Young" label="Geoffrey Winthrop Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="7362" end="7367" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133658" start="7484" end="7503" title="Climbers&amp;#x27; Club" label="Climbers&amp;#x27; Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="7610" end="7623" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="7639" end="7653" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295283" start="7846" end="7868" title="Smith, Elder &amp;amp; Co." label="Smith, Elder &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q16855051" start="7988" end="7999" title="Simon Bussy" label="Simon Bussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037160" start="8012" end="8019" title="Dorothy Bussy" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="8129" end="8139" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="8147" end="8162" title="Alpes-Maritimes" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="8214" end="8225" title="inheritance" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8397" end="8407" title="Music hall#Music halls of Paris" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q214654" start="8409" end="8417" title="Sorbonne (building)" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795492" start="8575" end="8594" title="Britannia Royal Naval College" label="Royal Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="8689" end="8701" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103888" start="8729" end="8749" title="Gerald Henry Rendall" label="Gerald Henry Rendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="8775" end="8780" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="9594" end="9603" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="9781" end="9794" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356106" start="9925" end="9945" title="Good-Bye to All That" label="Good-Bye to All That"/>
<link wikidata="Q217142" start="10040" end="10047" title="Snowdon" label="Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="10262" end="10270" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="10549" end="10559" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="10561" end="10573" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="10579" end="10586" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q669860" start="10786" end="10796" title="Mont Vélan" label="Mont Vélan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="10818" end="10824" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q624497" start="10903" end="10920" title="altitude sickness" label="altitude sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403" start="10963" end="10975" title="Dufourspitze" label="Dufourspitze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543386" start="10981" end="10994" title="List of mountains of the Alps over 4000 metres" label="third-highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="11003" end="11017" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="11061" end="11071" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308847" start="11287" end="11298" title="Guy Bullock" label="Guy Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16541" start="11469" end="11477" title="Nesthorn" label="Nesthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q133056" start="11726" end="11739" title="mountain pass" label="mountain pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552263" start="11740" end="11753" title="Grünhornlücke" label="Grünhornlücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q589143" start="11771" end="11787" title="Fiescher Glacier" label="Fiescher Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q327221" start="11870" end="11882" title="Bernese Alps" label="Bernese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q15127" start="11884" end="11898" title="Finsteraarhorn" label="Finsteraarhorn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11926" end="11929" title="Grade (climbing)#Comparison tables" label="5.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055930" start="11941" end="11964" title="Yosemite Decimal System" label="Yosemite Decimal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511828" start="12094" end="12108" title="Ann Bridge" label="Cottie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="12123" end="12131" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="12142" end="12151" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="12317" end="12323" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="12348" end="12357" title="Publishing" label="published"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="12406" end="12417" title="Biography" label="biographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785155" start="12547" end="12555" title="Herbétet" label="Herbétet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30415" start="12669" end="12680" title="Mont Maudit" label="Mont Maudit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262672" start="12846" end="12860" title="Alpine Journal" label="Alpine Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15125" start="13135" end="13147" title="Dent Blanche" label="Dent Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q583591" start="13247" end="13259" title="Mer de Glace" label="Mer de Glace"/>
<link wikidata="Q404688" start="13344" end="13371" title="Aiguille des Grands Charmoz" label="Aiguille des Grands Charmoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q404728" start="13452" end="13468" title="Aiguille du Midi" label="Aiguille du Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="13740" end="13749" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q926932" start="13866" end="13874" title="Stob Bàn (Mamores)" label="Stob Bàn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164576" start="13890" end="13898" title="Snow cornice" label="corniced"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13904" end="13909" title="Glossary of climbing terms#arête" label="arête"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009632" start="13967" end="13981" title="Càrn Mòr Dearg" label="Càrn Mòr Dearg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374" start="14203" end="14213" title="Matterhorn" label="Matterhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238903" start="14487" end="14504" title="David Pye (engineer)" label="David Randall Pye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776664" start="14591" end="14613" title="Sgùrr a&amp;#x27; Mhadaidh" label="Sgùrr a&amp;#x27; Mhadaidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="14621" end="14633" title="Isle of Skye" label="Isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143317" start="14800" end="14807" title="Cuillin" label="Cuillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106389" start="15298" end="15311" title="J. M. Archer Thomson" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="15933" end="15937" title="Tobacco pipe" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374617" start="16063" end="16073" title="Pen-y-Pass" label="Pen-y-Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397946" start="16481" end="16493" title="Llyn Cwellyn" label="Llyn Cwellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046131" start="16597" end="16603" title="Y Garn (Nantlle Ridge)" label="Y Garn"/>
<link wikidata="Q827331" start="16640" end="16644" title="Crux (climbing)" label="crux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631696" start="16827" end="16832" title="Pitch (ascent/descent)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="16992" end="17005" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503011" start="17029" end="17044" title="Geoffrey Keynes" label="Geoffrey Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502223" start="17136" end="17147" title="Great Gable" label="Great Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404375" start="17234" end="17242" title="Pinnacle (geology)" label="pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17462" end="17473" title="Pillar (Lake District)#Pillar Rock" label="Pillar Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30135170" start="17549" end="17558" title="Ennerdale, Cumbria" label="Ennerdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q472970" start="17745" end="17768" title="Geoffrey Winthrop Young" label="Geoffrey Winthrop Young"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17846" end="17850" title="Glossary of climbing terms#crag" label="crag"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="17870" end="17878" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256992" start="18463" end="18474" title="Three Steps" label="Second Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576350" start="18579" end="18600" title="Hugh Thackeray Turner" label="Hugh Thackeray Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="18605" end="18616" title="embroidery" label="embroiderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779430" start="18617" end="18638" title="Mary Elizabeth Turner" label="Mary Elizabeth Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="18827" end="18833" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="18939" end="18946" title="engaged" label="engaged"/>
<link wikidata="Q909146" start="19017" end="19026" title="Godalming" label="Godalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q472970" start="19205" end="19228" title="Geoffrey Winthrop Young" label="Geoffrey Winthrop Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639689" start="19755" end="19759" title="Lydd" label="Lydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="19817" end="19836" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="19999" end="20009" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20337" end="20352" title="Liaison officer#Military Liaison Officers (MLO)" label="liaison officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q239255" start="20519" end="20534" title="Battle of Arras (1917)" label="Battle of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786330" start="20698" end="20706" title="Avington, Hampshire" label="Avington"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="20722" end="20732" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="20834" end="20849" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517589" start="20875" end="20885" title="BL 60-pounder gun" label="60-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996284" start="20937" end="20947" title="Lieutenant (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="21122" end="21127" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817437" start="21188" end="21207" title="Military officers&amp;#x27; club" label="officers&amp;#x27; club"/>
<link wikidata="Q503384" start="21262" end="21270" title="Trafford Leigh-Mallory" label="Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q934433" start="21306" end="21316" title="Demobilization" label="demobilise"/>
<link wikidata="Q909146" start="21569" end="21578" title="Godalming" label="Godalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="21984" end="22010" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q795275" start="22019" end="22030" title="Alpine Club (UK)" label="Alpine Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269233" start="22055" end="22078" title="Mount Everest Committee" label="Mount Everest Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q353816" start="22227" end="22251" title="Francis Younghusband" label="Sir Francis Younghusband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065787" start="22253" end="22272" title="Arthur Robert Hinks" label="Arthur Robert Hinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182192" start="22358" end="22386" title="J. Norman Collie" label="Professor John Norman Collie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182282" start="22388" end="22405" title="John Percy Farrar" label="John Percy Farrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077781" start="22407" end="22428" title="Charles Francis Meade" label="Charles Francis Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q207326" start="22616" end="22622" title="summit" label="summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="23941" end="23948" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127631" start="24085" end="24099" title="Harold Raeburn" label="Harold Raeburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182596" start="24143" end="24195" title="1921 British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition" label="1921 British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419586" start="24640" end="24655" title="Port of Tilbury" label="Port of Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="25139" end="25148" title="Surveying" label="surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512938" start="25149" end="25163" title="Henry Morshead" label="Henry Morshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344689" start="25165" end="25179" title="Oliver Wheeler" label="Oliver Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308847" start="25378" end="25389" title="Guy Bullock" label="Guy Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509714" start="25413" end="25419" title="Porter (carrier)" label="porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126782" start="25489" end="25503" title="Kharta Glacier" label="Kharta Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231510" start="25526" end="25529" title="col" label="col"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822466" start="25533" end="25542" title="Lhakpa La" label="Lhakpa La"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434582" start="25622" end="25637" title="Rongbuk Glacier" label="Rongbuk Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611798" start="25707" end="25716" title="North Col" label="North Col"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144546" start="26398" end="26402" title="gale" label="gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="26556" end="26565" title="frostbite" label="frostbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="26808" end="26814" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q839199" start="26953" end="26957" title="1922 British Mount Everest expedition" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="27093" end="27101" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="27143" end="27152" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="27331" end="27339" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779710" start="27735" end="27752" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hall" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959381" start="27774" end="27793" title="Charles Howard-Bury" label="Charles Howard-Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="28035" end="28042" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q249306" start="28387" end="28388" title="Pound sign" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="28431" end="28443" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q839199" start="28485" end="28522" title="1922 British Mount Everest expedition" label="1922 British Mount Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230034" start="29259" end="29275" title="Howard Somervell" label="Howard Somervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220583" start="29277" end="29286" title="John Baptist Lucius Noel" label="John Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q957878" start="29288" end="29301" title="Edward Lisle Strutt" label="Edward Strutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q900745" start="29303" end="29315" title="George Finch (chemist)" label="George Finch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29321" end="29337" title="1922 British Mount Everest expedition#Expedition participants" label="Arthur Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="29351" end="29366" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="29426" end="29441" title="Ocean liner" label="passenger liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851743" start="29495" end="29506" title="deck tennis" label="deck tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q121191746" start="29562" end="29568" title="Bottled oxygen (climbing)" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="29689" end="29699" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019397" start="29807" end="29812" title="Phari" label="Phari"/>
<link wikidata="Q177346" start="29876" end="29899" title="Charles Granville Bruce" label="Charles Granville Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q785488" start="30015" end="30032" title="Rongbuk Monastery" label="Rongbuk Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785940" start="30079" end="30088" title="Everest base camps" label="Base Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="30095" end="30103" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434582" start="30135" end="30150" title="Rongbuk Glacier" label="Rongbuk Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434582" start="30155" end="30175" title="East Rongbuk Glacier" label="East Rongbuk Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230034" start="30280" end="30296" title="Howard Somervell" label="Howard Somervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q958017" start="30298" end="30311" title="Edward F. Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512938" start="30313" end="30327" title="Henry Morshead" label="Henry Morshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q121191746" start="30489" end="30508" title="Bottled oxygen (climbing)" label="supplemental oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="31823" end="31833" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32234" end="32251" title="Barometer#Aneroid barometers" label="aneroid barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181517" start="32303" end="32313" title="theodolite" label="theodolite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32331" end="32346" title="World altitude record (mountaineering)#British Everest expeditions" label="altitude record"/>
<link wikidata="Q232254" start="32792" end="32796" title="Pickaxe" label="pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q816762" start="32804" end="32811" title="ice axe" label="ice axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517447" start="32870" end="32874" title="adze" label="adze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626848" start="33152" end="33157" title="belay" label="belay"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="33517" end="33527" title="dehydrated" label="dehydrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q900745" start="33589" end="33601" title="George Finch (chemist)" label="George Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17172479" start="33603" end="33617" title="Geoffrey Bruce" label="Geoffrey Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284092" start="33623" end="33634" title="Tejbir Bura" label="Tejbir Bura"/>
<link wikidata="Q104119538" start="34964" end="34978" title="Colin Crawford (mountaineer)" label="Colin Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="35391" end="35400" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q862193" start="35686" end="35694" title="crevasse" label="crevasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220583" start="35759" end="35768" title="John Baptist Lucius Noel" label="John Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321974" start="35906" end="35911" title="cairn" label="cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17500081" start="36256" end="36274" title="Ganden Phodrang" label="Tibetan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q918286" start="36303" end="36319" title="1924 British Mount Everest expedition" label="third expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="36430" end="36442" title="Methodist Central Hall, Westminster" label="Central Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="37037" end="37044" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="37084" end="37092" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="37094" end="37102" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="37107" end="37113" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="37183" end="37191" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="37213" end="37224" title="Periodical literature" label="periodicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="37229" end="37242" title="encyclopaedia" label="encyclopaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="38336" end="38337" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="38370" end="38382" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="38531" end="38560" title="NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital" label="NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q206120" start="38582" end="38595" title="Lung volumes" label="lung capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972203" start="38679" end="38697" title="Broadhurst Theatre" label="Broadhurst Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="38801" end="38819" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="39045" end="39056" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="39057" end="39067" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="39170" end="39176" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858593" start="39208" end="39233" title="Appalachian Mountain Club" label="Appalachian Mountain Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="39252" end="39261" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285902" start="39313" end="39330" title="University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology" label="University Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="39391" end="39397" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="39399" end="39408" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q487977" start="39410" end="39419" title="Iowa City, Iowa" label="Iowa City"/>
<link wikidata="Q131908" start="39425" end="39432" title="Hanover, New Hampshire" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q255189" start="39985" end="39995" title="paraphrase" label="paraphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="40011" end="40019" title="Journalist" label="reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="40209" end="40219" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858571" start="40239" end="40247" title="Millbay" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232639" start="40309" end="40322" title="David Cranage" label="David Cranage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989967" start="40341" end="40369" title="University of Cambridge Institute of Continuing Education" label="Board of Extra-Mural Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="40640" end="40648" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034708" start="40792" end="40829" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Educational Association" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Educational Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246302" start="40931" end="40941" title="Social privilege" label="privileged"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41176" end="41185" title="University of Cambridge Institute of Continuing Education#Notable people" label="appointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948446" start="41466" end="41480" title="Golden Jubilee" label="Golden Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41563" end="41576" title="University of Cambridge#Teaching" label="Long Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="41585" end="41589" title="Autumn" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q617188" start="41624" end="41634" title="Hunstanton" label="Hunstanton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41642" end="41664" title="History of democracy#Rise of democracy in modern national governments" label="emergence of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016" start="41672" end="41684" title="17th century" label="17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192879" start="41689" end="41695" title="Raunds" label="Raunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282928" start="41758" end="41766" title="Halstead" label="Halstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="41996" end="42005" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q9583" start="42249" end="42264" title="1924 Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83236" start="42268" end="42276" title="Chamonix" label="Chamonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q82984" start="42286" end="42305" title="Pierre de Coubertin" label="Pierre de Coubertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="42359" end="42367" title="mountaineering" label="alpinism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42410" end="42433" title="1922 British Mount Everest expedition#Expedition participants" label="1922 Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q957878" start="42445" end="42465" title="Edward Lisle Strutt" label="Lt Col Edward Strutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q958017" start="42600" end="42613" title="Edward F. Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q451007" start="42675" end="42688" title="Andrew Irvine (mountaineer)" label="Andrew Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230034" start="42690" end="42706" title="Howard Somervell" label="Howard Somervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17172479" start="42708" end="42722" title="Geoffrey Bruce" label="Geoffrey Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890458" start="42724" end="42739" title="Bentley Beetham" label="Bentley Beetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639279" start="42745" end="42764" title="John de Vars Hazard" label="John de Vars Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369205" start="42797" end="42807" title="Noel Odell" label="Noel Odell"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="42826" end="42841" title="cinematographer" label="cinematographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220583" start="42842" end="42851" title="John Baptist Lucius Noel" label="John Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="42853" end="42863" title="Natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326473" start="42884" end="42900" title="Richard Hingston" label="Richard Hingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q99264240" start="42929" end="42945" title="Edward Oswald Shebbeare" label="Edward Shebbeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398514" start="43050" end="43059" title="Port of Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026780" start="43069" end="43094" title="SS California (1923)" label="SS &amp;quot;California&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q224029" start="43137" end="43151" title="André Maurois" label="Maurois&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="43179" end="43189" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="43214" end="43223" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="43359" end="43368" title="Gym" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304461" start="43378" end="43391" title="medicine ball" label="medicine ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="43458" end="43462" title="Deck (ship)" label="deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="43599" end="43609" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785940" start="43744" end="43753" title="Everest base camps" label="Base Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q500877" start="43796" end="43805" title="Kalimpong" label="Kalimpong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243601" start="43816" end="43824" title="Jelep La" label="Jelep La"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019397" start="43834" end="43839" title="Phari" label="Phari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723258" start="43860" end="43871" title="Kampa Dzong" label="Kampa Dzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541083" start="43906" end="43918" title="Shelkar" label="Shekar Dzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q785488" start="43934" end="43941" title="Rongbuk Monastery" label="Rongbuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="43992" end="44000" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="44063" end="44070" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="44087" end="44101" title="Cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="44966" end="44973" title="Grade (slope)" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="46113" end="46130" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="oxygen deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46337" end="46352" title="World altitude record (mountaineering)#British Everest expeditions" label="altitude record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369205" start="48033" end="48043" title="Noel Odell" label="Noel Odell"/>
<link wikidata="Q624497" start="48308" end="48325" title="altitude sickness" label="altitude sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220583" start="48467" end="48476" title="John Baptist Lucius Noel" label="John Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q595929" start="48608" end="48616" title="Changtse" label="Changtse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434582" start="48741" end="48761" title="Rongbuk Glacier" label="East Rongbuk Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q335095" start="49532" end="49553" title="Movie camera" label="motion picture camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="49861" end="49870" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="49928" end="49934" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256992" start="50262" end="50271" title="Three Steps" label="rock step"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639279" start="50537" end="50556" title="John de Vars Hazard" label="John de Vars Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q181517" start="50565" end="50575" title="theodolite" label="theodolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="50907" end="50916" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q852799" start="51121" end="51126" title="Rain and snow mixed" label="sleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q864184" start="51180" end="51188" title="Whistling" label="whistled"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="51193" end="51201" title="Yodeling" label="yodelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="51475" end="51483" title="Sunlight" label="sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51499" end="51503" title="Glossary of climbing terms#crag" label="crag"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="51796" end="51806" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39439" start="53727" end="53742" title="Bacton, Norfolk" label="Bacton, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719670" start="54007" end="54013" title="Alexander Kellas" label="Kellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065787" start="54130" end="54149" title="Arthur Robert Hinks" label="Arthur Robert Hinks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54463" end="54471" title="Telegraphy#Telegram services" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="54475" end="54484" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="54802" end="54815" title="George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="54875" end="54884" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="55107" end="55131" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476350" start="55186" end="55200" title="The Right Reverend" label="Right Reverend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702236" start="55201" end="55212" title="Luke Paget" label="Henry Paget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837071" start="55214" end="55231" title="Bishop of Chester" label="Bishop of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="55244" end="55251" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="55473" end="55482" title="Exploration" label="explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628202" start="55571" end="55590" title="Sidney Greville" label="Sir Sidney Greville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="55613" end="55631" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192609" start="55632" end="55646" title="Piers Legh" label="Sir Piers Legh"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="55652" end="55667" title="Edward VIII" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996284" start="55669" end="55679" title="Lieutenant (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="55697" end="55709" title="George VI" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q249306" start="55786" end="55787" title="Pound sign" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056948" start="55934" end="55971" title="1933 British Mount Everest expedition" label="1933 British Mount Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752285" start="55973" end="55989" title="Percy Wyn-Harris" label="Percy Wyn-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809248" start="55994" end="56008" title="Lawrence Wager" label="Lawrence Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q816762" start="56186" end="56193" title="ice axe" label="ice axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230034" start="56643" end="56659" title="Howard Somervell" label="Howard Somervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q261841" start="56712" end="56726" title="Norton Couloir" label="Norton Couloir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369205" start="57102" end="57112" title="Noel Odell" label="Noel Odell"/>
<link wikidata="Q69305" start="58231" end="58236" title="Täsch" label="Täsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q250902" start="58582" end="58595" title="swagger stick" label="swagger stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q961983" start="59291" end="59303" title="Frank Smythe" label="Frank Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59387" end="59407" title="Frank Smythe#Bibliography" label="&amp;quot;Camp Six&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19839672" start="59668" end="59705" title="1936 British Mount Everest expedition" label="1936 British Mount Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012778" start="59733" end="59743" title="North Face (Everest)" label="North Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="59764" end="59773" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="59930" end="59944" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594132" start="60252" end="60261" title="Joint authorship" label="co-author"/>
<link wikidata="Q60631249" start="60267" end="60281" title="Audrey Salkeld" label="Audrey Salkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="60439" end="60453" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q121191746" start="60747" end="60766" title="Bottled oxygen (climbing)" label="supplemental oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626848" start="60927" end="60934" title="Belaying" label="belayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11507985" start="61749" end="61769" title="Japanese Alpine Club" label="Japanese Alpine Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="61875" end="61879" title="China" label="Sino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611798" start="62223" end="62232" title="North Col" label="North Col"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="62237" end="62246" title="avalanche" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q862193" start="62312" end="62320" title="crevasse" label="crevasse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62517" end="62554" title="Timeline of Mount Everest expeditions#1975" label="1975 Chinese Mount Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="62623" end="62630" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434582" start="62638" end="62658" title="Rongbuk Glacier" label="East Rongbuk Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q354453" start="62923" end="62937" title="Maurice Wilson" label="Maurice Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48422" start="63107" end="63113" title="corpse" label="corpse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63297" end="63312" title="Everest base camps#North Base Camp in China" label="North Base Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079023" start="64080" end="64090" title="Winter storm" label="snowstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="64933" end="64939" title="Peking" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026100" start="64944" end="64949" title="Lhasa" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q388505" start="65301" end="65308" title="Missing person" label="missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="66169" end="66180" title="Language interpretation" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387515" start="66883" end="66896" title="Eric Simonson (mountaineer)" label="Eric Simonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q735984" start="66957" end="66969" title="Conrad Anker" label="Conrad Anker"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="66971" end="66980" title="Cinematographer" label="cameraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228887" start="66981" end="66990" title="Dave Hahn" label="Dave Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q220659" start="67187" end="67196" title="Artifact (archaeology)" label="artefacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="67518" end="67526" title="Circle" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="67565" end="67571" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434582" start="68113" end="68128" title="Rongbuk Glacier" label="Rongbuk Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133195" start="68409" end="68414" title="scree" label="scree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752285" start="68725" end="68741" title="Percy Wyn-Harris" label="Percy Wyn-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q390383" start="69262" end="69274" title="Pocketknife" label="pocketknives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352130" start="69362" end="69373" title="Vest Pocket Kodak" label="Vest Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="69374" end="69379" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="70092" end="70109" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546155" start="70145" end="70162" title="Bishop of Bristol" label="Bishop of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661108" start="71713" end="71719" title="mitten" label="mitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607881" start="71902" end="71934" title="2007 Altitude Everest expedition" label="2007 Altitude Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q162883" start="74445" end="74455" title="Free climbing" label="free-climb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256992" start="74471" end="74482" title="Three Steps" label="Second Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q918226" start="74643" end="74651" title="Effects of high altitude on humans" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q827331" start="74724" end="74728" title="Crux (climbing)" label="crux"/>
<link wikidata="Q168639" start="74819" end="74825" title="ladder" label="ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651339" start="74913" end="74950" title="1960 Chinese Mount Everest expedition" label="1960 Chinese Mount Everest expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9111683" start="75097" end="75108" title="Liu Lianman" label="Liu Lianman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626848" start="75176" end="75183" title="Belaying" label="belayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404337" start="75329" end="75334" title="piton" label="piton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11955896" start="75450" end="75463" title="Òscar Cadiach" label="Òscar Cadiach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453425" start="75721" end="75730" title="Free soloing" label="free-solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523838" start="75919" end="75931" title="Leo Houlding" label="Leo Houlding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76309" end="76315" title="List of people who died climbing Mount Everest#Deaths" label="deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="76373" end="76387" title="meteorological" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="76506" end="76525" title="barometric pressure" label="barometric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="76689" end="76698" title="Sea level" label="sea-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q865144" start="76699" end="76711" title="Weather map" label="pressure map"/>
<link wikidata="Q923628" start="76730" end="76761" title="India Meteorological Department" label="India Meteorological Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454987" start="76959" end="76965" title="Trough (meteorology)" label="trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010588" start="76994" end="77013" title="western disturbance" label="western disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q931652" start="77110" end="77120" title="Atmospheric convection" label="convective"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="77595" end="77604" title="Bar (unit)" label="millibars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="77700" end="77709" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961525" start="77789" end="77796" title="Generalized hypoxia" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="78327" end="78345" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="78380" end="78388" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="78799" end="78811" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="78815" end="78828" title="Stained glass" label="stained-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q79218" start="78829" end="78837" title="triptych" label="triptych"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595651" start="78848" end="78872" title="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s Church, Mobberley" label="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q52699397" start="78925" end="78942" title="English mythology" label="English mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="78944" end="78956" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="78958" end="78969" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q831462" start="78974" end="78985" title="Galahad" label="Sir Galahad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="79102" end="79108" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559480" start="79223" end="79240" title="Chester Cathedral" label="Chester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="79339" end="79352" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921982" start="79354" end="79367" title="Mount Mallory" label="Mount Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892722" start="79372" end="79384" title="Mount Irvine (California)" label="Mount Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="79496" end="79513" title="Air Chief Marshal" label="Air Chief Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q503384" start="79518" end="79540" title="Trafford Leigh-Mallory" label="Trafford Leigh-Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q538968" start="79585" end="79594" title="Avro York" label="Avro York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630884" start="79623" end="79634" title="French Alps" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568666" start="79727" end="79747" title="Glenn Allan Millikan" label="Glenn Allan Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432019" start="79822" end="79849" title="Fall Creek Falls State Park" label="Fall Creek Falls State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q130018" start="80139" end="80145" title="Denali" label="Denali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611798" start="80290" end="80299" title="North Col" label="North Col"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220583" start="80528" end="80537" title="John Baptist Lucius Noel" label="John Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15526417" start="80591" end="80610" title="The Epic of Everest" label="The Epic of Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101729" start="80632" end="80643" title="George Lowe (mountaineer)" label="George Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207751" start="80725" end="80748" title="The Conquest of Everest" label="The Conquest of Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822857" start="80782" end="80820" title="Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition" label="Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q449118" start="80919" end="80932" title="Brian Blessed" label="Brian Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774950" start="81117" end="81134" title="The Wildest Dream" label="The Wildest Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q735984" start="81142" end="81154" title="Conrad Anker" label="Conrad Anker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523838" start="81159" end="81171" title="Leo Houlding" label="Leo Houlding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880354" start="81281" end="81296" title="Baku Yumemakura" label="Baku Yumemakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="81383" end="81388" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580761" start="81446" end="81472" title="anime-influenced animation" label="anime-influenced animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107555499" start="81485" end="81504" title="The Summit of the Gods (film)" label="Le Sommet des Dieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q313489" start="81605" end="81619" title="Jeffrey Archer" label="Jeffrey Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144856" start="81633" end="81659" title="Paths of Glory (Archer novel)" label="&amp;quot;Paths of Glory&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q349339" start="81679" end="81689" title="Doug Liman" label="Doug Liman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="81695" end="81708" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978353" start="81875" end="81907" title="Weaver Hall Museum and Workhouse" label="Weaver Hall Museum and Workhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009813" start="81910" end="81919" title="Northwich" label="Northwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="82159" end="82174" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566941" start="82197" end="82224" title="We choose to go to the Moon" label="We choose to go to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633171" start="82541" end="82587" title="List of people who died climbing Mount Everest" label="List of people who died climbing Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82590" end="82635" title="List of solved missing person cases: pre-1950" label="List of solved missing person cases: pre-1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435337" start="82638" end="82661" title="List of unsolved deaths" label="List of unsolved deaths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="361981" wikidata="Q4396877" url="?curid=361981" title="Rockcliffe Park">
<text>Rockcliffe Park (French: &quot;Parc Rockcliffe&quot;) is a neighbourhood in Rideau-Rockcliffe Ward, close to the centre of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Established in 1864, organized as a Police village in 1908, and an independent village from 1926, and ultimately amalgamated with the rest of Ottawa on January 1, 2001. , it had a population of 2,021. In 1977 the entire village of Rockcliffe Park was designated a Heritage Conservation District. Rockcliffe Park is one of only a handful of surviving nineteenth-century communities of its kind in North America.

==Geography==
The area is northeast of downtown, on the southern banks of the Ottawa River. It encompasses the small McKay Lake (a Meromictic lake), Sand Pits Lake (The Pond), and the Rockeries, a rock garden and playing field maintained by the National Capital Commission (NCC).

As it was long a separate village not under the jurisdiction of Ottawa&#x27;s municipal government, Rockcliffe Park differs from the rest of the city. The village is characterized by its park-like setting, with varied topography – narrow curving roads without curbs or sidewalks, many trees, generous lots and gardens, and houses set unobtrusively within a visually continuous, rich green landscape. It is relatively inaccessible to through traffic.

To the north, on the cliffs of the Ottawa River, there is public greenspace maintained by the National Capital Commission, also called Rockcliffe Park. It is transversed by a branch of the Sir George-Étienne Cartier Parkway. The parkway has several small parking lots along its length that enable visitors to enjoy the lawns, wooded areas, parks, and lookouts. There is also a large gazebo, and public restrooms. In the winter visitors can enjoy cross-country skiing and toboganning. The largely francophone neighbourhood of Vanier lies to the south.

==Heritage==
Rockcliffe Park was founded by Thomas Keefer, in 1864, in accordance with the principles of the Picturesque tradition. The preservation of the natural landscape with roads lined with mature trees and curving around a varied topography, its rocky outcroppings and its lake and pond, as well as strong landscaping of individual properties, are all key to the Picturesque quality of the Village. The motto on the village coat-of-arms is “Inter Arboribus Floremus” - amidst the trees we flourish.

The entire village is a Heritage Conservation District. Heritage conservation district plans have been required for all heritage conservation districts in the province since 2005. After public consultations, and review by the City of Ottawa&#x27;s Built Heritage Subcommittee and Planning Committee, the Rockcliffe Park Heritage Conservation District Plan was approved by Ottawa City Council in 2016. Legislation was enacted to adopt the Plan, pursuant to Section 41 of the &quot;Ontario Heritage Act&quot;. The Plan&#x27;s objective is conservation of the park-like qualities of the area, and of the buildings and properties that contribute to its heritage character.
Since a heritage permit is now required prior to undertaking the alteration or demolition of a property, some property owners have raised concerns that market values will be negatively affected – see Ontario Heritage Act: Implementation and Issues. This heritage designation of properties was challenged in a landmark case of 270 Buchan Rd; in May 2019 the Local Planning Appeal Tribunal sided with the homeowner ordering that city to issue permit for demolition. The heritage consultant found incomplete evaluation forms and observations that don’t align with scores in a sample of 50 evaluations. The downfall of the city’s case to protect the home was an admission that 721 property evaluations in Rockcliffe Park were not done correctly and that more errors could be uncovered in the future. In the case of &quot;Statler v. Ottawa&quot; (City), 2017 CarswellOnt 18749 (O.M.B), the Ontario Municipal Board (&quot;OMB&quot;) made the decision that Heritage Conservation District studies adopted prior to the 2005 amendments to the OHA have no force in law; and, that the pre-2005 OHA did not control property, only structures, resulting in the lack of legal authority to regulate land. &quot;The decision of the OMB in Statler v. Ottawa (City) represents a warning to cities across the province that the Board (now the Local Planning Appeal Tribunal) will not allow municipalities to overreach their powers under the Ontario Heritage Act (&quot;OHA&quot;).&quot;

==Community==
The community is home to one public elementary school, Rockcliffe Park Public School (RPPS), and two private schools, Elmwood School and Ashbury College. Located beside the elementary school is a community hall/library complex. The library was originally funded, built and staffed through the efforts of Rockcliffe residents, but is now a branch of the Ottawa Public Library, with computer access, a children&#x27;s area, a young adult section and regular adult section. The library houses a special collection of art-related books called the Margaret A. Bailey collection.

In the community hall, there are memorabilia about and from HMCS &quot;Rockcliffe&quot; – an &quot;Algerine&quot;-class minesweeper that served during World War II – and a plaque and honour roll dedicated to residents who served.

There is no commercial activity in the village.
Rockcliffe Park is and has been home to many Ottawa notables, including former prime ministers, senior civil servants, corporate leaders and many ambassadors to Canada. The Dutch royal family lived there during World War II. Their former home, Stornoway, is now the residence of the leader of the Canadian Official Opposition. Rockcliffe Park Public School, which was attended by the eldest princess, Beatrix, now calls its gymnasium Queen Juliana Hall.

==Demographics==
According to the Canada 2021 Census:
*Population: 1,888
*% Change (2016–2021): −2.3
*Dwellings: 781
*Area (km².): 1.77
*Density (persons per km².): 1069.6

Average salary in Rockcliffe Park is $186,000, whereas the average salary in Ottawa is $64,500, based on average total income in 2020 among recipients.

The benchmark price for a single family home in Rockcliffe Park was $1,516,300 in August 2017, compared to $398,400 for the city of Ottawa as a whole.

==Reeves and Mayors==
The leading politician of Rockcliffe Park was known as the Reeve until the 1980s when that position was redesignated as Mayor.

* 1926–1928: David L. McKeand
* 1928–1932: R. E. Wodehouse
* 1933–1938: C. P. Edwards
* 1938–1954: D. P. Cruikshank
* 1954–1956: James Hyndman
* 1956–1965: Denis Coolican
* 1965–1974: Alan O. Gibbons
* 1974–1978: Ronald Clark
* 1978–1985: Beryl Plumptre
* 1985–2000: Patrick Murray

==See also==

* List of Ottawa neighbourhoods
* Rideau Hall
* Ottawa/Rockcliffe Airport
* Rockcliffe Flying Club

==References==
*  , accessed 20 January 2007
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4396877" start="0" end="15" title="Rockcliffe Park" label="Rockcliffe Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17" end="23" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332560" start="76" end="98" title="Rideau-Rockcliffe Ward" label="Rideau-Rockcliffe Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="123" end="129" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="131" end="138" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209617" start="184" end="198" title="Police village" label="Police village"/>
<link wikidata="Q452440" start="261" end="272" title="Merger (politics)" label="amalgamated"/>
<link wikidata="Q60974" start="638" end="650" title="Ottawa River" label="Ottawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22477466" start="677" end="687" title="McKay Lake (Ottawa)" label="McKay Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165822" start="691" end="706" title="Meromictic lake" label="Meromictic lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q22408714" start="709" end="723" title="Sand Pits Lake" label="Sand Pits Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141231" start="757" end="768" title="rock garden" label="rock garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q613449" start="805" end="832" title="National Capital Commission" label="National Capital Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q60974" start="1327" end="1339" title="Ottawa River" label="Ottawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354998" start="1481" end="1515" title="Sir George-Étienne Cartier Parkway" label="Sir George-Étienne Cartier Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="1547" end="1559" title="parking lots" label="parking lots"/>
<link wikidata="Q961082" start="1675" end="1681" title="gazebo" label="gazebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="1788" end="1799" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554592" start="1817" end="1823" title="Vanier (Ottawa)" label="Vanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627825" start="1953" end="1964" title="Picturesque" label="Picturesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243209" start="2375" end="2405" title="Heritage Conservation District" label="Heritage Conservation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094681" start="2831" end="2851" title="Ontario Heritage Act" label="Ontario Heritage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094681" start="3220" end="3240" title="Ontario Heritage Act" label="Ontario Heritage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354996" start="4555" end="4584" title="Rockcliffe Park Public School" label="Rockcliffe Park Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="4601" end="4615" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366995" start="4618" end="4632" title="Elmwood School (Ottawa)" label="Elmwood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227958" start="4637" end="4652" title="Ashbury College" label="Ashbury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q77115" start="4696" end="4710" title="Community centre" label="community hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="4711" end="4718" title="library" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901505" start="4853" end="4874" title="Ottawa Public Library" label="Ottawa Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630904" start="5135" end="5162" title="HMCS Rockcliffe" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Rockcliffe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499879" start="5598" end="5607" title="Stornoway (residence)" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015173" start="5660" end="5679" title="Official Opposition (Canada)" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="5843" end="5861" title="Canada 2021 Census" label="Canada 2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q194489" start="5990" end="5996" title="salary" label="salary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="6059" end="6065" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6368" end="6373" title="Reeve (Canada)" label="Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257175" start="6593" end="6607" title="Denis Coolican" label="Denis Coolican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6676" end="6690" title="Beryl Plumptre" label="Beryl Plumptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080984" start="6736" end="6765" title="List of Ottawa neighbourhoods" label="List of Ottawa neighbourhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151874" start="6768" end="6779" title="Rideau Hall" label="Rideau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912736" start="6782" end="6807" title="Ottawa/Rockcliffe Airport" label="Ottawa/Rockcliffe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000248" start="6810" end="6832" title="Rockcliffe Flying Club" label="Rockcliffe Flying Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="361982" wikidata="Q1950336" url="?curid=361982" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park">
<text>Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park is a national park located in the Canterbury Region in the central-west of the South Island of New Zealand. It was established in October 1953 and takes its name from the highest mountain in New Zealand, Aoraki / Mount Cook. The area of the park is , and it shares a border with Westland Tai Poutini National Park along the Main Divide of the Southern Alps. The national park consists of reserves that were established as early as 1885 to protect the area&#x27;s significant landscape and vegetation. Glaciers cover 40% of the park, including the county&#x27;s largest glacier, Haupapa / Tasman Glacier. In 1990, the park was included in the area designated as the Te Wāhipounamu World Heritage Site. The park is managed by the Department of Conservation (DOC) alongside Ngāi Tahu, the &quot;iwi&quot; who are in the region.

At the end of the most recent ice age approximately 13000 years ago, numerous glaciers in the park were tributaries of a much larger glacier covering all of Hooker Valley and Tasman Valley in hundreds of metres of ice. This glacier reached beyond the southern end of today&#x27;s Lake Pukaki, up to south of Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park. As it retreated, it filled the hollowed-out valleys, leaving behind the U-shaped valleys seen today in the national park. Early European surveyors and explorers ventured into the alpine region surrounding Aoraki / Mount Cook from the 1850s. Many of the geographical features in the national park were named by or after them. The Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act passed in October 1998 recognised the original names of some geographical features, establishing dual English / Māori names.

Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park is home to more than four hundred species of plants, including more than one hundred introduced species. There are about thirty-five species of birds in the park, most notably the rare black stilt and pīwauwau. The only road access into the park is via State Highway 80 which starts away near Twizel, the closest town, and leads directly to Mount Cook Village along the western shore of Lake Pukaki. Mount Cook Aerodrome is a small airfield located southeast of Mount Cook Village within the national park.

Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park is a popular tourist destination. There are numerous walking tracks, the most popular being the Hooker Valley Track, a relatively short track that takes around three hours to complete. The park is also popular with astrophotographers and star-gazers because of the low levels of light pollution. An area including Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park and the Mackenzie Basin was designated as the Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky Reserve in June 2012. The national park has been used as a filming location for numerous films.

==History==

=== Early Māori history ===
In Māori mythology, Aoraki was one of the sons of Raki the Sky Father. One version of the legend states that Aoraki came down from heaven in a canoe with three of his brothers, Rakiroa, Rakirua and Rārakiroa, to visit his father Raki&#x27;s new wife Papatūānuku, but the &quot;waka&quot; (canoe) overturned. The brothers climbed on to the overturned canoe, becoming the mountains Aoraki / Mount Cook, Rakiroa (Mount Dampier), Rakirua (Mount Teichelmann) and Rārakiroa (Mount Tasman). The &quot;waka&quot; itself became the Southern Alps (&quot;Kā Tiritiri o te Moana&quot;).

Although there is no evidence of permanent or temporary Māori settlement within the national park, some artefacts and evidence of burnt vegetation have been found in the nearby Mackenzie Basin. These may be related to nomadic parties who would spend months here hunting moa or fighting other parties. Māori would burn tōtara forests to assist them with their hunting of moa and gathering food, mostly weka, eels and kiore, before heading to the West Coast in search of &quot;pounamu&quot;.

In 1896, mountaineer Arthur Harper wrote that Māori had a deep-seated fear of the mountains and preferred to stay lower down in the valleys. However, Māori did have knowledge of the various features of high alpine areas, with special words for different types of ice and snow. Historian Johannes Carl Andersen believed it was possible that Māori had travelled over the Main Divide, which is at the northern boundary of Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park, to trade &quot;pounamu&quot;.

=== Later history ===

According to log entries made by explorer Abel Tasman, it is likely that he and his crew sighted the Southern Alps in December 1642 from the Tasman Sea near Barrytown. In 1770 Captain James Cook sailed along the West Coast of the South Island. He sighted and named the Southern Alps but probably did not sight Aoraki. Aoraki was given the name Mount Cook by Captain Stokes of the survey ship HMS &quot;Acheron&quot; in 1851, to honour James Cook&#x27;s circumnavigation of New Zealand. In 1998, the Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act officially recognised the original names of the geographical features of Ngāi Tahu&#x27;s &quot;takiwā&quot; (tribal area), establishing dual English and Māori names such as Kirikirikatata / Mount Cook Range and Haupapa / Tasman Glacier.

Europeans have had interest in the national park since the 1850s; public appreciation of the alpine regions surrounding Aoraki / Mount Cook grew with the maps and reports produced by early European surveyors and explorers. Julius von Haast explored the area at the head of Lakes Tekapo, Pukaki and Ōhau in 1862, collecting specimens, making maps and writing comprehensive reports on his observations, and, starting in 1867, surveyor Edward Sealy explored many glaciers. Many of the peaks, glaciers and other geographical features of the region were named by or for these early explorers, such as the Sealy Tarns track being named after Edward Sealy and the Mueller Glacier named after Ferdinand von Mueller.

Public appreciation of the mountains also grew as images of the area began to circulate. Artists painted pictures, and from 1867–1870 Sealy photographed the Mount Cook region. In 1873 the then Governor of New Zealand, Sir George Bowen, visited the Mount Cook region, thereby further raising the profile of the area. Parts of Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park were first set aside as a recreation reserve in 1885, and the national park was established in October 1953.

In 1990, the park (along with Westland Tai Poutini, Mount Aspiring and Fiordland National Parks) became part of the Te Wahipounamu World Heritage Site, the first place in New Zealand to attain World Heritage Status. Following the settlement between Ngāi Tahu and the Crown in October 1998, a number of South Island place names were amended by the Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998 to incorporate their Māori names. The name of the mountain village and national park were officially changed from Mount Cook to Aoraki / Mount Cook.

== Establishment as a national park ==
Efforts to protect the alpine environment began in the 19th century. A petition addressed to James Sutter, a member of Parliament, was circulated in November 1884, requesting that the Government protect the alpine region around Aoraki / Mount Cook. Petitioners were concerned that stock grazing and burn-offs were destroying the native bush and vegetation of the area. The petitioners suggested that Frank Huddleston, who had recently bought land at the base of the Mueller Glacier and was building the Hermitage, be appointed as a ranger to oversee the area.

In January 1885 the Hooker and Mueller Valleys were gazetted as the Hooker Glacier Recreation Reserve. In 1887 the Government permanently reserved an area of 97,800 acres of the Tasman Valley above the Mueller Valley confluence, which was known as the Tasman Recreation Reserve or Tasman Park. The Hooker Glacier reserve was expanded in 1890, becoming the 38,000-acre Aorangi Domain.

In 1953, Tasman Park and Aorangi Domain became the Mount Cook National Park. The park as established covered of the Southern Alps, including the Mueller, Hooker, and Tasman glaciers and the eastern slopes of Aoraki / Mount Cook and Mount Tasman. The park is managed by the Department Of Conservation and Ngāi Tahu, the iwi who hold &quot;mana whenua&quot; status of the land.

==Geography==

=== Topography ===
The park stretches for about along the southwest–northeast direction of the Southern Alps, covering on the south-eastern side of the main spine of the Alps. Of New Zealand&#x27;s 20 peaks over , all except Mount Aspiring / Tititea lie within the park. These include New Zealand&#x27;s highest mountain, Aoraki / Mount Cook, at . Other prominent peaks in or nearby the national park include Mount Tasman, Mount Hicks, Mount Sefton and Mount Elie de Beaumont.

=== Glaciers ===

At the end of the most recent ice age around 13,000 years ago, numerous glaciers were tributaries of a much larger glacier covering all of Hooker Tasman Valleys in hundreds of metres of ice. This glacier was about long and reached beyond the southern end of today&#x27;s Lake Pukaki, up to south of Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park. As the glacier retreated, it filled the hollowed-out valleys with rocks and gravel, leaving behind the flat-bottomed U-shaped valleys seen today. Moraines left behind by the glacier&#x27;s retreat can be seen in the valleys.

Glaciers cover 40% of the park area, notably the Tasman Glacier in the Tasman Valley east of Aoraki / Mount Cook which is the largest glacier in New Zealand. A majority of glaciers in New Zealand lie within Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park, such as the Tasman Glacier, Hooker Glacier, Murchison Glacier and Mueller Glacier, while further north in the park lie the Godley Glacier, Classen Glacier, Grey Glacier and Maud Glacier. All of these glaciers terminate at proglacial lakes formed in recent decades due to a sustained period of shrinking. Tasman Lake and Hooker Lake are easily accessible via walking tracks and are the only two of these lakes that have official names. Tasman Lake is the largest of the proglacial lakes. Taking a boat tour among the icebergs on the Tasman Lake is a popular tourist activity.

===Climate===

Temperatures in Mount Cook Village range between extremes of to , and typically fall just over for every of additional altitude.

Rainfall is similarly variable, with the driest months receiving around precipitation, but recorded maxima are in one day and in a single month. Snow falls on about 21 days per year.

During the coldest months of the year, Mueller Glacier Lake, Hooker Lake, and Tasman Lake usually freeze over, at least partially. The weather conditions in the park, in particular at higher altitudes, can be unpredictable and change rapidly.

==Geology==
The Southern Alps lie along a geological plate boundary, with the Pacific Plate to the southeast pushing westward and colliding with the northward-moving Indo-Australian Plate to the northwest. Aoraki / Mount Cook lies in the centre of the Alpine Fault, a long active fault formed by the plate boundary, which has ruptured four times in the last 900 years. Over the last 45 million years, the collision of the two tectonic plates has pushed up a 25 km thickness of rocks on the Pacific Plate to form the Southern Alps. Extreme temperatures and high precipitation work to shatter surface rock, leading to erosion down the steep slopes. In December 1991, an avalanche of 10 million cubic metres of snow and rock caused 10 metres to be lost off the top of Aoraki / Mount Cook. Two decades of erosion of the ice cap exposed after this collapse reduced the height by another 30 m to 3,724 m, as revealed by GPS data from a University of Otago climbing expedition in November 2013.

There are two main rock types in the Southern Alps: sedimentary sandstones and metamorphic schists. The sandstones are greywacke and argillite, mostly to the east of the Main Divide, whereas the schists are mostly to the west of the Main Divide. Rock along the Alpine Fault has been warped and folded into complex layers with much shearing and fracturing. Very few fossils have been found in the rocks of the national park. Parts of the Malte Brun range can be dated to the Permian Period by fossils found there in red argillite.

==Ecology==
===Flora===

More than 400 species of plants are found in Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park, including more than 100 introduced plant species such as the colourful Russell lupin, wild cherry, snowberries, and wilding pines. Most parts of the national park are either at higher altitude or in the proglacial valleys such as the Hooker Valley and Tasman Valley, where the soil of the valley floors and moraine walls do not support forest growth. As a result, the only pockets of forest and native bush, such as silver beech and tōtara trees, can be found in the park are along the southern edge of the Hooker Valley and the lower slopes of Sealy Range.

The plant life in the majority of the park consists mostly of alpine plants. Between and in the valleys, the vegetation is predominantly snow tussock grassland, as well as golden speargrass, large mountain daisies (&quot;tikumu&quot;) (&quot;Celmisia semicordata&quot;, &quot;Celmisia coriacea&quot;), and Mount Cook lily, (&quot;Ranunculus lyallii&quot;), the largest buttercup in the world. All of these plants flower in the warmer months from November to February – early in the season in the valley floors, and later at higher altitudes. At the highest rocks of Aoraki / Mount Cook, around 14 species of lichen have been found.

The native vegetation continues to be under threat by introduced plant species ranging from non-native trees through to lupins, broom and non-native grasses. These are mostly contained in the valley floors of the Tasman and Hooker Valley, since they are the most accessible parts of the park.

Tutu, a poisonous plant, flourishes throughout the Hooker Valley during summer. Tutu is considered &quot;taonga&quot; by Ngāi Tahu.

===Fauna===

There are about 35 species of birds in the park including the kea, the only alpine parrot, Australasian Harrier (&quot;kāhu&quot;), silvereye (&quot;tauhou&quot;), a small omnivorous passerine bird, New Zealand falcon (&quot;kārearea&quot;), and the pipit (&quot;pīhoihoi&quot;). The tiny New Zealand rock wren (&quot;pīwauwau&quot;), a threatened species, is the only permanent alpine bird in New Zealand.

Small insectivores such as the rifleman (&quot;tītipounamu&quot;) and the fantail (&quot;pīwakawaka&quot;) live in the low forest and scrub, along with small numbers of two larger birds, the kererū and morepork (&quot;ruru&quot;). Introduced species such as finches and sparrows live throughout the bush near Mount Cook Village. The black stilt (&quot;kakī&quot;), the rarest wading bird in the world, primarily lives in the braided riverbed of the Tasman Valley. In 2019, young black stilts raised in a hatchery were released near the Cass River and Godley River. European explorer Julius von Haast reported seeing kākā and piopio in the national park in 1862, however the piopio later became extinct.

The park is home to many invertebrates, including large dragonflies, crickets, grasshoppers, 223 recorded moth species and 7 native butterflies. The black alpine wētā, also known as the Mount Cook flea, is found above the snowline. The jewelled gecko lives in the park but is rarely seen.

==Human interaction==

=== Access ===

==== By land ====

Access to the national park began as a rough track from Twizel along the western shore of Lake Pukaki to the Hermitage. The road, now known as State Highway 80, was improved over time. In the 1960s a major hydroelectric scheme was underway in the Mackenzie Basin. This required Lake Pukaki to be raised by , which would submerge parts of the gravel road to the Hermitage, so a new sealed road was built and completed in 1975. The highway ends at Mount Cook Village, with a connecting road leading to the White Horse Hill camping ground. Another small road leads to a car park near Tasman Lake, the start of a short walking track and the Ball Hut Route. A pedestrian swing bridge was built over the Hooker River in the Hooker Valley in 1911, providing easier access to climbing routes.

Rodolph Wigley&#x27;s Mount Cook Motor Co was formed in 1906 to provide passenger and mail services to the Hermitage from the railhead at Fairlie. The first coaches held between five and nine passengers and the journey from Fairlie to the Hermitage took around seven hours, not including a meal break. The service evolved into Mount Cook Landlines, which transported visitors to Mount Cook Village from Queenstown and Christchurch until 1989. In 1989, the new owner of Mount Cook Landlines, Tourism Holdings Limited, scrapped the coach services and the &quot;Mount Cook&quot; brand. In recent years, coach services to Mount Cook Village are run by InterCity and other smaller operators.

==== By air ====

In 1920, following his success running a bus service to Mount Cook Village, Rodolph Wigley raised the idea of providing flights from Timaru and Queenstown to Mount Cook. A test flight took place in May 1920, with a plane circling Aoraki / Mount Cook but not landing, but nothing came of the idea. The first landing in the Mount Cook area took place on 4 December 1934. Squadron-Leader T. W. White and a passenger flew a Spartan from Timaru, landing at Birch Hill Flat, southeast of Mount Cook Village. Wigley&#x27;s Mount Cook Tourist Company then built a small airfield, Mount Cook Aerodrome, at Birch Hill Flat. The aerodrome opened on 3 May 1936. There is also another airfield, Glentanner Aerodrome, which is from Mount Cook Village. Mount Cook Airline began scheduled passenger flights to the area in 1961. In December 2019, Mount Cook Airline was merged into Air New Zealand and ceased operations.

The Mount Cook company developed retractable skis for small aircraft, providing direct access to snowfields for skiers and sightseers. The first ski plane flight using retractable skis took place in 1955. Mount Cook Ski-Planes and Helicopters is now an independently operated company, offering landings on the Tasman Glacier. Helicopters also provide access to the mountains for hunters and climbers. Ski touring is also possible on the Tasman Glacier, the descent from the top to the bottom is about .

=== Settlement within the park ===

==== Mount Cook Village ====

The village contains a small visitor centre, housing and amenities for the staff of the hotel and motels and other support personnel. The village has a small public primary school, opened in 1960, which is the only school in New Zealand situated inside a national park.

In 1884, Frank Huddleston opened accommodation he called &#x27;The Hermitage&#x27; at a site near the Mueller Glacier, to cater for climbing parties visiting the area. The hotel was later expanded, but was severely damaged by two floods in 1913.

The Hermitage was rebuilt on a more elevated site, opening in 1914, but that building was destroyed by fire in 1957. It was rebuilt quickly, opening in 1958, and since then has been altered and expanded several times as tourism increased.

=== Tourism ===

A visitor centre in the village features interpretation exhibits about the area&#x27;s natural environment and history as well as an artwork collection. Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park attracted over one million tourists in 2019, a significant increase compared to the three hundred ninety-eight thousand people visited that visited in the 2016/2017 season. Tourism significantly decreased after the COVID-19 pandemic.

The park is a popular location for day hikes, sightseeing flights, heliskiing, hunting, kayaking, mountaineering, ski touring and tramping. The Department of Conservation, alongside Ngāi Tahu, administers all activities in the park, including the White Horse Hill camping ground. Recreational helicopter flights and sightseeing planes operate in the national park. Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park also attracts astrophotographers and stargazers due to low light pollution in the park.

Mount Cook Village is the start of several walking tracks, such as the popular Hooker Valley track which is long (return) and typically takes three hours to complete. About 1800–2000 people a day walk the Hooker Valley track in the peak season. Sealy Tarns is another popular track in the park. It is more challenging than the Hooker Valley track, and is nicknamed &quot;The Stairway to Heaven&quot; due to its steepness. Guided walking tours are offered on some other tracks, and boat trips and kayaking tours for tourists take place on the Tasman Lake at the end of the glacier. The park contains 15 huts, mostly in alpine terrain. The huts range from basic shelters to serviced huts, with the most accessible being Mueller Hut, which can be reached from Mount Cook Village within four hours. In February 2024, the Department of Conservation reported that 250 people per day were using the track to Mueller Hut, mostly as day-walkers. The large number of visitors led to the toilets at the hut nearing maximum capacity. The track was temporarily closed to day-walkers so that those with a hut booking could still access and use the hut.

Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park is the starting point of the Alps to Ocean Cycle Trail to Oamaru. The cycle trail was constructed from 2010 onwards by the New Zealand Cycle Trail project. the cycle trail still includes along public roads.

=== Mountaineering ===

The peaks of the Aoraki / Mount Cook region have long attracted mountaineers. In 1882 Rev. William Spotswood Green made the first notable attempt to climb Aoraki / Mount Cook. Green travelled to New Zealand with two Swiss guides to make the climb, after seeing Sealy&#x27;s photographs of the mountain at an exhibition in London. The three men got very close to the summit before being forced to turn back. At a dinner in his honour after the climb, Green noted that climbing would be easier if huts were built in the mountains, as the huts would provide shelter and a place to store provisions, lightening the load of climbers. He also suggested that New Zealand set up an Alpine Club, leading to establishment of the New Zealand Alpine Club in 1891.

After several attempts, the first successful ascent of Aoraki / Mount Cook was made on Christmas Day 1894, by Tom Fyfe, Jack Clarke, and George Graham.

In December 1910, Freda Du Faur became the first woman to climb Aoraki / Mount Cook, and in 1913 her climbing party made the first ascents of the Footstool and Mount Sefton. Mountaineering on the Aoraki / Mount Cook massif is a hazardous activity. In 1982, Mark Inglis and his climbing partner were trapped in a snow cave for two weeks.

Other mountaineering routes include crossing the Aroarokaehe Range via the Copland Pass, and the Mount Cook Range via the Ball Pass.

The area was the training ground for Sir Edmund Hillary. On the opposite side of the Hooker Valley, Mount Ollivier was Sir Edmund Hillary&#x27;s first major climb in 1939. Since the establishment of a tramping track to Mueller Hut, not far below the summit, Ollivier is now one of the most accessible mountains in the park.
Another mountain popular for mountaineers of intermediate skills is Sebastopol, the closest mountain to Mount Cook Village. At in height, it is only above Mount Cook Village, with the lower half of the ascent following the Red Tarns tramping track. Sebastopol offers one of a few view points taking in both the Hooker Valley and the Tasman Valley.

There are 15 mountain huts in Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park for the use of climbers and hunters. Twelve of these are managed by the Department of Conservation, two belong to the New Zealand Deerstalkers Association and one, Caroline Hut, is privately owned by an alpine guiding company. Another hut—Red Stag Hut—sits just outside the national park in the adjoining Te Kahui Kaupeka Conservation Park. Hooker Hut, built in 1910, is the oldest surviving hut in the national park. It has been moved three times as the Hooker Glacier receded, then was removed and restored before being reassembled in a new location in 2021. The oldest hut still in its original location is Sefton Bivouac, built in 1917.

=== International Dark Sky Reserve ===

In June 2012, an area of including Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park and the Mackenzie Basin was designated as the Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky Reserve by the DarkSky International. At the time of the designation in 2012, the reserve was the largest in the world, and the only reserve of its type in the Southern Hemisphere. The night sky brightness in the reserve ranks at a level 2 on the nine-level Bortle scale.

== Management and conservation ==

=== Management plan ===
In 2018 the Department of Conservation drafted a management plan for the park to consider how land, water, flora and fauna, aircraft and visitors to Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park could be managed over the following 10 years. However, review of the plan stopped in February 2019 to consider the ramifications of a Supreme Court decision involving Ngāi Tai, an Auckland iwi, who argued that DOC should consider the Treaty of Waitangi when granting concessions for commercial activities on conservation land. The Supreme Court found that &quot;decisions to grant concessions to third parties would need to include asking whether the concession opportunities should be preserved for the economic benefit of Ngāi Tai and whether there was any basis for the preferential grant of concessions to Ngāi Tai&quot;. DOC paused work on the management plan for Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park while it held discussions with Ngāi Tahu.

The formation of the draft management plan occurred at the same time as the number of visitors to Aoraki / Mount Cook Park was increasing dramatically. Visitor numbers doubled between 2016 and 2019, reaching more than one million visits to Mount Cook Village, the gateway to the park. Proposals to manage the huge number of tourists included a booking system, a park entrance fee, and a &#x27;park and ride&#x27; system to limit traffic in the village. A local Ngāi Tahu leader noted that Tourism New Zealand has been encouraging lots of people to come to the country without necessarily having the infrastructure in place&quot;. The Department of Conservation had concerns about management of increasing quantities of human waste and litter in the village and in alpine huts, suggesting that visitors might be encouraged to take their litter away when they leave the park.

=== Threats from introduced animals ===
A wide range of introduced animals are present in the park or in surrounding regions. These include stoats, red deer, possums, tahr and chamois. Many of these animals pose significant threats to the flora and fauna of the park.

==== Tahr ====
In 1904 the Duke of Bedford gave five Himalayan tahr to the New Zealand Tourist Department. The South Canterbury Acclimatisation Society released the animals at Governor&#x27;s Bush in Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park in December 1904. In 1909 another eight tahr were released in the same area, and the population increased. Tahr cause damage to alpine plants, leading to soil erosion, and from 1937 the government has attempted to control the spread and numbers of tahr. The Department of Conservation encourages hunting of tahr in Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park.

==== Chamois ====
In 1907, the Emperor of Austria presented the New Zealand government with a herd of eight chamois. The animals were released in the Hooker valley near the Hermitage Hotel as protected game animals, and within a few years they had begun breeding and spreading along the length of the Southern Alps. By the 1930s chamois were acknowledged to be causing damage to the alpine environment, by eating native plants and by trampling vegetation and compacting the soil. Protection was removed and control measures were created. Today chamois can be hunted year-round in Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park.

=== Lead toxicity to kea ===
Research on lead toxicity in kea living at Aoraki / Mount Cook in the 1990s found that of 38 live kea tested, all were found to have detectable blood lead levels, 26 considered dangerously high. Additional analysis of 15 dead kea sent to Massey University for diagnostic pathology between 1991 and 1997 found nine bodies to have lead blood levels consistent with causing death. After further testing in the 2000s found lead in kea, the Department of Conservation attempted to remove all sources of lead such as flashings and nail heads from buildings in Mount Cook Village. The Kea Conservation Trust has continued this work with funding from DOC.

=== Other threats ===
After extensive filming took place in national parks including Aoraki / Mount Cook for the &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; trilogy, concerns about the possible effects of such activities on the environment were raised at a workshop in 2002.

== In popular culture ==
Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park has been used as a filming location for numerous films, including &quot;Mulan&quot; (2020), &quot;Vertical Limit&quot; (2000), &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; film series (2001–2003), &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; film series (2005–2010), and &quot;A Wrinkle in Time&quot; (2018). Minas Tirith, the capital of Gondor in the fantasy adventure film series &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, was filmed approximately away from Mount Cook Village.

&quot;First Crossings&quot;, a reality show retracing early exploration in New Zealand, had two episodes relating to Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park: &#x27;Fyfe and Graham&#x27;, about the first ascent of Mount de la Beche in 1894, and &#x27;Miracle in the Southern Alps&#x27;, about a 1948 rescue on La Perouse.

==See also==
*Forest parks of New Zealand
*List of mountains of New Zealand by height
*National parks of New Zealand
*Protected areas of New Zealand
==References==
==External links==
*Aoraki/Mount Cook National Park
*Aoraki/Mount Cook National Park Education Resource 2010 (archived)
*Mt Cook: Does reaching summit outweigh risks?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1950336" start="0" end="33" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="39" end="52" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="68" end="85" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="113" end="125" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059" start="238" end="257" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053661" start="313" end="347" title="Westland Tai Poutini National Park" label="Westland Tai Poutini National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="377" end="390" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="523" end="533" title="#Fauna" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="535" end="542" title="Glacier" label="Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140440" start="612" end="636" title="Haupapa / Tasman Glacier" label="Haupapa / Tasman Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q575398" start="699" end="713" title="Te Wāhipounamu" label="Te Wāhipounamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="762" end="788" title="Department of Conservation (New Zealand)" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="805" end="814" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="826" end="829" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="890" end="897" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347588" start="1140" end="1151" title="Lake Pukaki" label="Lake Pukaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="1275" end="1290" title="U-shaped valley" label="U-shaped valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021862" start="1532" end="1563" title="Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998" label="Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="1676" end="1681" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="1809" end="1827" title="introduced species" label="introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q686269" start="1909" end="1920" title="black stilt" label="black stilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q135589" start="1925" end="1933" title="New Zealand rock wren" label="pīwauwau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926698" start="1977" end="1993" title="State Highway 80 (New Zealand)" label="State Highway 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q837901" start="2017" end="2023" title="Twizel" label="Twizel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950416" start="2065" end="2083" title="Mount Cook Village" label="Mount Cook Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885374" start="2124" end="2144" title="Mount Cook Aerodrome" label="Mount Cook Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="2481" end="2499" title="astrophotography" label="astrophotographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="2504" end="2514" title="star gazing" label="star-gazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474953" start="2660" end="2707" title="Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky Reserve" label="Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q546879" start="2841" end="2856" title="Māori mythology" label="Māori mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130974" start="3088" end="3099" title="Rangi and Papa" label="Papatūānuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710791" start="3115" end="3119" title="Waka (canoe)" label="waka"/>
<link wikidata="Q476966" start="3248" end="3261" title="Mount Dampier" label="Mount Dampier"/>
<link wikidata="Q31663112" start="3273" end="3290" title="Mount Teichelmann" label="Mount Teichelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551962" start="3307" end="3319" title="Mount Tasman" label="Mount Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="3361" end="3374" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q495609" start="3591" end="3606" title="Mackenzie Basin" label="Mackenzie Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="3684" end="3687" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q756714" start="3815" end="3819" title="weka" label="weka"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="3821" end="3824" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q339418" start="3830" end="3835" title="Polynesian rat" label="kiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="3859" end="3869" title="West Coast Region" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279509" start="3889" end="3896" title="pounamu" label="pounamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799928" start="3926" end="3939" title="Arthur Paul Harper" label="Arthur Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216590" start="4192" end="4214" title="Johannes Carl Andersen" label="Johannes Carl Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="4455" end="4466" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="4554" end="4564" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864953" start="4570" end="4579" title="Barrytown" label="Barrytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="4597" end="4607" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700884" start="4779" end="4785" title="John Lort Stokes" label="Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631191" start="4805" end="4828" title="HMS Acheron (1838)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Acheron&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021862" start="4912" end="4943" title="Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998" label="Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359728" start="5040" end="5046" title="Rohe" label="takiwā"/>
<link wikidata="Q31682334" start="5118" end="5151" title="Kirikirikatata / Mount Cook Range" label="Kirikirikatata / Mount Cook Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194022" start="5462" end="5468" title="Lake Tekapo" label="Tekapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349516" start="5481" end="5485" title="Lake Ōhau" label="Ōhau"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899241" start="5616" end="5628" title="Edward Sealy" label="Edward Sealy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440673" start="5783" end="5794" title="Sealy Tarns" label="Sealy Tarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866899" start="5840" end="5855" title="Mueller Glacier" label="Mueller Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q708002" start="5868" end="5889" title="Ferdinand von Mueller" label="Ferdinand von Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392013" start="6110" end="6126" title="George Bowen" label="Sir George Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053661" start="6391" end="6411" title="Westland Tai Poutini National Park" label="Westland Tai Poutini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="6413" end="6427" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q877719" start="6432" end="6455" title="Fiordland National Park" label="Fiordland National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q575398" start="6477" end="6491" title="Te Wahipounamu" label="Te Wahipounamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="6492" end="6511" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837289" start="6591" end="6601" title="Treaty of Waitangi claims and settlements" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143861" start="7027" end="7039" title="James Sutter" label="James Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186812" start="7547" end="7554" title="gazette" label="gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682824" start="8218" end="8229" title="mana whenua" label="mana whenua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210275" start="8497" end="8521" title="Mount Aspiring / Tititea" label="Mount Aspiring / Tititea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059" start="8594" end="8613" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551962" start="8681" end="8693" title="Mount Tasman" label="Mount Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950509" start="8695" end="8706" title="Mount Hicks (New Zealand)" label="Mount Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950712" start="8708" end="8720" title="Mount Sefton" label="Mount Sefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950452" start="8725" end="8747" title="Mount Elie de Beaumont" label="Mount Elie de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="8798" end="8805" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="9219" end="9234" title="U-shaped valley" label="U-shaped valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="9248" end="9255" title="Moraine" label="Moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140440" start="9377" end="9391" title="Tasman Glacier" label="Tasman Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q736870" start="9598" end="9612" title="Hooker Glacier (New Zealand)" label="Hooker Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937549" start="9614" end="9631" title="Murchison Glacier" label="Murchison Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866899" start="9636" end="9651" title="Mueller Glacier" label="Mueller Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q556920" start="9779" end="9788" title="glacier terminus" label="terminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320719" start="9792" end="9807" title="proglacial lake" label="proglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085236" start="9874" end="9885" title="Tasman Lake" label="Tasman Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26706870" start="9890" end="9901" title="Hooker Lake" label="Hooker Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="10772" end="10786" title="plate boundary" label="plate boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="10797" end="10810" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="10885" end="10906" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850372" start="10971" end="10983" title="Alpine Fault" label="Alpine Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089248" start="10992" end="11004" title="active fault" label="active fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201513" start="11649" end="11668" title="University of Otago" label="University of Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="11799" end="11805" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q917545" start="11827" end="11836" title="greywacke" label="greywacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q836062" start="11841" end="11850" title="argillite" label="argillite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408316" start="12145" end="12155" title="Malte Brun (mountain)" label="Malte Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="12182" end="12196" title="Permian" label="Permian Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q836062" start="12227" end="12236" title="argillite" label="argillite"/>
<link wikidata="Q159737" start="12415" end="12428" title="Lupinus polyphyllus" label="Russell lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131517" start="12430" end="12441" title="Prunus cerasus" label="wild cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157972" start="12443" end="12454" title="snowberries" label="snowberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001272" start="12460" end="12473" title="Wilding conifer" label="wilding pines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12746" end="12750" title="The bush#New Zealand" label="bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434315" start="12760" end="12772" title="silver beech" label="silver beech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12889" end="12900" title="Sealy Range" label="Sealy Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856836" start="13040" end="13052" title="Tussock grasslands of New Zealand" label="snow tussock"/>
<link wikidata="Q14858818" start="13075" end="13092" title="Aciphylla aurea" label="golden speargrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708310" start="13100" end="13116" title="Celmisia" label="mountain daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15562375" start="13145" end="13165" title="Celmisia semicordata" label="Celmisia semicordata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13179" end="13196" title="Celmisia coriacea" label="Celmisia coriacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409878" start="13209" end="13224" title="Ranunculus lyallii" label="Mount Cook lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="13511" end="13517" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q263414" start="13830" end="13834" title="tutu (plant)" label="Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q974993" start="13935" end="13941" title="taonga" label="taonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q193337" start="14038" end="14041" title="kea" label="kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q605827" start="14067" end="14087" title="Australasian Harrier" label="Australasian Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q313394" start="14108" end="14117" title="silvereye" label="silvereye"/>
<link wikidata="Q756643" start="14175" end="14193" title="New Zealand falcon" label="New Zealand falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193807" start="14226" end="14231" title="pipit" label="pipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q135589" start="14265" end="14286" title="New Zealand rock wren" label="New Zealand rock wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q646366" start="14415" end="14423" title="Rifleman (bird)" label="rifleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q913047" start="14458" end="14465" title="New Zealand fantail" label="fantail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145127" start="14575" end="14581" title="kererū" label="kererū"/>
<link wikidata="Q908909" start="14586" end="14594" title="morepork" label="morepork"/>
<link wikidata="Q160835" start="14642" end="14649" title="finches" label="finches"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922" start="14654" end="14662" title="Old World sparrow" label="sparrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q686269" start="14717" end="14728" title="black stilt" label="black stilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049176" start="14920" end="14930" title="Cass River (Mackenzie District)" label="Cass River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576724" start="14935" end="14947" title="Godley River" label="Godley River"/>
<link wikidata="Q626289" start="15000" end="15004" title="kākā" label="kākā"/>
<link wikidata="Q135467" start="15009" end="15015" title="Piopio (bird)" label="piopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065917" start="15250" end="15254" title="wētā" label="wētā"/>
<link wikidata="Q10626657" start="15274" end="15289" title="Pharmacus montanus" label="Mount Cook flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017976" start="15324" end="15338" title="jewelled gecko" label="jewelled gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997444" start="16222" end="16236" title="Rodolph Wigley" label="Rodolph Wigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920234" start="16244" end="16263" title="Mount Cook Group" label="Mount Cook Motor Co"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16348" end="16356" title="railhead" label="railhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q839581" start="16360" end="16367" title="Fairlie, New Zealand" label="Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829092" start="16713" end="16737" title="Tourism Holdings Limited" label="Tourism Holdings Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045736" start="16870" end="16879" title="InterCity (New Zealand)" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573886" start="17348" end="17355" title="Spartan Aircraft" label="Spartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016574" start="17361" end="17367" title="Timaru" label="Timaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885374" start="17500" end="17520" title="Mount Cook Aerodrome" label="Mount Cook Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274983" start="17610" end="17630" title="Glentanner Aerodrome" label="Glentanner Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138889" start="17666" end="17684" title="Mount Cook Airline" label="Mount Cook Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q204296" start="17793" end="17808" title="Air New Zealand" label="Air New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446589" start="18234" end="18245" title="Ski touring" label="Ski touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411786" start="18432" end="18446" title="visitor centre" label="visitor centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="19580" end="19588" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640771" start="19667" end="19677" title="heliskiing" label="heliskiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="19679" end="19686" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094083" start="19688" end="19696" title="kayaking" label="kayaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="19698" end="19712" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548073" start="19730" end="19738" title="Hiking in New Zealand" label="tramping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="19744" end="19770" title="New Zealand Department of Conservation" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="20013" end="20031" title="astrophotography" label="astrophotographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="20036" end="20046" title="Stargazing" label="stargazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="20058" end="20073" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440673" start="20333" end="20344" title="Sealy Tarns" label="Sealy Tarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735652" start="21291" end="21316" title="Alps to Ocean Cycle Trail" label="Alps to Ocean Cycle Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782" start="21320" end="21326" title="Oamaru" label="Oamaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983237" start="21385" end="21408" title="New Zealand Cycle Trail" label="New Zealand Cycle Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568963" start="21585" end="21608" title="William Spotswood Green" label="William Spotswood Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015201" start="22213" end="22236" title="New Zealand Alpine Club" label="New Zealand Alpine Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815882" start="22357" end="22365" title="Tom Fyfe" label="Tom Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22367" end="22378" title="Jack Clarke (mountaineer)" label="Jack Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22384" end="22398" title="George Graham (mountaineer)" label="George Graham."/>
<link wikidata="Q5496666" start="22418" end="22431" title="Freda Du Faur" label="Freda Du Faur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900166" start="22657" end="22668" title="Mark Inglis" label="Mark Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548379" start="22712" end="22721" title="snow cave" label="snow cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180490" start="22813" end="22825" title="Copland Pass" label="Copland Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q33817" start="22913" end="22927" title="Edmund Hillary" label="Edmund Hillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922579" start="22972" end="22986" title="Mount Ollivier" label="Mount Ollivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q84349023" start="23914" end="23948" title="Te Kahui Kaupeka Conservation Park" label="Te Kahui Kaupeka Conservation Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q124474953" start="24406" end="24453" title="Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky Reserve" label="Aoraki Mackenzie International Dark Sky Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q826992" start="24461" end="24482" title="DarkSky International" label="DarkSky International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="24631" end="24640" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537571" start="24641" end="24651" title="Sky brightness" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722595" start="24704" end="24716" title="Bortle scale" label="Bortle scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023205" start="25128" end="25136" title="Ngāi Tai ki Tāmaki" label="Ngāi Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829095" start="26196" end="26215" title="Tourism New Zealand" label="Tourism New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617756" start="26722" end="26728" title="Stoat in New Zealand" label="stoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="26730" end="26738" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153515" start="26740" end="26746" title="common brushtail possum in New Zealand" label="possum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130200" start="26749" end="26753" title="tahr" label="tahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q131340" start="26758" end="26765" title="chamois" label="chamois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264488" start="26878" end="26893" title="Duke of Bedford" label="Duke of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="27467" end="27485" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474070" start="28093" end="28106" title="Animal lead poisoning" label="lead toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134606" start="28319" end="28336" title="Massey University" label="Massey University"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854443" start="28659" end="28681" title="Kea Conservation Trust" label="Kea Conservation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="28849" end="28866" title="Lord of the Rings" label="Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284283" start="29123" end="29128" title="Mulan (2020 film)" label="Mulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356402" start="29149" end="29163" title="Vertical Limit" label="Vertical Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="29184" end="29205" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211909" start="29243" end="29267" title="The Chronicles of Narnia (film series)" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24301388" start="29309" end="29326" title="A Wrinkle in Time (2018 film)" label="A Wrinkle in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q308657" start="29341" end="29353" title="Minas Tirith" label="Minas Tirith"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="29370" end="29376" title="Gondor" label="Gondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162994" start="29835" end="29862" title="Forest parks of New Zealand" label="Forest parks of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052801" start="29864" end="29906" title="List of mountains of New Zealand by height" label="List of mountains of New Zealand by height"/>
<link wikidata="Q62301" start="29908" end="29937" title="National parks of New Zealand" label="National parks of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498169" start="29939" end="29969" title="Protected areas of New Zealand" label="Protected areas of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="361993" wikidata="Q2121926" url="?curid=361993" title="Ripening">
<text>Ripening is a process in fruits that causes them to become more palatable. In general, fruit becomes sweeter, less green, and softer as it ripens. Even though the acidity of fruit increases as it ripens, the higher acidity level does not make the fruit seem tarter. This effect is attributed to the Brix-Acid Ratio. Climacteric fruits ripen after harvesting and so some fruits for market are picked green (e.g. bananas and tomatoes).

Underripe fruits are also fibrous, not as juicy, and have tougher outer flesh than ripe fruits (see Mouth feel). Eating unripe fruit can lead to stomachache or stomach cramps, and ripeness affects the palatability of fruit.

== Science ==
Developing fruits produce compounds like alkaloids and tannins. These compounds are antifeedants, meaning that they discourage animals who would eat them while they are still ripening. This mechanism is used to make sure that fruit is not eaten before the seeds are fully developed.

At the molecular level, a variety of different plant hormones and proteins are used to create a negative feedback cycle which keeps the production of ethylene in balance as the fruit develops.

==Agents==

Ripening agents accelerate ripening. An important ripening agent is ethylene, a gaseous hormone produced by many plants. Many synthetic analogues of ethylene are available. They allow many fruits to be picked prior to full ripening, which is useful since ripened fruits do not ship well. For example, bananas are picked when green and artificially ripened after shipment by being exposed to ethylene.

Calcium carbide is also used in some countries for artificially ripening fruit. When calcium carbide comes in contact with moisture, it produces acetylene gas, which is similar in its effects to the natural ripening agent, ethylene. Acetylene accelerates the ripening process. Catalytic generators are used to produce ethylene gas simply and safely. Ethylene sensors can be used to precisely control the amount of gas. Covered fruit ripening bowls or bags are commercially available. These containers increase the amount of ethylene and carbon dioxide gases around the fruit, which promotes ripening.

Climacteric fruits continue ripening after being picked, a process accelerated by ethylene gas. Non-climacteric fruits can ripen only on the plant and thus have a short shelf life if harvested when they are ripe.

==Indicators==
Iodine (I) can be used to determine whether fruits are ripening or rotting by showing whether the starch in the fruit has turned into sugar. For example, a drop of iodine on a slightly rotten part (not the skin) of an apple will stay yellow or orange, since starch is no longer present. If the iodine is applied and takes 2–3 seconds to turn dark blue or black, then the process of ripening has begun but is not yet complete. If the iodine becomes black immediately, then most of the starch is still present at high concentrations in the sample, and hence the fruit has not fully started to ripen.

==Stages==
Climacteric fruits undergo a number of changes during fruit ripening. The major changes include fruit softening, sweetening, decreased bitterness, and colour change. These changes begin in an inner part of the fruit, the locule, which is the gel-like tissue surrounding the seeds. Ripening-related changes initiate in this region once seeds are viable enough for the process to continue, at which point ripening-related changes occur in the next successive tissue of the fruit called the pericarp. As this ripening process occurs, working its way from the inside towards outer most tissue of the fruit, the observable changes of softening tissue, and changes in color and carotenoid content occur. Specifically, this process activates ethylene production and the expression of ethylene-response genes affiliated with the phenotypic changes seen during ripening. 
Colour change is the result of pigments, which were always present in the fruit, becoming visible when chlorophyll is degraded. However, additional pigments are also produced by the fruit as it ripens.

In fruit, the cell walls are mainly composed of polysaccharides including pectin. During ripening, a lot of the pectin is converted from a water-insoluble form to a soluble one by certain degrading enzymes. These enzymes include polygalacturonase. This means that the fruit will become less firm as the structure of the fruit is degraded.Enzymatic breakdown and hydrolysis of storage polysaccharides occurs during ripening. The main storage polysaccharides include starch. These are broken down into shorter, water-soluble molecules such as fructose, glucose and sucrose. During fruit ripening, gluconeogenesis also increases.

Acids are broken down in ripening fruits and this contributes to the sweeter rather than sharp tastes associated with unripe fruits. In some fruits such as guava, there is a steady decrease in vitamin C as the fruit ripens. This is mainly as a result of the general decrease in acid content that occurs when a fruit ripens.

=== Tomatoes ===
Different fruits have different ripening stages. In tomatoes the ripening stages are:
* Green: When the surface of the tomato is completely green
* Breaker: When less than 11% of the surface is red
* Turning: When less than 31% of the surface is red (but not less than 11%)
* Pink: When less than 61% of the surface is red (but not less than 31%)
* Light Red: When less than 91% of the surface is red (but not less than 61%)
* Red: When the surface is nearly completely red.

==Lists of climacteric and non-climacteric fruits==
This is an incomplete list of fruits that ripen after picking (&quot;climacteric&quot;) and those that do not (&quot;non-climacteric&quot;).
===Climacteric===

===Non-climacteric===
==Regulation==
There are two patterns of fruit ripening: climacteric that is induced by ethylene and non-climacteric that occurs independently of ethylene. This distinction can be useful in determining the ripening processes of various fruits, since climacteric fruits continue ripening after they are removed due to the presence of ethylene, while nonclimacteric fruits only ripen while still attached to the plant. In non-climacteric fruits, auxins act to inhibit ripening. They do this by repressing genes involved in cell modification and anthocyanin synthesis. Ripening can be induced by abscisic acid, specifically the process of sucrose accumulation as well as color acquisition and firmness. While ethylene plays a major role in the ripening of climacteric plants, it still has effects in non-climacteric species as well. In strawberries, it was shown to stimulate color and softening processes. Studies found that the addition of exogenous ethylene induces secondary ripening processes in strawberries, stimulating respiration. They suggested that this process involves ethylene receptors, a type of gasoreceptor, that may vary between climacteric and non-climacteric fruits.

=== Methyl jasmonate ===
Jasmonate is involved in multiple aspects of the ripening process in non-climacteric fruits. This class of hormones includes jasmonic acid and methyl jasmonate. Studies showed that the expression of genes involved in various pathways in ripening was increased with the addition of methyl jasmonate. This study found that methyl jasmonate led to an increase in red coloration and the accumulation of lignin and anthocyanins, which can be used as ripening indicators. The genes they analyzed include those involved in anthocyanin accumulation, cell wall modification, and ethylene synthesis; all of which promote fruit ripening.

=== Abscisic acid ===
ABA also plays an important role in the ripening of non-climacteric plants. It has been shown to increase the rate of ethylene production and anthocyanin concentrations. Ripening was enhanced, as seen with the accelerated fruit coloration and softening. This occurs because ABA acts as a regulator of ethylene production, increasing synthesis similarly to climacteric fruits.

==See also==
* Bletting, a post-ripening reaction that some fruits undergo before they are edible
* Cervical ripening, when the pregnant human cervix degrades collagen and proteins and then changes shape prior to delivery

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2121926" start="0" end="8" title="Ripening" label="Ripening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="25" end="30" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361262" start="64" end="73" title="palatable" label="palatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q460453" start="101" end="108" title="Sweetness" label="sweeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="163" end="170" title="acidity" label="acidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q836941" start="299" end="314" title="Brix" label="Brix-Acid Ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431745" start="316" end="327" title="Climacteric (botany)" label="Climacteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="411" end="418" title="Banana" label="bananas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="423" end="431" title="Tomato" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161" start="461" end="468" title="fibrous" label="fibrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952715" start="535" end="545" title="Mouthfeel" label="Mouth feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="580" end="591" title="stomachache" label="stomachache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006818" start="595" end="609" title="Stomach cramp" label="stomach cramps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361262" start="636" end="648" title="palatability" label="palatability"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="715" end="724" title="Alkaloid" label="alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="729" end="736" title="Tannin" label="tannins"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158082" start="758" end="769" title="antifeedant" label="antifeedant"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="1465" end="1471" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5850062" start="1555" end="1563" title="Ethylene as a plant hormone" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q421801" start="1566" end="1581" title="Calcium carbide" label="Calcium carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q133145" start="1711" end="1720" title="acetylene" label="acetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431745" start="2168" end="2186" title="Climacteric fruits" label="Climacteric fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5850062" start="2250" end="2258" title="Ethylene as a plant hormone" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="2397" end="2403" title="Iodine" label="Iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="2495" end="2501" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="2531" end="2536" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431745" start="3007" end="3025" title="Climacteric fruits" label="Climacteric fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q598874" start="4302" end="4319" title="polygalacturonase" label="polygalacturonase"/>
<link wikidata="Q191835" start="4668" end="4683" title="gluconeogenesis" label="gluconeogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431745" start="5640" end="5651" title="Climacteric (botany)" label="climacteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="5841" end="5849" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="6197" end="6202" title="auxin" label="auxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332211" start="6346" end="6359" title="abscisic acid" label="abscisic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906434" start="8006" end="8014" title="Bletting" label="Bletting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065332" start="8091" end="8108" title="Cervical ripening" label="Cervical ripening"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362001" wikidata="Q497327" url="?curid=362001" title="Gardon">
<text>The Gardon or Gard (Occitan and French: &quot;Gardon, Gard&quot;, , ) is a river in southern France. It is the namesake of the department of Gard. Several of its tributaries are also called &quot;Gardon&quot;. It is long, and takes its source in the commune of Saint-Martin-de-Lansuscle, in the Cévennes mountain range. In its upper course it is also referred to as &quot;Gardon de Saint-Martin&quot;. From its furthest source, that of its tributary &quot;Gardon de Saint-Jean&quot;, it is 133 km long. It flows into the Rhône (right-side tributary) at Comps, north of Beaucaire, across from Vallabrègues.

==Features==
The Roman aqueduct Pont du Gard and the 16th-century Pont Saint-Nicolas are two historic bridges that cross the Gardon. The Gorges du Gardon, which ends at Pont Saint-Nicolas, is a popular recreation area for kayaking, canoeing, rock climbing, and hiking.

The village of Collias, approximately downriver from the Pont Saint-Nicolas, has several kayak and canoe rental agencies which will bus customers upriver to the Pont Saint-Nicolas (until the river level drops low in late June). Departing from Collias by kayak or canoe will bring you to the Pont du Gard in about an hour and one-half. It is possible to kayak or canoe under the Pont du Gard. Though, at times, the river is not high enough to allow for passage.

==Floods==
In September 2002 and again in December 2003, the Gardon had record level floods that damaged many of its bridges including the Pont Saint-Nicolas, which has since been fully restored. The river today shows few signs of the floods.

==Places along the river==
* Lozère
* Gard : Anduze, Saint-Jean-du-Gard, Saint-André-de-Valborgne, Remoulins, Montfrin

La Grand-Combe and Alès are situated on the Gardon d&#x27;Alès, the major left tributary.

==References==
==External links==
*Regordane Info - The independent portal for the Regordane Way or St Gilles Trail. The Regordane Way runs alongside the river Gardon from Ners south-eastwards </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q497327" start="4" end="10" title="Gardon" label="Gardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q497327" start="14" end="18" title="Gardon" label="Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="20" end="27" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="32" end="38" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122609" start="75" end="80" title="List of rivers of France" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="93" end="99" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="127" end="137" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12515" start="141" end="145" title="Gard" label="Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q472358" start="261" end="286" title="Saint-Martin-de-Lansuscle" label="Saint-Martin-de-Lansuscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="295" end="303" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="440" end="449" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="456" end="476" title="Gardon de Saint-Jean" label="Gardon de Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="521" end="526" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q324389" start="553" end="558" title="Comps, Gard" label="Comps"/>
<link wikidata="Q211647" start="569" end="578" title="Beaucaire, Gard" label="Beaucaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q379971" start="592" end="604" title="Vallabrègues" label="Vallabrègues"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="624" end="638" title="Roman aqueduct" label="Roman aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q189764" start="639" end="651" title="Pont du Gard" label="Pont du Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103643" start="673" end="691" title="Saint-Nicolas-de-Campagnac Bridge" label="Pont Saint-Nicolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338868" start="744" end="760" title="Gorges du Gardon" label="Gorges du Gardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094083" start="829" end="837" title="kayaking" label="kayaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856109" start="839" end="847" title="canoeing" label="canoeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="849" end="862" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="868" end="874" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q266910" start="892" end="899" title="Collias" label="Collias"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="1424" end="1429" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="1612" end="1618" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
<link wikidata="Q12515" start="1621" end="1625" title="Gard" label="Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q240921" start="1628" end="1634" title="Anduze" label="Anduze"/>
<link wikidata="Q268590" start="1636" end="1654" title="Saint-Jean-du-Gard" label="Saint-Jean-du-Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q651757" start="1656" end="1680" title="Saint-André-de-Valborgne" label="Saint-André-de-Valborgne"/>
<link wikidata="Q244486" start="1682" end="1691" title="Remoulins" label="Remoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q267527" start="1693" end="1701" title="Montfrin" label="Montfrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239967" start="1703" end="1717" title="La Grand-Combe" label="La Grand-Combe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193183" start="1722" end="1726" title="Alès" label="Alès"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294362" start="1747" end="1765" title="Gardon d&amp;#x27;Alès" label="Gardon d&amp;#x27;Alès"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362011" wikidata="Q1067046" url="?curid=362011" title="Princess Zelda">
<text>is a character in Nintendo&#x27;s &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; video game series. She was created by Shigeru Miyamoto for the original 1986 game &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot;. As one of the central characters in the series, she has appeared in the majority of the games in various incarnations. Zelda is the elf-like Hylian princess of the kingdom of Hyrule, an associate of the series protagonist Link, and bearer of the Triforce of Wisdom.

Zelda&#x27;s role has often been that of a damsel in distress or donor who assists Link. In many games, she is captured by the antagonist Ganon, necessitating Link to come to her rescue. In several games she is one of the Sages whose heroism is essential to defeating Ganon; in others, like &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; and &quot;The Wind Waker&quot;, she adopts alternative personas to take a more active role in the story. In &quot;Skyward Sword&quot;, her first incarnation is revealed to be the mortal form of the goddess Hylia, establishing the bloodline of the goddess and giving her descendants a range of magical powers. In &quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot;, she is featured as the playable protagonist.

Zelda has been described as one of the most recognisable princesses in video gaming. She has appeared in branded merchandise, comics and manga, and an animated television series. In addition to &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series, she has appeared as a playable character in a number of spin-off games and other game series, including &quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot;, &quot;Cadence of Hyrule&quot;, &quot;Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity&quot;, and the &quot;Super Smash Bros.&quot; series. Critics have responded positively to her development into a strong female character and have listed her as one of the greatest female video game characters of all time.
== Concept and creation ==
=== Characterisation ===
According to Shigeru Miyamoto, co-creator of &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series, Princess Zelda&#x27;s name was inspired by Zelda Fitzgerald, an American novelist, dancer, and socialite, as well as the wife of fellow novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald. Miyamoto had decided to name the first game &quot;The Legend of X&quot;, but did not know what the X would stand for. He said that a public relations planner had suggested the name when proposing an illustrated story for the game involving the rescue of a princess who was defined as an eternal beauty. Miyamoto explained: &quot;I couldn&#x27;t really get behind the book idea but I really liked the name Zelda. I asked him if I could use it, and he said that would be fine. And that&#x27;s where the title &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; was born.&quot;

Zelda was established as a princess in the first game, with few details given about the Royal Family of Hyrule until later games. She is a princess in most games except in &quot;Skyward Sword&quot;, which takes place before the founding of Hyrule Kingdom. Like Link, there are multiple incarnations of Princess Zelda in the series who are all connected by &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; timeline, which spans thousands of years of fictional history. Each version of Princess Zelda is a descendant of the first who founded the royal line and Hyrule. The instruction booklet for &quot;Zelda II: The Adventure of Link&quot; establishes that Zelda&#x27;s name reoccurs because the prince of the kingdom orders that &quot;every female child born into the royal household shall be given the name Zelda&quot;.
In &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot;, Zelda&#x27;s role was expanded by giving her an alter ego as a surviving member of the Sheikah clan named . To hide from Ganondorf and protect the Triforce of Wisdom, she disguises herself as a ninja warrior. During the game, she acts as a guide and helps Link on his quest to defeat Ganondorf until near the end of the game when she reveals herself to be Zelda. Sheik&#x27;s gender was the subject of debate, with some fans believing that Zelda transforms herself into a male character in &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot;. Nintendo senior product marketing manager Bill Trinen responded that Sheik is a woman: &quot;simply Zelda in a different outfit&quot;. In 2016, Miyamoto revealed in an interview that the development team had considered the possibility of producing a spin-off game with Sheik as the protagonist. A game starring Sheik was reported to be in development at Retro Studios but was eventually cancelled.
Another alter ego of Zelda named was introduced in &quot;The Wind Waker&quot; and its Nintendo DS sequel, &quot;Phantom Hourglass&quot;. Like Sheik, she plays a major role in the storyline as a young pirate captain who helps Link to find his sister, Aryll. In this incarnation, Zelda is unaware of her royal bloodline until the end of the game. Her true identity is revealed when the Triforce of Wisdom is restored, which results in her physical transformation to her Princess Zelda form. &quot;The Phantom Hourglass&quot; follows on from &quot;The Wind Waker&quot; with Link and Tetra exploring the sea to find new land. Tetra is captured on a Ghost Ship, and Link must defeat the Demon Monster Bellum with the Phantom Sword to save her. In a 2011 interview with &quot;GamesRadar+&quot;, series producer Eiji Aonuma commented on the possibility of Tetra reappearing within the &quot;Zelda&quot; series: &quot;Personally, I really like the character, but the director on the DS games after that, Mr. Iwamoto, said he didn&#x27;t really like her, so he didn&#x27;t want to use her&quot;.

Zelda was given a more active role in &quot;Spirit Tracks&quot; by adventuring alongside Link in spirit form, which made a sharp contrast to her damsel in distress role in earlier installments. Aonuma explained that this decision reflected the desires of fans and developers alike. A survey conducted in the United States signified consumers preferred more independent female characters, including Zelda&#x27;s alter-egos Sheik and Tetra. Director, Daiki Iwamoto, also expressed an interest in making Zelda &quot;a more integral part of the game&quot; during the game&#x27;s development.

The character&#x27;s significance within the mythology of the series was expanded further in &quot;Skyward Sword&quot;, where the first incarnation of Zelda is established as the mortal reincarnation of the goddess Hylia, a recurring deity worshipped by the Hylians that appears in statue form. Aonuma said that his team had been looking at how to portray Zelda more as the title character rather than just a princess to be rescued and wanted to give her an active role in the story. He also said that by establishing a connection between Zelda and Link, it helps the player to be better immersed in the adventure.

Aonuma said that for &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot;, Zelda was designed to be &quot;complex and multifaceted&quot;. He said that he wanted players to &quot;explore and see these different sides of Zelda, different emotions that she evokes&quot;. During development, the team briefly considered giving Zelda the lead role as female protagonist. Director Hidemaro Fujibayashi said that in &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; her character development is a key aspect of the narrative: &quot;She&#x27;s going through growth, experiencing things, and ultimately figuring out what kind of a person she&#x27;s going to be.&quot;

With the development of &quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot;, Zelda was given the role of protagonist for the first time in a mainline &quot;Zelda game&quot;, although it was originally intended for Link. Aonuma recognised that players wanted a playable Zelda and decided that she was the ideal character for the game&#x27;s echoes concept. Despite feeling that this would do justice to the character, the development team struggled to find the right story and brainstormed ideas to explain Zelda&#x27;s motivations for embarking on the adventure.

=== Character design ===

Official artwork created for the original game depicted the character dressed in a long pink gown wearing a necklace and tiara. Artwork for &quot;Zelda II: The Adventure of Link&quot; was similar and depicted her with red hair. For the development of &quot;A Link to the Past&quot;, Zelda was originally designed wearing a sci-fi themed outfit to correspond with an early multi-world game concept, but this was eventually scrapped. For &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; her royal dress was designed with a tabard featuring the Sheikah coat of arms and the Hyrule royal family crest.

In the anime-inspired video game &quot;The Wind Waker&quot;, Tetra&#x27;s hair was designed as a swirl to mimic the wind and smoke in the game. Her alter ego contrasts with Zelda&#x27;s traditional appearance in the game as princess wearing long hair and royal dress.

During the development of &quot;Twilight Princess&quot; illustrator Yusuke Nakano tried to portray the princess as a pensive character, &quot;as if she&#x27;s wondering about something&quot;. He drew illustrations of Zelda with feelings of &quot;hopelessness and anxiousness&quot;, but tried to avoid depicting her and Link &quot;too full of gloom and doom&quot;.

In &quot;Skyward Sword&quot; Zelda was presented as a student of the Knight Academy instead of her usual role as princess. The designers wanted her to look like a &quot;typical village girl&quot; and aimed to &quot;establish her as a heroine&quot;. They removed the royal ornamentation from her head and designed her wearing sky blue and a red dress. They also created Zelda in her goddess form, in which she was designed, &quot;dressed simply, and in white&quot;.

For the release of &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot;, a variety of concept art was considered for Zelda&#x27;s character design. Fujibayashi commented that Zelda&#x27;s character was the most difficult to define because while the planners had approached her by thinking about what kind of person she is, the designers took a different approach and considered how Zelda&#x27;s design could make players feel. The team was so concerned that they repeatedly made refinements to her design until the end of development. Alongside various dress designs, Zelda&#x27;s image was updated to include outfits that showed her ready for combat, including the final blue blouse and pants that complemented Link&#x27;s primary outfit. Fujibayashi said that Zelda&#x27;s shorter hairstyle in &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; was designed to make her feel more realistic, due to being actively mobile while restoring the kingdom after &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot;.

In &quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot;, Zelda is the avatar for the player, so Aonuma felt it was necessary to keep her appearance balanced so that she was neither too cute nor conspicuous. The development team at Grezzo spent a long time finalising her appearance to enhance her character appeal. Her facial expressions were designed to match the feelings of the player, so Aonuma made subtle changes to her eyes and mouth so that her face evolves from a serious expression into a smile as the story progresses.

=== Portrayal ===

Princess Zelda has been voiced by several voice actors, including Bonnie Jean Wilbur in , Brandy Kopp in &quot;Super Smash Bros. Ultimate&quot; (World of Light only) and Stephanie Martone in &quot;Cadence of Hyrule&quot;. She is voiced by Canadian-American actress Patricia Summersett in &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot;, &quot;Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity&quot;, and &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot;. Zelda has also been voiced by several Japanese actors, including Jun Mizusawa (&quot;Ocarina of Time&quot;, &quot;Twilight Princess&quot;, &quot;Super Smash Bros. Melee&quot;), Hikari Tachibana (&quot;Four Swords Adventures&quot;, &quot;The Wind Waker&quot;, &quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot;), Akane Omae (&quot;Spirit Tracks&quot;), Ayumi Fujimura (&quot;A Link Between Worlds&quot; and &quot;Super Smash Bros. Ultimate&quot;), Saori Seto (&quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot;) Yū Shimamura (&quot;Skyward Sword&quot;, &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot;, &quot;Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity&quot; and &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot;). and Chiyuki Miura (&quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot;). In &quot;Zelda&#x27;s Adventure&quot;, she was portrayed by a receptionist at the Viridis Corporation named Diane Burns.

== Characteristics ==
Zelda is a princess and member of the royal family of Hyrule. In the early games, her role is the damsel in distress for Link to save after she is kidnapped by the series main antagonist, Ganon. She bears the characteristic traits of the Hylians, having elven features including pointy ears. Throughout the series her age has ranged from a child to a young adult who is typically aged 16 or 17 years.

Within the fictional mythology of the series, the first Zelda is the mortal reincarnation of the goddess Hylia. In &quot;Skyward Sword&quot;, this incarnation of Zelda establishes Hyrule and the bloodline of the Royal Family of Hyrule. Each subsequent incarnation is a direct descendant and possesses the blood of the goddess. Zelda is also associated with Nayru, one of the three Golden Goddesses who create the world in the creation myth of the series. Like Link and Ganon, she is the bearer of one of three components of the Triforce named the Triforce of Wisdom, which gives her the inherent qualities of intelligence and wisdom. In the first game, the Triforce of Wisdom is split into fragments, necessitating Link to retrieve it in order to defeat Ganon. In later games, it manifests itself within Zelda, giving her the ability to conjure light arrows. Most iterations of Zelda have magical powers, such as teleportation, precognition, and the ability to heal.

Throughout the series, Zelda has wielded various weapons. In &quot;Twilight Princess&quot; she is depicted holding a sword and also fights with a sword in &quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot;. She is also skilled in the use of a bow, which she uses to shoot light arrows at enemies, such as Ganondorf. In addition to using the Twilight Bow in &quot;Twilight Princess&quot;, Zelda&#x27;s signature weapon is the Bow of Light, a recurring legendary weapon in the series.

=== Relationships ===
In the mythology of the series, Zelda&#x27;s role is directly connected to the other two main characters, Link and Ganon. The trio represent the three virtues of the Triforce, a mysterious artifact and prominent icon that is positioned at the heart of the series, with Link embodying Courage, Ganon representing Power, and Zelda possessing Wisdom. Zelda&#x27;s relationship with Link is ambiguous, with some games, such as &quot;Zelda II: The Adventure of Link&quot;, &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; and &quot;Spirit Tracks&quot; hinting at the possibility of a romantic relationship between the two characters. &quot;Skyward Sword&quot; placed greater emphasis on a romantic relationship in its storyline, illustrated by Nintendo releasing an official &quot;Romance Trailer&quot; for the game. Aonuma explained that originally he planned to cut out any elements of romance from the game but decided to keep it in: &quot;it wasn&#x27;t that we wanted to create a romance between Link and Zelda as much as we wanted the player to feel like this is a person who&#x27;s very important to me, who I need to find&quot;.

==Appearances==
===&quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series===
Princess Zelda has appeared in most of &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; games, but there have been several games where she does not make an appearance, such as &quot;Link&#x27;s Awakening&quot; (1993), &quot;Majora&#x27;s Mask&quot; (2000), where she only appears in a flashback, and &quot;Tri Force Heroes&quot; (2015). Due to being the titular character, it is a common misconception amongst non-players that Zelda is the protagonist of the series, when she is almost always a non-playable character.

Zelda made her debut in the original &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; (1986), where she is kidnapped by Ganon, who seeks to steal the Triforce of Wisdom. Before her capture, she scatters the eight pieces of the Triforce of Wisdom across the land and sends her nursemaid Impa to find Link, who eventually rescues her. She returns in the sequel, &quot;Zelda II: The Adventure of Link&quot; (1987), where Link discovers that she has been cursed into an eternal slumber and can only be revived by the Triforce of Courage. Link breaks the curse by retrieving the Triforce and use its power to awaken her. Zelda rewards Link with a kiss at the end of the game. In &quot;A Link to the Past&quot; (1991), Zelda is one of seven maidens descended from sages who sealed away Ganon during the Imprisoning War, a battle fought against Ganon&#x27;s army. After being kidnapped by the dark wizard Agahnim, she telepathically pleads with Link to rescue her. After, she and the other maidens assist Link in breaking the seal on Ganon&#x27;s tower so that Link may defeat the villain. Zelda initially appears as a child and later as an adult in &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; (1998). Suspicious of Ganondorf&#x27;s intentions, she sends Link on his quest to open the door to the Sacred Realm to obtain the Master Sword and Triforce. When Ganondorf reveals his wicked intentions, Zelda flees Hyrule Castle and goes into hiding, giving Link the Ocarina of Time. Seven years later, she poses as a mysterious Sheikah named Sheik and guides him on his quest to save Hyrule&#x27;s Sages from Ganondorf.

In &quot;Oracle of Seasons&quot; and &quot;Oracle of Ages&quot; (2001), Zelda only appears after inputting a secret code that is obtained upon completion. After sensing danger in the lands of Holodrum and Labrynna, she sends her handmaiden Impa to protect Din and Nayru, the Oracle of Seasons and Ages, respectively. In the full linked game, Zelda is captured by Twinrova, who plans to sacrifice her in order to resurrect Ganon, but Link intervenes and defeats him in the final boss battle. &quot;Four Swords&quot; (2002) presents Princess Zelda as one of many descendants protecting the seal on the Four Sword. While taking Link to the Four Sword Sanctuary, which seals the evil sorcerer Vaati, she senses the seal&#x27;s power is diminishing and is captured by Vaati, who takes her to his Palace of Winds to marry her. She is again rescued by Link and they seal Vaati away. Zelda&#x27;s incarnation in &quot;The Wind Waker&quot; (2002) is unaware of her royal identity and lives as the pirate captain Tetra. When Link&#x27;s younger sister Aryll is kidnapped by the Helmaroc King, she agrees to help him explore the islands with her pirate crew. Ganondorf discovers Tetra&#x27;s true identity when the Triforce of Wisdom is repaired. In the final boss battle against Ganondorf, she assists Link by using his bow to shoot arrows of light. In &quot;Four Swords Adventures&quot; (2004), Zelda fears Vaati&#x27;s return and attempts to reseal him. While doing so, Dark Link captures Zelda and her six maidens. To save them, Link uses the Four Sword but accidentally frees Vaati. After Link rescues Zelda, Ganon is revealed to be behind the plan. Following Vaati&#x27;s defeat, Zelda helps Link to defeat Ganon by giving him the Magic Bow.

In &quot;The Minish Cap&quot; (2004), Zelda is petrified by Vaati, who shatters the Picori Blade and breaks the seal, allowing evil to spread across Hyrule. Link is tasked with saving Zelda by restoring the Picori Blade. &quot;Twilight Princess&quot; (2006) centers around the Twilight King Zant&#x27;s invasion of Hyrule, where Zelda is forced to surrender. When Link is transformed into a wolf by the Twilight Realm&#x27;s power, he and his companion Midna work together to free Hyrule by first defeating Zant and then Ganondorf. Zelda appears as one of the game&#x27;s bosses, having been possessed by Ganondorf&#x27;s dark magic. In the final boss battle, she accompanies Link on horseback and helps him in combat by stunning Ganondorf with Light Arrows. &quot;Phantom Hourglass&quot; (2007) continues Zelda&#x27;s storyline as Tetra. When she is turned to stone and kidnapped by a Ghost Ship, Link jumps overboard and is rescued by a fairy named Ciela. In order to save Tetra, he must sail with Ciela and a sea captain named Linebeck to find the guardians of Power, Wisdom, and Courage. In &quot;Spirit Tracks&quot; (2009) Zelda meets Link at his graduation ceremony as a railroad engineer. After being attacked by villainous Chancellor Cole, her spirit is separated from her body and she accompanies Link on his quest. &quot;Spirit Tracks&quot; features Zelda as a playable cooperative character. In her spirit form, she can possess Phantom Knights and perform various tasks to help Link restore the Spirit Tracks.

Though not a princess in &quot;Skyward Sword&quot; (2011), Zelda is presented as the reincarnation of the goddess Hylia and a close childhood friend to Link. When she is spirited away in a tornado conjured by the demon lord Ghirahim, Link travels to the Surface and reunites with her after opening the Gate of Time. Ghirahim drags Zelda to the past and uses her power to release the antagonist Demise to change past events. After Link defeats Demise in battle, he and Zelda remain on the Surface to establish Hyrule Kingdom. In &quot;A Link Between Worlds&quot; (2013), Zelda entrusts the Pendant of Courage to Link when the sorcerer Yuga begins capturing the descendants of the Seven Sages. After Yuga turns Zelda into a painting and casts her into the dying world of Lorule, Link follows him into Lorule to rescue Zelda and the sages. Princess Hilda of Lorule conspires with Yuga to steal the Triforce of Wisdom and Triforce of Courage to save her own kingdom, but eventually makes amends by returning Link and Zelda to Hyrule, where they use the Triforce to restore Lorule.

In the backstory of &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; (2017), Zelda&#x27;s story is revealed in a series of Link&#x27;s memories. When Calamity Ganon attacks Hyrule using ancient Sheikah machinery, Zelda awakens her sacred power while protecting Link, sending him to the Shrine of Resurrection and sealing Calamity Ganon and herself in Hyrule Castle. After a century, she awakens Link and in the final battle, gives him the Bow of Light to defeat Dark Beast Ganon. In the sequel, &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; (2023), Zelda and Link accidentally awaken Ganondorf beneath Hyrule Castle, where she consequently falls into an abyss and disappears into the distant past. In the time of the Zonai, she meets Hyrule&#x27;s first king Rauru and his wife Sonia, who help her to use her sacred power to restore the decayed Master Sword. Aware of Ganondorf&#x27;s threat, she sacrifices herself by swallowing a Secret Stone, transforming into the Light Dragon, which provides her with the immortality to return the Master Sword to Link. After Ganondorf&#x27;s defeat, she is transformed back into a Hylian by the power of time and light.

In &quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot; (2024), Zelda is featured as the protagonist. It is the first mainline &quot;Zelda&quot; game developed by Nintendo to feature Zelda as the player character. Zelda&#x27;s weapon is the magical Tri Rod and she uses her power of Wisdom to duplicate objects and enemies, called echoes, to fight alongside her. Aided by a fairy named Tri, she can explore Hyrule, recover Link&#x27;s weapons, and transform into a spectre of Link, which allows her to briefly engage in active combat.

===Spin-off games===
Zelda appears in three CD-i games based on &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series, which were developed out of an agreement between Philips and Nintendo to use &quot;Zelda&quot; characters on Philips&#x27;s CD-i format. In &quot;&quot; (1993), she is kidnapped by Ganon and has to be rescued by Link. In &quot;&quot; (1993) and &quot;Zelda&#x27;s Adventure&quot; (1994), Princess Zelda is the protagonist and must save Link. &quot;Zelda: The Wand of Gamelon&quot; is noteworthy as the first time that Zelda appeared as a playable character. Having been developed with little input from Nintendo, the games have been criticised for their poor story, gameplay and animation and are not recognised by Nintendo as canon.

Zelda is a playable character in &quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot; (2014) and, according to the game&#x27;s producer Yosuke Hayashi, was designed to be a stronger character with the feeling of a ruler. Her weapons include a rapier, baton and also the Dominion Rod, which was made available as downloadable content. Sheik is also a playable character and wields daggers and a harp. In addition to her &quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot; incarnation, Tetra and Toon Zelda (her incarnation from &quot;Spirit Tracks&quot;) appear in &quot;Hyrule Warriors Legends&quot; and were added to &quot;Hyrule Warriors&quot; as downloadable content.

In the rhythm game &quot;Cadence of Hyrule&quot;, which was released in 2019 for the Nintendo Switch, players can choose to play through the game as either Link or Zelda. The game is a crossover between &quot;Crypt of the NecroDancer&quot; and &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series. Zelda has a magical shield to protect her and can use Link&#x27;s weapons, such as the hookshot and boomerang.

A spiritual successor to &quot;Hyrule Warriors,&quot; &quot;Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity&quot;, was released in 2020 and designed as a prequel to &quot;Breath of the Wild.&quot; Princess Zelda is one of several characters from &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; that appears as a playable character and fights using the Sheikah Slate and a bow.

===Other game series===
Zelda was introduced in the &quot;Super Smash Bros.&quot; series as a playable character in &quot;Super Smash Bros. Melee&quot; and has appeared in every subsequent game. In &quot;Melee&quot; and &quot;Super Smash Bros. Brawl&quot;, Zelda possesses the ability to transform into Sheik. In &quot;Super Smash Bros. for 3DS and Wii U&quot; and &quot;Super Smash Bros. Ultimate&quot;, they are separate characters. In &quot;Melee&quot; her design was based on her &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; incarnation, while in &quot;Brawl&quot; it was based on her appearance in &quot;Twilight Princess&quot;. The &quot;Twilight Princess&quot; incarnation of Zelda returned in &quot;Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS&quot; and &quot;Wii U&quot;. In &quot;Ultimate&quot;, Sheik&#x27;s design took inspiration from the Sheikah Set in &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; and her final smash is the Sheikah Dance. Zelda&#x27;s design is based on her appearance in &quot;A Link Between Worlds&quot; and her final smash is the Triforce of Wisdom.

=== Television series ===
A set of &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; cartoons aired from 1989 to 1990 as a part of DiC&#x27;s &quot;The Super Mario Bros. Super Show&quot;. It was loosely based on the original game and centres on Link, Zelda, Ganon and a fairy named Spryte, and also features Zelda&#x27;s father, King Harkinian. Thirteen episodes were produced before the cancellation of &quot;The Super Mario Bros. Super Show&quot;. Although Zelda is sometimes captured by Ganon, she is depicted as a smart, resourceful character. The series also emphasises a romantic relationship between Link and Zelda, in which Link is always begging Zelda for a kiss. Zelda was voiced by Cyndy Preston in the TV series. Writer Phil Harnage thought that Zelda&#x27;s characterisation was ahead of its time and a role model for girls. He said that rather than being a Disney Princess, Zelda was an &quot;action hero in her own right&quot;. Preston said that she portrayed Zelda as an independent woman: &quot;She didn&#x27;t need a hero to save her, and that was so cool&quot;. Zelda and Link also appear in season 2 of &quot;Captain N: The Game Master.&quot;

=== Comics and manga ===

Shortly after the release of the first game, a companion manga book was published by Wanpaku Comics in September 1986. &quot;The Hyrule Fantasy&quot; manga was released in Japan and follows the same plot as the game with an expanded role for Zelda. In 1986, a &quot;Choose Your Own Adventure&quot; style of manga was published, &quot;The Legend of Zelda: The Mirage Castle&quot;. Published entirely in Japanese, the manga features playing as Zelda and some scrapped concepts, including Zelda&#x27;s father named King Graham II. Zelda also appears in a similar manga book published in 1992, &quot;The Legend of Zelda: The Triforce of the Gods&quot;, which is based on &quot;A Link to the Past&quot;. A comic series published in the early 1990s by Valiant Comics was based on the adventures of Zelda and Link. Like &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; animated television series, which was being aired around the same time, it involves Link attempting to get a kiss from Zelda. A serial comic by manga author Shotaro Ishinomori was originally published in 1992 in &quot;Nintendo Power&quot; magazine and later collected in graphic novel form. It was based on &quot;The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past&quot; and tells an alternate version of the events. It was reprinted as a single volume in 2015 by Viz Media. Other manga adaptations of &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; games have also been published, including &quot;Majora&#x27;s Mask&quot;, &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot;, &quot;The Minish Cap&quot; and &quot;Phantom Hourglass&quot;, which are illustrated by Akira Himekawa.

=== Gamebooks ===
Alongside Link, Zelda appears in several Nintendo gamebooks. &quot;The Crystal Trap&quot; and &quot;The Shadow Prince&quot; were published in 1992, which were written in the style of &quot;Choose Your Own Adventure&quot; books. &quot;The Crystal Trap&quot; focuses on Zelda freeing Link from the trap, while &quot;The Shadow Prince&quot; involves Link saving Zelda.

== Merchandise ==
Zelda has been reproduced in the form of figurines and plush toys. Various amiibo have been released since 2014 depicting her in several incarnations. Two amiibo of Zelda and Sheik were released for the &quot;Super Smash Bros.&quot; series in 2014 and 2015. Several amiibo of Zelda have been released for the &quot;Zelda&quot; series, including the &quot;Wind Waker&quot; incarnation, the &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; incarnation and Zelda and loftwing from &quot;Skyward Sword&quot;. In November 2023, an amiibo for &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; depicting Zelda holding the Master Sword was released. A Lego minifigure of Zelda was revealed in May 2024 as part of a Great Deku Tree Lego set.

== Reception and legacy ==
Critics and gamers consider Zelda to be a significant video game character in popular culture. The book &quot;Female Action Heroes&quot; described Zelda as &quot;perhaps one of the most well-known princesses in video game history&quot;, though acknowledged that her role in the games was to serve as a damsel in distress. In 2009, she was voted the third greatest female character in games on Nintendo systems by the &quot;Official Nintendo Magazine&quot;, which appreciated her as &quot;a strong woman who, with her sword and bow and arrow, is capable of holding her own in a fight&quot;. In 2016, Digital Spy ranked her as one of the &quot;most iconic female game characters of all time&quot;. In 2018, readers of &quot;Guinness World Records Gamer&#x27;s Edition&quot; voted her as one of the top video game characters of all time. Readers of the Japanese publication &quot;Famitsu&quot; chose her as their favourite &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; character in 2023. Alex Huebner of &quot;iMore&quot; said that she is a &quot;badass&quot;, illustrated by her various alter egos as a fighter in disguise, a pirate leader and a goddess. Ozzie Mejia, writing for &quot;Shacknews&quot;, chose Zelda as one of the best characters in &quot;Super Smash Bros. Ultimate&quot;, emphasising her increased speed and dash attack with additional knockback. He also praised her character development within the &quot;Zelda&quot; series for developing from a passive princess to a strong heroine. Eric Ravenscraft of &quot;Wired&quot; commented that despite not being the playable character in the mainline series, Zelda is often the driving force behind the story as the embodiment of wisdom and light, and opined that Link is &quot;simply the sword Zelda wields&quot;.

Zelda&#x27;s character development in &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; was praised by Richard George and Audrey Drake of &quot;IGN&quot;, who commented that it was the first time in the series that she was given more depth. They particularly enjoyed seeing her develop from a carefree child to the warrior Sheik as a result of the game&#x27;s time shifts. Maddy Myers writing for &quot;The Mary Sue&quot; considered Zelda and Sheik to be two halves of a flawed, complex character, but felt that the game &quot;doesn&#x27;t seem to respect her much&quot;. &quot;The Wind Waker&quot; was a highlight for Chad Concelmo of &quot;Destructoid&quot;, who commented on its rare gaming moment of creating a plot reveal in which the pirate Tetra is revealed to be Zelda, which was considered particularly rewarding due to the notoriously repetitive nature of the &quot;Zelda&quot; series. Tetra was recognised by &quot;The Guardian&quot; as one of 30 &quot;interesting female game characters&quot;, with the comment, &quot;Tetra demands respect and gets it&quot;. When reviewing &quot;Spirit Tracks&quot;, Abbie Stone of &quot;GamesRadar&quot; praised Zelda&#x27;s role as a ghost that can possess enemies, as it places her in the position of co-lead throughout the game, and opined that this proves &quot;action and femininity aren&#x27;t mutually exclusive&quot;. Oli Welsh of &quot;Eurogamer&quot; commented that for most of the game she fulfils a similar role to Navi or Midna by providing hints and comments, but praised the close romance between her and Link that replaces her usual position as a distant ideal. Tom Mc Shea writing for &quot;GameSpot&quot; focused on the &quot;endearing rapport&quot; between Zelda and Link in the story of &quot;Skyward Sword&quot;, noting that rather than being a damsel in distress, Zelda is presented as Link&#x27;s equal and that both characters must make a sacrifice. Jonathan Holmes writing for &quot;Destructoid&quot; highlighted a particular scene in &quot;Skyward Sword&quot; in which Zelda communicates her love for Link through her eyes and body language, describing it as &quot;beautiful&quot; and opined that Nintendo had made it an unforgettable moment.
Speaking for &quot;Nintendo Life&quot;, Alex Olney appreciated the human traits and flaws displayed by Zelda in &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; and considered this to be her best incarnation, citing the pressure of her responsibilities, her determination to protect her kingdom and Link, her strength and power, and her ability to match Calamity Ganon and restrain him for 100 years. Gita Jackson writing for &quot;Kotaku&quot; considered her blue adventuring outfit to be a &quot;cool departure from the norm&quot; of the traditionally pink Hylian princess and illustrated her prominent story arc within the game. Madeline Carpou of &quot;The Mary Sue&quot; listed her &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; incarnation as one of the most inspiring female characters in video games, stating that although she is &quot;a living representation of the people&#x27;s salvation&quot; and struggles under the pressure of expectation, she refuses to give up on her responsibilities. Laura Dale of &quot;Syfy&quot; expressed delight at having the ability to play as Zelda throughout the entirety of &quot;Cadence of Hyrule&quot;, despite not being an official &quot;Zelda&quot; title. She said that exploring dungeons and fighting enemies as Zelda felt &quot;absolutely awesome&quot; and was made more enjoyable for a female gamer due to having something in common with the hero. Patricia Hernandez writing for &quot;Polygon&quot; said that &quot;Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity&quot; had transformed Zelda into a &quot;total badass&quot; and a capable fighter, which was particularly welcome after seeing her lamenting her inability to contribute more to the fight against Calamity Ganon in &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot;.

Steve Watts of &quot;GameSpot&quot; felt that the story in &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; belongs to Zelda, not only because she is the focus of the main quest line, but also because the mystery of discovering her location slowly unravels throughout the game and leads to an &quot;incredible, stirring revelation&quot;. He also praised the game for inverting the story trope of Link being the prophesied hero and making Zelda the strategist who makes him the hero by helping him in the distant past, thereby being the author of the prophecy. Zelda&#x27;s story in &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; was particularly praised by Matthew Byrd of &quot;Den of Geek&quot;, who described it as an &quot;emotional and engaging arc&quot;, highlighting her sacrifice for those she loves and her memorable reveal as the Light Dragon. He praised her altruism for being dependable and aspirational, saying that it &quot;doesn’t feel like some cheap emotional ploy designed to drum up sympathy&quot;. Zelda&#x27;s performance as a &quot;solution-based thinker&quot; in &quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot; was well received by Todd Martens of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, who felt that the game benefited by having better character development and more inventiveness in Zelda than has previously been shown in Link.

=== Analysis ===
In &quot;Destructoid,&quot; Timothy Monbleau wrote that while Zelda was mostly a plot device and a player goal in the first three &quot;Zelda&quot; games, Yoshiaki Koizumi&#x27;s involvement in writing &quot;Link&#x27;s Awakening&quot; caused a fundamental shift in the series by producing stronger storylines. He opined that by giving the female character Marin a more intimate relationship with Link, Koizumi effectively impacted Zelda&#x27;s role in subsequent games by giving her a more active role in the narrative. Brendan Main for &quot;The Escapist&quot; magazine commented that Zelda&#x27;s alter-ego Sheik in &quot;Ocarina of Time&quot; broke the conventions of the character&#x27;s role because &quot;Sheik is everything Zelda is not&quot;. He commented that while Zelda&#x27;s elegance and femininity had restricted her to being a captive, Sheik&#x27;s ambiguous gender gave the character freedom, but noted that once Zelda is revealed to be Sheik, she is immediately returned to a captive again. Zelda&#x27;s evolution from the &quot;princess in peril&quot; was noted by Kyle Hilliard of &quot;Game Informer&quot; who commented that in most games she is simply a goal for the player to acquire, but in more recent titles she has grown into a more fleshed-out character. Jason Guisao of &quot;Game Informer&quot; said that although Zelda has the potential to be equal to Link, &quot;Nintendo is attached to tired scenarios where she is captured or immobilized&quot;. He opined that she had been sidelined in &quot;Breath of the Wild&quot; and should instead be leading a new era of fully integrated co-operative play. Jacob Kastrenakes for &quot;The Verge&quot; opined that switching Link&#x27;s and Zelda&#x27;s roles could be possible without requiring Link to be absent, but highlighted that Aonuma confirmed that this idea had been rejected. Sara Gitkos of &quot;iMore&quot; opined that Zelda deserved her own game due to being &quot;a scholar, a leader, and a fierce princess who takes charge of her own destiny&quot;. Jay Castello writing for &quot;Polygon&quot; described the ending of &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; as a tragedy for perpetuating the status quo of Zelda&#x27;s repetitive role in the series, commenting that the gendered elements &quot;appear to skate by simply because this has been going on so long that mentioning them feels blasé&quot;. Heather Wald of &quot;GamesRadar+&quot; highlighted that &quot;Tears of the Kingdom&quot; had reignited the longstanding debate about the possibility of Zelda becoming a playable character in the series. NME writer Ali Shutler said it was a &quot;bold move forward&quot; by finally making Zelda a playable character in &quot;Echoes of Wisdom&quot; and praised her capabilities of exploring dungeons and fighting bosses. Liv Ngan of &quot;GamesRadar+&quot; described the game as &quot;bittersweet disappointment&quot; after finding that Zelda had to step aside to make way for Link in the final battle. Ashley Bardhan of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; commented that Nintendo was finally recognising the female characters in its franchises and that the game redefines the role of the Nintendo princess by giving Zelda the ability to save herself.

== See also ==
* Characters of &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Princess Zelda page at Play Nintendo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="5" end="14" title="Character (arts)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="18" end="26" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="40" end="59" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="66" end="76" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q12382" start="104" end="120" title="Shigeru Miyamoto" label="Shigeru Miyamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12395" start="154" end="173" title="The Legend of Zelda (video game)" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q174396" start="313" end="316" title="elf" label="elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="322" end="328" title="Hylian" label="Hylian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="356" end="362" title="Hyrule" label="Hyrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q568553" start="403" end="407" title="Link (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999118" start="427" end="435" title="Triforce" label="Triforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="491" end="509" title="damsel in distress" label="damsel in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036206" start="513" end="518" title="Donor (fairy tale)" label="donor"/>
<link wikidata="Q545044" start="586" end="591" title="Ganon" label="Ganon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="745" end="760" title="The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time" label="Ocarina of Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="777" end="791" title="The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker" label="The Wind Waker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="881" end="894" title="The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword" label="Skyward Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="973" end="978" title="Hylia (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Hylia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1085" end="1101" title="The Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom" label="Echoes of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133604" start="1281" end="1297" title="The Legend of Zelda (manga)" label="comics and manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535629" start="1306" end="1332" title="The Legend of Zelda (TV series)" label="animated television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q15361287" start="1499" end="1514" title="Hyrule Warriors" label="Hyrule Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q62128701" start="1528" end="1545" title="Cadence of Hyrule" label="Cadence of Hyrule"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1559" end="1591" title="Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity" label="Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778220" start="1613" end="1630" title="Super Smash Bros." label="Super Smash Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q12382" start="1879" end="1895" title="Shigeru Miyamoto" label="Shigeru Miyamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="1917" end="1936" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q187324" start="1994" end="2010" title="Zelda Fitzgerald" label="Zelda Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="2096" end="2115" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q861205" start="2851" end="2864" title="Skyward Sword" label="Skyward Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q568553" start="2934" end="2938" title="Link (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="3029" end="3069" title="The Legend of Zelda Timeline" label="&amp;quot;The Legend of Zelda&amp;quot; timeline"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3257" end="3288" title="Zelda II: The Adventure of Link" label="Zelda II: The Adventure of Link"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3486" end="3501" title="The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time" label="Ocarina of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="3596" end="3603" title="Sheikah" label="Sheikah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911181" start="4070" end="4081" title="Bill Trinen" label="Bill Trinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q531167" start="4382" end="4395" title="Retro Studios" label="Retro Studios"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4483" end="4497" title="The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker" label="The Wind Waker"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="4512" end="4523" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4538" end="4555" title="The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass" label="Phantom Hourglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="5196" end="5207" title="GamesRadar+" label="GamesRadar+"/>
<link wikidata="Q731575" start="5231" end="5242" title="Eiji Aonuma" label="Eiji Aonuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q868545" start="5558" end="5571" title="Spirit Tracks" label="Spirit Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="5659" end="5677" title="damsel in distress" label="damsel in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q17185964" start="6746" end="6764" title="Breath of the Wild" label="Breath of the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q556257" start="7072" end="7092" title="Hidemaro Fujibayashi" label="Hidemaro Fujibayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q64577191" start="7112" end="7132" title="Tears of the Kingdom" label="Tears of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7370" end="7386" title="The Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom" label="Echoes of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8164" end="8182" title="The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past" label="A Link to the Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="8492" end="8497" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8786" end="8803" title="The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess" label="Twilight Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255529" start="10741" end="10747" title="Grezzo" label="Grezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54093632" start="11171" end="11197" title="Super Smash Bros. Ultimate" label="Super Smash Bros. Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62128701" start="11257" end="11274" title="Cadence of Hyrule" label="Cadence of Hyrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q62434102" start="11325" end="11344" title="Patricia Summersett" label="Patricia Summersett"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11386" end="11418" title="Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity" label="Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067046" start="11529" end="11541" title="Jun Mizusawa" label="Jun Mizusawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052131" start="11609" end="11632" title="Super Smash Bros. Melee" label="Super Smash Bros. Melee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544943" start="11641" end="11657" title="Hikari Tachibana" label="Hikari Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11665" end="11687" title="The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures" label="Four Swords Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q15361287" start="11729" end="11744" title="Hyrule Warriors" label="Hyrule Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828940" start="11753" end="11763" title="Akane Omae" label="Akane Omae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370758" start="11793" end="11807" title="Ayumi Fujimura" label="Ayumi Fujimura"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11815" end="11836" title="The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds" label="A Link Between Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9099081" start="11888" end="11898" title="Saori Seto" label="Saori Seto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9132826" start="11929" end="11941" title="Yū Shimamura" label="Yū Shimamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q65095700" start="12090" end="12103" title="Chiyuki Miura" label="Chiyuki Miura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521652" start="12145" end="12167" title="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure" label="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="12334" end="12340" title="Hyrule" label="Hyrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="12378" end="12396" title="damsel in distress" label="damsel in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q545044" start="12468" end="12473" title="Ganon" label="Ganon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="12518" end="12525" title="Hylians" label="Hylians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="12787" end="12792" title="Hylia (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Hylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399781" start="13039" end="13044" title="Nayru" label="Nayru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999118" start="13210" end="13218" title="Triforce" label="Triforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q545044" start="13932" end="13941" title="Ganondorf" label="Ganondorf"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15471" end="15492" title="The Legend of Zelda: Link&amp;#x27;s Awakening" label="Link&amp;#x27;s Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15513" end="15531" title="The Legend of Zelda: Majora&amp;#x27;s Mask" label="Majora&amp;#x27;s Mask"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15595" end="15611" title="The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes" label="Tri Force Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="15784" end="15806" title="Non-player character" label="non-playable character"/>
<link wikidata="Q12395" start="15852" end="15871" title="The Legend of Zelda (video game)" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16158" end="16189" title="Zelda II: The Adventure of Link" label="Zelda II: The Adventure of Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q370055" start="16472" end="16490" title="A Link to the Past" label="A Link to the Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q213911" start="16941" end="16956" title="Ocarina of Time" label="Ocarina of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203334" start="17093" end="17105" title="Master Sword" label="Master Sword"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17388" end="17448" title="The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages" label="&amp;quot;Oracle of Seasons&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Oracle of Ages&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17641" end="17644" title="Recurring characters in The Legend of Zelda series#Din" label="Din"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17649" end="17654" title="Recurring characters in The Legend of Zelda series#Nayru" label="Nayru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17748" end="17756" title="Recurring characters in The Legend of Zelda series#Twinrova" label="Twinrova"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17882" end="17893" title="The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past and Four Swords" label="Four Swords"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18074" end="18079" title="Recurring characters in The Legend of Zelda series#Vaati" label="Vaati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698862" start="18148" end="18153" title="Vaati" label="Vaati"/>
<link wikidata="Q852563" start="18295" end="18309" title="The Wind Waker" label="The Wind Waker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18734" end="18756" title="The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures" label="Four Swords Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19132" end="19146" title="The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap" label="The Minish Cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q735613" start="19350" end="19367" title="Twilight Princess" label="Twilight Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200192" start="19576" end="19581" title="Midna" label="Midna"/>
<link wikidata="Q657710" start="19888" end="19905" title="Phantom Hourglass" label="Phantom Hourglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q868545" start="20224" end="20237" title="Spirit Tracks" label="Spirit Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q861205" start="20676" end="20689" title="Skyward Sword" label="Skyward Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q11300470" start="21179" end="21200" title="A Link Between Worlds" label="A Link Between Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q17185964" start="21749" end="21767" title="Breath of the Wild" label="Breath of the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q64577191" start="22206" end="22226" title="Tears of the Kingdom" label="Tears of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22861" end="22877" title="The Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom" label="Echoes of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956209" start="23408" end="23466" title="CD-i games based on The Legend of Zelda series" label="CD-i games based on &amp;quot;The Legend of Zelda&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="23517" end="23524" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023103" start="23592" end="23596" title="CD-i" label="CD-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521652" start="23719" end="23741" title="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure" label="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15361287" start="24142" end="24157" title="Hyrule Warriors" label="Hyrule Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q816745" start="24321" end="24327" title="rapier" label="rapier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632782" start="24733" end="24744" title="rhythm game" label="rhythm game"/>
<link wikidata="Q62128701" start="24751" end="24768" title="Cadence of Hyrule" label="Cadence of Hyrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="24811" end="24826" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259371" start="24935" end="24959" title="Crypt of the NecroDancer" label="Crypt of the NecroDancer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25182" end="25214" title="Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity" label="Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778220" start="25526" end="25543" title="Super Smash Bros." label="Super Smash Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1052131" start="25590" end="25613" title="Super Smash Bros. Melee" label="Super Smash Bros. Melee"/>
<link wikidata="Q843131" start="25694" end="25717" title="Super Smash Bros. Brawl" label="Super Smash Bros. Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195150" start="25787" end="25822" title="Super Smash Bros. for 3DS and Wii U" label="Super Smash Bros. for 3DS and Wii U"/>
<link wikidata="Q54093632" start="25839" end="25865" title="Super Smash Bros. Ultimate" label="Super Smash Bros. Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535629" start="26554" end="26573" title="The Legend of Zelda (TV series)" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q515708" start="26626" end="26629" title="DiC" label="DiC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642566" start="26637" end="26681" title="Super Mario Bros. television series" label="&amp;quot;The Super Mario Bros. Super Show&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q299615" start="27188" end="27201" title="Cyndy Preston" label="Cyndy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140303" start="27366" end="27381" title="Disney Princess" label="Disney Princess"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27624" end="27650" title="Captain N: The Game Master" label="Captain N: The Game Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="27742" end="27747" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990994" start="27951" end="27976" title="Choose Your Own Adventure" label="Choose Your Own Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q508154" start="28431" end="28445" title="Valiant Comics" label="Valiant Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q471103" start="28687" end="28705" title="Shotaro Ishinomori" label="Shotaro Ishinomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q719801" start="28748" end="28762" title="Nintendo Power" label="Nintendo Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="28982" end="28991" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q418710" start="29242" end="29256" title="Akira Himekawa" label="Akira Himekawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039157" start="29318" end="29336" title="Nintendo gamebooks" label="Nintendo gamebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157056" start="29737" end="29743" title="amiibo" label="amiibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203334" start="30242" end="30254" title="Master Sword" label="Master Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q133803" start="30271" end="30286" title="Lego minifigure" label="Lego minifigure"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="30350" end="30354" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="30466" end="30481" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q668937" start="30811" end="30837" title="Official Nintendo Magazine" label="Official Nintendo Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111380" start="30987" end="30998" title="Digital Spy" label="Digital Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="31110" end="31153" title="Guinness World Records Gamer&amp;#x27;s Edition" label="Guinness World Records Gamer&amp;#x27;s Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="31265" end="31272" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781268" start="31382" end="31387" title="iMore" label="iMore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049346" start="31559" end="31568" title="Shacknews" label="Shacknews"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="31900" end="31905" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="32271" end="32274" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505371" start="32530" end="32542" title="The Mary Sue" label="The Mary Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265424" start="32769" end="32780" title="Destructoid" label="Destructoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="33053" end="33065" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="33261" end="33271" title="GamesRadar+" label="GamesRadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="33519" end="33528" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039019" start="33601" end="33605" title="Navi (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Navi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200192" start="33609" end="33614" title="Midna" label="Midna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="33782" end="33790" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="34362" end="34375" title="Nintendo Life" label="Nintendo Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083295" start="34757" end="34763" title="Kotaku" label="Kotaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505371" start="34982" end="34994" title="The Mary Sue" label="The Mary Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="35331" end="35335" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226423" start="35744" end="35751" title="Polygon (website)" label="Polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="36702" end="36713" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="37185" end="37202" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094438" start="37527" end="37543" title="Yoshiaki Koizumi" label="Yoshiaki Koizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698862" start="37729" end="37734" title="Marin (Legend of Zelda)" label="Marin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520773" start="37916" end="37928" title="The Escapist (magazine)" label="The Escapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27197" start="38479" end="38492" title="Game Informer" label="Game Informer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155442" start="39030" end="39039" title="The Verge" label="The Verge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="39921" end="39939" title="playable character" label="playable character"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="39955" end="39958" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="40377" end="40390" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698862" start="40610" end="40655" title="Characters of The Legend of Zelda" label="Characters of &amp;quot;The Legend of Zelda&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362020" wikidata="Q20810" url="?curid=362020" title="Aerangis">
<text>Aerangis, abbreviated as Aergs in horticultural trade, is a genus of the Orchid family (Orchidaceae). The name of this genus has been derived from the Greek words &#x27;aer&#x27; (air) and &#x27;angos&#x27; (urn), referring to the form of the lip. It is the type genus of the subtribe Aerangidinae, which has recently been subsumed in the subtribe Angraecinae. Approximately 50 species in this genus are known mostly from tropical Africa, but also from the Comoro Islands, Madagascar and Sri Lanka.

Species are usually epiphytic, sometimes lithophytic small orchids, resembling &quot;Vanda&quot;s in appearance. Their large, waxy, star-shaped flowers are generally white, cream-colored or yellow. They show a long, nectar-filled spur, often longer than the flower itself. There is a single stem with many flowers on a long raceme. The lip is flat and resembles the petals and sepals. They give off an agreeable smell during the night. There are six to ten parallel-veined, fleshy, evergreen leaves.

These orchids are not often found in collections, even though they are rather easy to grow. Around 15 species are commonly available. Also &quot;Aerangis&quot;&#x27; descendants from intergeneric hybridization have been registered:

* &quot;×Aerangaeris&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Rangaeris&quot;)
* &quot;×Amesangis&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Amesiella&quot;)
* &quot;×Angrangis&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Angraecum&quot;)
* &quot;×Diaphanangis&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Diaphananthe&quot;)
* &quot;×Euryangis&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Eurychone&quot;)
* &quot;×Summerangis&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Summerhayesia&quot;)
* &quot;×Thesaera&quot; (&quot;Aerangis&quot; × &quot;Aeranthes&quot;)

== References ==

* (1865) Flora 48: 190.
* (Eds) (2014) Genera Orchidacearum Volume 6: Epidendroideae (Part 3); page 344 ff., Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

== External links ==
*
*&quot;Aerangis citrata&quot;
*Orchid Species, photos, &quot;Aerangis&quot; page 
*Cal Orchid, Caring for &quot;Aerangis&quot;
*Orchidées Nature Producteur d&#x27;Orchidées, &quot;Aerangis&quot;
*Société Belge d&#x27;Orchidophilie, les Aerangis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20810" start="25" end="30" title="Aerangis" label="Aergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="60" end="65" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="73" end="79" title="Orchid" label="Orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="258" end="268" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687947" start="285" end="297" title="Aerangidinae" label="Aerangidinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680963" start="348" end="359" title="Angraecinae" label="Angraecinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="431" end="437" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="457" end="471" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoro Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="473" end="483" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="488" end="497" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="520" end="529" title="epiphytic" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321691" start="541" end="552" title="lithophytic" label="lithophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q286061" start="585" end="590" title="Vanda" label="Vanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799403" start="836" end="839" title="Labellum (botany)" label="lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="866" end="871" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="877" end="882" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="1197" end="1210" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1242" end="1254" title="×Aerangaeris" label="×Aerangaeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292546" start="1291" end="1300" title="Rangaeris" label="Rangaeris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1316" end="1326" title="×Amesangis" label="×Amesangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20800" start="1363" end="1372" title="Amesiella" label="Amesiella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1388" end="1398" title="×Angrangis" label="×Angrangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21139" start="1435" end="1444" title="Angraecum" label="Angraecum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1460" end="1473" title="×Diaphanangis" label="×Diaphanangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355276" start="1510" end="1522" title="Diaphananthe" label="Diaphananthe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1538" end="1548" title="×Euryangis" label="×Euryangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906022" start="1585" end="1594" title="Eurychone" label="Eurychone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1610" end="1622" title="×Summerangis" label="×Summerangis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637591" start="1659" end="1672" title="Summerhayesia" label="Summerhayesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1688" end="1697" title="×Thesaera" label="×Thesaera"/>
<link wikidata="Q20809" start="1734" end="1743" title="Aeranthes" label="Aeranthes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362021" wikidata="Q909603" url="?curid=362021" title="2004 Giro d'Italia">
<text>The 2004 Giro d&#x27;Italia was the 87th edition of the Giro d&#x27;Italia, one of cycling&#x27;s Grand Tours. It began in Genoa with a prologue. The race came to a close with a mass-start road stage that stretched from Clusone to Milan. Nineteen teams entered the race that was won by the Italian Damiano Cunego of the team. Second and third were the Ukrainian Serhiy Honchar and Italian Gilberto Simoni.

In the race&#x27;s other classifications, rider Fabian Wegmann won the mountains classification, Raffaele Illiano of the team won the intergiro classification, and rider Alessandro Petacchi won the points classification. In addition to the points classification, Petacchi also won the secondary most combative and Azzurri d&#x27;Italia classifications. finished as the winners of the &quot;Trofeo Fast Team&quot; classification, ranking each of the nineteen teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time. The other team classification, the &quot;Trofeo Super Team&quot; classification, where the teams&#x27; riders are awarded points for placing within the top twenty in each stage and the points are then totaled for each team was won by .

==Teams==

A total of 19 teams were invited to participate in the 2004 Giro d&#x27;Italia. Each team sent a squad of nine riders, so the Giro began with a peloton of 171 cyclists. Out of the 171 riders that started this edition of the Giro d&#x27;Italia, a total of 140 riders made it to the finish in Milan.

The 19 teams that took part in the race were:

==Route and stages==

The route for the 2004 Giro d&#x27;Italia was unveiled by race director Angelo Zomegnan on 8 November 2003 in Milan. It contained two time trial events, all of which were individual. The organizers divided the remaining nineteen stages into three categories: flat stages, rolling stages, and mountain stages. Twelve of the stages were declared flat stages. Of the seven stages remaining, three stages were designated rolling stages and three were ranked as mountain stages. In the stages containing categorized climbs, three had summit finishes: stage 3, to Corno alle Scale; stage 7, to Montevergine di Mercogliano; and stage 18, to Bormio 2000. The organizers chose to include two rest days. When compared to the previous year&#x27;s race, the race was shorter, contained the same amount of rest days, and the same amount of time trials. In addition, this race opened with a prologue, which the last year&#x27;s race did not.

==Race overview==

The 2004 Giro d&#x27;Italia began with a prologue around the Italian city of Genoa. Bradley McGee won the first leg of the race after besting the second place rider Olaf Pollack by ten seconds. The race&#x27;s first mass-start stage came down to a sprint finish in the city of Alba. The stage was won by Italian sprinter Alessandro Petacchi and Pollack managed to take the race lead after earning a twelve-second time bonus by finishing second on the stage. Stage 2 saw the race lead switch back to McGee after he finished second to the stage winner Damiano Cunego.

Success in stages was limited to eight of the competing teams, three of which achieved multiple stage victories, while two individual riders won multiple stages. The riders that won more than once were Alessandro Petacchi in stages 1, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 15, and 20 and Damiano Cunego in stages 2, 7, 16, and 18. won nine stages with Petacchi. won five stages, four with Cunego and one with Gilberto Simoni in stage 3. won two stages, with Pavel Tonkov in stage 17 and Stefano Garzelli in stage 19.

, , , , and De Nardi each won one stage at the Giro d&#x27;Italia. FDJeux.com won the opening prologue with Bradley McGee. Lotto-Domo&#x27;s Robbie McEwen won stage 4 by out-sprinting the rest of the field for the stage win, as did Acqua &amp; Sapone rider Fred Rodriguez in stage 9. Ceramica Panaria-Margres&#x27;s Emanuele Sella won the hilly stage 11. De Nardi rider Serhiy Honchar won the stage 13 individual time trial.

==Classification leadership==

In the 2004 Giro d&#x27;Italia, four different jerseys were awarded. For the general classification, calculated by adding each cyclist&#x27;s finishing times on each stage, and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass-start stages, the leader received a pink jersey. This classification is considered the most important of the Giro d&#x27;Italia, and the winner is considered the winner of the Giro.

Additionally, there was a points classification, which awarded a mauve jersey. In the points classification, cyclists got points for finishing in the top 15 in a stage. The stage win awarded 25 points, second place awarded 20 points, third 16, fourth 14, fifth 12, sixth 10, and one point fewer per place down the line, to a single point for 15th. In addition, points could be won in intermediate sprints.
There was also a mountains classification, which awarded a green jersey. In the mountains classifications, points were won by reaching the top of a mountain before other cyclists. Each climb was categorized as either first, second, or third category, with more points available for the higher-categorized climbs. The highest point in the Giro (called the &quot;Cima Coppi&quot;), which in 2004 was Passo di Gavia, afforded more points than the other first-category climbs.

The fourth jersey represented the intergiro classification, marked by a blue jersey. The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification, in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped. As the race goes on, their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey.

There were also two classifications for teams. The first was the Trofeo Fast Team. In this classification, the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time. The Trofeo Super Team was a team points classification, with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points (20 for first place, 19 for second place and so on, down to a single point for 20th) for their team.

The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run.

==Final standings==

===General classification===

===Points classification===



===Mountains classification===

===Intergiro classification===



===Trofeo Fast Team classification===

===Trofeo Super Team classification===

===Minor classifications===

Other less well-known classifications, whose leaders did not receive a special jersey, were awarded during the Giro. Other awards included the Combativity classification, which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints, mountain passes and stage finishes. Italian Alessandro Petacchi won the Most Combative classification. The Azzurri d&#x27;Italia classification was based on finishing order, but points were awarded only to the top three finishers in each stage. The Azzurri d&#x27;Italia classification was also won by Alessandro Petacchi. The &quot;Trofeo Fuga Piaggio&quot; classification rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field, each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear. The classification was won by Daniele Righi. Teams were given penalty points for minor technical infringements. was the most successful in avoiding penalties, and so won the Fair Play classification.

==References==

===Citations===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q909603" start="4" end="27" title="2004 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="2004 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="56" end="74" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866427" start="98" end="109" title="Grand Tour (cycling)" label="Grand Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="123" end="128" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q100388" start="220" end="227" title="Clusone" label="Clusone"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="231" end="236" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316910" start="298" end="312" title="Damiano Cunego" label="Damiano Cunego"/>
<link wikidata="Q343354" start="362" end="376" title="Serhiy Honchar" label="Serhiy Honchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q252436" start="389" end="404" title="Gilberto Simoni" label="Gilberto Simoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q456885" start="455" end="469" title="Fabian Wegmann" label="Fabian Wegmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q715102" start="504" end="520" title="Raffaele Illiano" label="Raffaele Illiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q312614" start="577" end="596" title="Alessandro Petacchi" label="Alessandro Petacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1457" end="1462" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94929" start="2092" end="2108" title="Lizzano in Belvedere" label="Corno alle Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55053" start="2122" end="2149" title="Mercogliano" label="Montevergine di Mercogliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q40516" start="2168" end="2179" title="Bormio" label="Bormio 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048767" start="2249" end="2274" title="2003 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="previous year&amp;#x27;s race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2559" end="2564" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q450769" start="2566" end="2579" title="Bradley McGee" label="Bradley McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q701580" start="2647" end="2659" title="Olaf Pollack" label="Olaf Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341" start="2759" end="2763" title="Alba, Piedmont" label="Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q312614" start="2803" end="2822" title="Alessandro Petacchi" label="Alessandro Petacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q316910" start="3032" end="3046" title="Damiano Cunego" label="Damiano Cunego"/>
<link wikidata="Q312614" start="3251" end="3270" title="Alessandro Petacchi" label="Alessandro Petacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q252436" start="3441" end="3456" title="Gilberto Simoni" label="Gilberto Simoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q444439" start="3490" end="3502" title="Pavel Tonkov" label="Pavel Tonkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q458804" start="3519" end="3535" title="Stefano Garzelli" label="Stefano Garzelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q691836" start="4084" end="4106" title="general classification" label="general classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627215" start="4453" end="4474" title="points classification" label="points classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q820524" start="4850" end="4874" title="mountains classification" label="mountains classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250962" start="5194" end="5204" title="Cima Coppi" label="Cima Coppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008597" start="5231" end="5245" title="Passo di Gavia" label="Passo di Gavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270306" start="5341" end="5365" title="Intergiro classification in the Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="intergiro classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q312614" start="6842" end="6861" title="Alessandro Petacchi" label="Alessandro Petacchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6905" end="6941" title="Points classification in the Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia#Azzurri d.27Italia classification" label="Azzurri d&amp;#x27;Italia classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q312614" start="7100" end="7119" title="Alessandro Petacchi" label="Alessandro Petacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q735156" start="7386" end="7399" title="Daniele Righi" label="Daniele Righi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362024" wikidata="Q134161" url="?curid=362024" title="Joint-stock company">
<text>A joint-stock company (JSC) is a business entity in which shares of the company&#x27;s stock can be bought and sold by shareholders. Each shareholder owns company stock in proportion, evidenced by their shares (certificates of ownership). Shareholders are able to transfer their shares to others without any effects to the continued existence of the company.

In modern-day corporate law, the existence of a joint-stock company is often synonymous with incorporation (possession of legal personality separate from shareholders) and limited liability (shareholders are liable for the company&#x27;s debts only to the value of the money they have invested in the company). Therefore, joint-stock companies are commonly known as corporations or limited companies.

Some jurisdictions still provide the possibility of registering joint-stock companies without limited liability. In the United Kingdom and in other countries that have adopted its model of company law, they are known as unlimited companies.

A joint-stock company is an artificial person; it has legal existence separate from persons composing it. It can sue and can be sued in its own name. It is created by law, established for commercial purposes, and comprises a large number of members. The shares of each member can be purchased, sold, and transferred without the consent of other members. Its capital is divided into transferable shares, suitable for large undertakings. Joint stock companies have a perpetual succession and a common seal.

==Advantages==
Ownership refers to a large number of privileges. The company is managed on behalf of the shareholders by a board of directors, elected at an annual general meeting.

The shareholders also vote to accept or reject an annual report and audited set of accounts. Individual shareholders can sometimes stand for directorships within the company if a vacancy occurs, but that is uncommon.

A joint-stock company also differs from other company forms, as it lacks internal ownership (hence its shareholders). This means that although the shareholder(s) in the joint-stock company may also work for the company as employees or by contract, when they act as shareholders they are always exterior to the company, which may help keep ownership business-oriented and impersonal.

Provided sales and assets exist within the company, a joint-stock company is effectively a forum for three- party trading: Owners, i.e. shareholders, are seeking financial funds (profits) and offer economic assets, in the form of capital. Employees, contractors and other contracted parties seek compensation and offer labor for this. Utilisers, ie customers, clients and other stakeholders, seek products and services, and offer financial funds for this.

The shareholders are usually not liable for any of the company debts that extend beyond the company&#x27;s ability to pay up to the amount of them.

== Early joint-stock companies ==
=== China ===

The earliest records of joint-stock companies appear in China during the Tang and Song dynasties. The Tang dynasty saw the development of the &quot;heben&quot;, the earliest form of joint stock company with an active partner and one or two passive investors. By the Song dynasty this had expanded into the &quot;douniu&quot;, a large pool of shareholders with management in the hands of &quot;jingshang&quot;, merchants who operated their businesses using investors&#x27; funds, with investor compensation based on profit-sharing, reducing the risk of individual merchants and burdens of interest payment.

=== Europe ===

Finding the earliest joint-stock company is a matter of definition. An early form of joint-stock company was the medieval commenda, although it was usually employed for a single commercial expedition. Around 1350 in France at Toulouse, 96 shares of the &quot;Société des Moulins du Bazacle&quot;, or Bazacle Milling Company were traded at a value that depended on the profitability of the mills the society owned, making it probably the first company of its kind in history. The Swedish company Stora has documented a stock transfer for an eighth of the company (or more specifically, the mountain in which the copper resource was available) as early as 1288.

In more recent history, the earliest joint-stock company recognized in England was the Company of Merchant Adventurers to New Lands, founded in 1551 with 240 shareholders. It became the Muscovy Company, which had a monopoly on trade between Russia and England, when royal charter was granted in 1555. The most notable joint-stock company from the British Isles was the East India Company, which was granted a royal charter by Queen Elizabeth I on December 31, 1600 with the intention of establishing trade on the Indian subcontinent. The charter effectively granted the newly formed &quot;Honourable East India Company&quot; a fifteen-year monopoly on all English trade in the East Indies.

Soon afterwards, in 1602, the Dutch East India Company issued shares that were made tradable on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange. The development enhanced the ability of joint-stock companies to attract capital from investors, as they could now easily dispose of their shares. In 1612, it became the first &#x27;corporation&#x27; in intercontinental trade with &#x27;locked in&#x27; capital and limited liability. The joint-stock company became a more viable financial structure than previous guilds or state-regulated companies. The first joint-stock companies to be implemented in the Americas were the London Company and the Plymouth Company.

Transferable shares aim to achieve positive returns on equity, which is evidenced by investment in companies like the East India Company, which used the financing model to manage their trade on the Indian subcontinent. Joint-stock companies paid out divisions (dividends) to their shareholders by dividing up the profits of the voyage in the proportion of shares held. Divisions were usually cash, but when working capital was low and detrimental to the survival of the company, divisions were either postponed or paid out in remaining cargo, which could be sold by shareholders for profit.

However, in general, incorporation was possible by royal charter or private act, and it was limited because of the government&#x27;s jealous protection of the privileges and advantages thereby granted.

As a result of the rapid expansion of capital-intensive enterprises in the course of the Industrial Revolution in Europe and the United States, many businesses came to be operated as unincorporated associations or extended partnerships, with large numbers of members. Nevertheless, membership of such associations was usually for a short term so their nature was constantly changing.

Consequently, registration and incorporation of companies, without specific legislation, was introduced by the Joint Stock Companies Act 1844. Initially, companies incorporated under this Act did not have limited liability, but it became common for companies to include a limited liability clause in their internal rules. In the case of &quot;Hallett v Dowdall&quot;, the Court of the Exchequer held that such clauses bound people who have notice of them. Four years later, the Joint Stock Companies Act 1856 provided for limited liability for all joint-stock companies provided, among other things, that they included the word &quot;limited&quot; in their company name. The landmark case of &quot;Salomon v A Salomon &amp; Co Ltd&quot; established that a company with legal liability, not being a partnership, had a distinct legal personality that was separate from that of its individual shareholders.

==Corporate law==
The existence of a corporation requires a special legal framework and body of law that specifically grants the corporation legal personality, and it typically views a corporation as a fictional person, a legal person, or a moral person (as opposed to a natural person) which shields its owners (shareholders) from &quot;corporate&quot; losses or liabilities; losses are limited to the number of shares owned. It furthermore creates an inducement to new investors (marketable stocks and future stock issuance). Corporate statutes typically empower corporations to own property, sign binding contracts, and pay taxes in a capacity separate from that of its shareholders, who are sometimes referred to as &quot;members&quot;. The corporation is also empowered to borrow money, both conventionally and directly to the public, by issuing interest-bearing bonds. Corporations subsist indefinitely; &quot;death&quot; comes only by absorption (takeover) or bankruptcy. According to Lord Chancellor Haldane,

This &#x27;directing will&#x27; is embodied in a corporate Board of Directors. The legal personality has two economic implications. It grants creditors (as opposed to shareholders or employees) priority over the corporate assets upon liquidation. Second, corporate assets cannot be withdrawn by its shareholders, and assets of the firm cannot be taken by personal creditors of its shareholders. The second feature requires special legislation and a special legal framework, as it cannot be reproduced via standard contract law.

The regulations most favorable to incorporation include:

===Financial disclosure===
In many jurisdictions, corporations whose shareholders benefit from limited liability are required to publish annual financial statements and other data so that creditors who do business with the corporation are able to assess the creditworthiness of the corporation and cannot enforce claims against shareholders. Shareholders, therefore, experience some loss of privacy in return for limited liability. That requirement generally applies in Europe, but not in common law jurisdictions, except for publicly traded corporations (for which financial disclosure is required for investor protection).

===Corporate taxation===
In many countries, corporate profits are taxed at a corporate tax rate, and dividends paid to shareholders are taxed at a separate rate. Such a system is sometimes referred to as &quot;double taxation&quot; because any profits distributed to shareholders will eventually be taxed twice. One solution, followed by as in the case of the Australian and UK tax systems, is for the recipient of the dividend to be entitled to a tax credit to address the fact that the profits represented by the dividend have already been taxed. The company profit being passed on is thus effectively taxed only at the rate of tax paid by the eventual recipient of the dividend.

In other systems, dividends are taxed at a lower rate than other income (for example, in the US), or shareholders are taxed directly on the corporation&#x27;s profits, while dividends are not taxed (for example, S corporations in the US).

==Closely held corporations and publicly traded corporations==

The institution most often referenced by the word &quot;corporation&quot; is publicly traded, which means that the company&#x27;s shares are traded on a public stock exchange (for example, the New York Stock Exchange or Nasdaq in the United States) whose shares of stock of corporations are bought and sold by and to the general public. Most of the largest businesses in the world are publicly traded corporations.

However, the majority of corporations are privately held, or closely held, so there is no ready market for the trading of shares. Many such corporations are owned and managed by a small group of businesspeople or companies, but the size of such a corporation can be as vast as the largest public corporations.

Closely held corporations have some advantages over publicly traded corporations. A small, closely held company can often make company-changing decisions much more rapidly than a publicly traded company, as there will generally be fewer voting shareholders, and the shareholders would have common interests. A publicly traded company is also at the mercy of the market, with capital flow in and out based not only on what the company is doing but also on what the market and even what the competitors, major and minor, are doing.

However, publicly traded companies also have advantages over their closely held counterparts. Publicly traded companies often have more working capital and can delegate debt throughout all shareholders. Therefore, shareholders of publicly traded company will each take a much smaller hit to their returns as opposed to those involved with a closely held corporation. Publicly traded companies, however, can suffer from that advantage. A closely held corporation can often voluntarily take a hit to profit with little to no repercussions if it is not a sustained loss. A publicly traded company often comes under extreme scrutiny if profit and growth are not evident to stock holders, thus stock holders may sell, further damaging the company. Often, that blow is enough to make a small public company fail.

Often, communities benefit from a closely held company more so than from a public company. A closely held company is far more likely to stay in a single place that has treated it well even if that means going through hard times. Shareholders can incur some of the damage the company may receive from a bad year or slow period in the company profits. Closely held companies often have a better relationship with workers. In larger, publicly traded companies, often after only one bad year, the first area to feel the effects is the workforce with layoffs or worker hours, wages or benefits being cut. Again, in a closely held business the shareholders can incur the profit damage rather than passing it to the workers.

The affairs of publicly traded and closely held corporations are similar in many respects. The main difference in most countries is that publicly traded corporations have the burden of complying with additional securities laws, which (especially in the US) may require additional periodic disclosure (with more stringent requirements), stricter corporate governance standards as well as additional procedural obligations in connection with major corporate transactions (for example, mergers) or events (for example, elections of directors).

A closely held corporation may be a subsidiary of another corporation (its parent company), which may itself be either a closely held or a public corporation. In some jurisdictions, the subsidiary of a listed public corporation is also defined as a public corporation (for example, in Australia).

==By countries==

===Australia===
In Australia corporations are registered and regulated by the Commonwealth Government through the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. Corporations law has been largely codified in the Corporations Act 2001.

===Brazil===
In Brazil there are many different types of legal entities (&#x27;), but the two most common ones commercially speaking are (i) &#x27;, identified by &quot;Ltda.&quot; or &quot;Limitada&quot; after the company&#x27;s name, equivalent to the British limited liability company, and (ii) &#x27; or &#x27;, identified by &quot;SA&quot; or &quot;Companhia&quot; in the company&#x27;s name, equivalent to the British public limited company. The &quot;Ltda.&quot; is mainly governed by the new Civil Code, enacted in 2002, and the &quot;SA&quot;, by Law 6.404, dated December 15, 1976, as amended.

===Bosnia and Herzegovina===
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a joint-stock company is called:
* (often abbreviated d.d. or D.D.) in both the Bosnian language and the Croatian language, while the Serbian language uses:
* (often abbreviated a.d. or A.D. - Cyrillic alphabet : акционарско друштво or а.д.).

The specified form of organization means that the company (private or state-owned) is organized on the Bosnian market (Federation of BiH and RS entity level) as a legal entity that has shares (Bosnian/Croatian: dionica or &quot;vrijednosni papir&quot;; Serbian: akcija or &quot;hartija od vrijednosti&quot; - Cyrillic: акција or хартија од вриједности) that can be traded in a free market or stock exchanges in the Bosnia and Herzegovina (listed in Sarajevo Stock Exchange or Banja Luka Stock Exchange).

===Bulgaria===
In Bulgaria, a joint-stock company is called a &#x27; or &#x27; ( or ). When all shares are owned by a single shareholder the company receives the special designation of &#x27; or &#x27; ( or ).

===Canada===
In Canada both the federal government and the provinces have corporate statutes, and thus a corporation may be incorporated either provincially or federally. Many older corporations in Canada stem from Acts of Parliament passed before the introduction of general corporation law. The oldest corporation in Canada is the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company; though its business has always been based in Canada, its Royal Charter was issued in England by King Charles II in 1670, and became a Canadian charter by amendment in 1970 when it moved its corporate headquarters from London to Canada. Federally recognized corporations are regulated by the &quot;Canada Business Corporations Act&quot;.

===Chile===
The Chilean form of joint-stock company is called &quot;Sociedad por Acciones&quot; (often abbreviated &quot;SpA&quot;). They were created in 2007 by Law N° 20.190, and they are the most recent variety of societary types, as they represent a simplified form of corporation – originally conceived for venture capital companies.

According to the Ministry of Economy&#x27;s Business and Society Registry, SpAs accounted for 71.42% of new businesses in October 2023.

===Czech Republic and Slovakia===
The Czech form of the public limited company is called &#x27; (&#x27;) and its private counterpart is called &#x27; (&#x27;).
Their Slovak equivalents are called &#x27; (&#x27;) and &#x27; (&#x27;).

===German-speaking countries===
Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein recognize two forms of company limited by shares: the (AG), analogous to public limited companies (or corporations in US/Can) in the English-speaking world, and the (GmbH), similar to the modern private limited company.

===Italy===
Italy recognizes three types of company limited by shares: the public limited company (&quot;società per azioni&quot;, or S.p.A.), the private limited company (&quot;società a responsabilità limitata&quot;, or S.r.l.), and the publicly traded partnership (&quot;società in accomandita per azioni&quot;, or S.a.p.a.). The latter is a hybrid of the limited partnership and public limited company, having two categories of shareholders, some with and some without limited liability, and is rarely used in practice.

===Japan===
In Japan, both the state and local public entities under the Local Autonomy Act (now 47 prefectures, made in the 19th century and municipalities) are considered to be . Non-profit corporations may be established under the Civil Code.

The term or (企業 &quot;kigyō&quot;) is used to refer to business corporations. The predominant form is the &quot;Kabushiki gaisha&quot; (株式会社), used by public corporations as well as smaller enterprises. &quot;Mochibun kaisha&quot; (持分会社), a form for smaller enterprises, are becoming increasingly common. Between 2002 and 2008, the existed to bridge the gap between for-profit companies and non-governmental and non-profit organizations.

=== Latvia ===
In Latvia, which uses a model similar to Germany, a public stock company is called an &quot;akciju sabiedrība&quot; (a/s, A/S or AS), whereas a private, &#x27;limited liability company&#x27; is called a &quot;sabiedrība ar ierobežotu atbildību&quot; (SIA). State-owned variants of these companies add an initial capital V (&quot;valsts&quot; - &#x27;state&#x27;), as in VAS and VSIA.

===Netherlands===
===Norway===
In Norway, a joint-stock company is called an &quot;aksjeselskap&quot;, abbreviated &quot;AS&quot;. A special and by far less common form of joint-stock companies, intended for companies with a large number of shareholders, is the publicly traded joint-stock companies, called &quot;allmennaksjeselskap&quot; and abbreviated &quot;ASA&quot;. A joint-stock company must be incorporated, has an independent legal personality and limited liability, and is required to have a certain capital upon incorporation. Ordinary joint-stock companies must have a minimum capital of NOK 30,000 upon incorporation, which was reduced from 100,000 in 2012. Publicly traded joint-stock companies must have a minimum capital of NOK 1 million.

===Russia===
See: Open joint-stock company (OJSC).

===Spain===

In Spain there are two types of companies with limited liability: (i) &quot;S.L.&quot;, or &quot;Sociedad Limitada&quot; (a private limited company), and (ii) &quot;S.A.&quot;, or &quot;Sociedad Anónima&quot; (similar to a public limited company).

=== Ukraine ===
The Ukrainian form of the private limited company is called товариство з обмеженою відповідальністю: ТОВ () or ТзОВ (), : &quot;partnership with limited liability&quot;.

Several types of joint stock companies (, &quot;&quot;) exist in Ukraine. Due to specifics of the Soviet economy, all enterprises in the Soviet republic as the rest of the Soviet Union were state owned and private entrepreneurship was strictly prohibited and criminally prosecuted. Following the Gorbachev initiated broad spectrum reforms (perestroika), there was introduced a term of khozraschet and permission for organization of public economic entities called cooperatives.

Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine&#x27;s economy, along with those of the rest of the former Soviet republics, was further liberalized. Along with private entrepreneurship, many state owned companies were privatized, primarily by the former party&#x27;s apparatchiks which gave a rise of another term &quot;Red directors&quot;. Many companies started to be sold at open market and commercialized. Those companies were transformed in joint-stock companies by selling their shares for mutual cooperation and investment.

As in the rest former Soviet republics (predominantly Russia) in Ukraine were created following commercial companies:
* National joint-stock company, NJSC () 
* Open joint-stock company, OJSC () 
* Closed joint-stock company, CJSC () 

In 2009 further reforms were introduced and open joint-stock companies were forced to be restructured as public joint-stock company (, &#x27;) or private joint-stock company (, &#x27;).

Minimum amount of share capital is 1,250 minimum wages (as of 1 January 2017 ₴4,000,000 or US$148,000).

Ukraine National Securities and Stock Market Commission is the main stock market state authority.

===United Kingdom===
Most companies are regulated by the Companies Act 2006. The most common type of company is the private limited company (&quot;Limited&quot; or &quot;Ltd&quot;). Private limited companies can either be limited by shares or by guarantee. Other corporate forms include the public limited company (&quot;plc&quot;) and the private unlimited company.

Some corporations, both public and private sector, are formed by Royal Charter or Act of Parliament.

A special type of corporation is a corporation sole, which is an office held by an individual natural person (the incumbent), but which has a continuing legal entity separate from that person.

===United States===
Several types of conventional corporations exist in the United States. Generically, any business entity that is recognized as distinct from the people who own it (i.e., is not a sole proprietorship or a partnership) is a corporation. This generic label includes entities that are known by such legal labels as &#x27;association&#x27;, &#x27;organization&#x27; and &#x27;limited liability company&#x27;, as well as corporations proper.

Only a company that has been formally incorporated according to the laws of a particular state is called a &quot;corporation.&quot; A corporation was defined in the Dartmouth College case of 1819, in which Chief Justice Marshall of the United States Supreme Court stated: &quot;A corporation is an artificial being, invisible, intangible, and existing only in contemplation of the law.&quot; A corporation is a legal entity, distinct and separate from the individuals who create and operate it. As a legal entity the corporation can acquire, own, and dispose of property in its own name like buildings, land and equipment. It can also incur liabilities and enter into contracts like franchising and leasing. American corporations can be either profit-making companies or non-profit entities. Tax-exempt non-profit corporations are often called &quot;501(c)3 corporations,&quot; after the section of the Internal Revenue Code that addresses the tax exemption for many of them.

In some states, such as Colorado, a corporation may represent itself pro se in courts of law in some situations.

The federal government can only create corporate entities pursuant to relevant powers in the U.S. Constitution. Thus, virtually all corporations in the U.S. are incorporated under the laws of a particular state. A major exception to the federal non-participation in the incorporation of private businesses is in banking; under the National Bank Act, banks may receive charters from the federal government as national banks, subjecting them to the regulation of the federal Office of the Comptroller of the Currency rather than state banking regulators.

All states have some kind of &quot;general corporation law&quot; (California, Delaware, Kansas, Nevada and Ohio actually use that exact name) which authorizes the formation of private corporations &quot;without&quot; having to obtain a charter for each one from the state legislature (as was formerly the case in the 19th century). Many states have separate, self-contained laws authorizing the formation and operation of certain specific types of corporations that are wholly independent of the state general corporation law. For example, in California, nonprofit corporations are incorporated under the Nonprofit Corporation Law, and in Illinois, insurers are incorporated under the Illinois Insurance Code.

Corporations are created by filing the requisite documents with a particular state government. The process is called &quot;incorporation&quot;, referring to the abstract concept of clothing the entity with a &quot;veil&quot; of artificial personhood (embodying, or &quot;corporating&quot; it, &#x27;corpus&#x27; being the Latin word for &#x27;body&#x27;). Only certain corporations, including banks, are chartered. Others simply file their articles of incorporation with the state government as part of a registration process.

Once incorporated, a corporation has artificial personhood everywhere it may operate, until such time as the corporation may be dissolved. A corporation that operates in one state while being incorporated in another is a &quot;foreign corporation&quot;. This label also applies to corporations incorporated outside of the United States. Foreign corporations must usually register with the secretary of state&#x27;s office in each state to lawfully conduct business in that state.

A corporation is legally a citizen of the state (or other jurisdiction) in which it is incorporated (except when circumstances direct the corporation be classified as a citizen of the state in which it has its head office, or the state in which it does the majority of its business). Corporate business law differs dramatically from state to state. Many prospective corporations choose to incorporate in a state whose laws are most favorable to its business interests. Many large corporations are incorporated in Delaware, for example, without being physically located there because that state has very favorable corporate tax and disclosure laws.

Companies set up for privacy or asset protection often incorporate in Nevada, which does not require disclosure of share ownership. Many states, particularly smaller ones, have modeled their corporate statutes after the Model Business Corporation Act, one of many model sets of law prepared and published by the American Bar Association.

As juristic persons, corporations have certain rights that attach to natural persons. The vast majority of them attach to corporations under state law, especially the law of the state in which the company is incorporated – since the corporations very existence is predicated on the laws of that state. A few rights also attach by federal constitutional and statutory law, but they are few and far between compared to the rights of natural persons. For example, a corporation has the personal right to bring a lawsuit (as well as the capacity to be sued) and, like a natural person, a corporation can be libeled. 

Harvard College, an undergraduate school of Harvard University, formally the President and Fellows of Harvard College (also known as the Harvard Corporation), is the oldest corporation in the western hemisphere. Founded in 1636, the second of Harvard&#x27;s two governing boards was incorporated by the Great and General Court of Massachusetts in 1650. Significantly, Massachusetts itself was a corporate colony at that time – owned and operated by the Massachusetts Bay Company (until it lost its charter in 1684) – so Harvard College is a corporation created by a corporation.

Many nations have modeled their own corporate laws on American business law. Corporate law in Saudi Arabia, for example, follows the model of New York State corporate law. In addition to typical corporations in the United States, the federal government, in 1971 passed the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA), which authorized the creation of 12 regional native corporations for Alaska Natives and over 200 village corporations that were entitled to a settlement of land and cash. In addition to the 12 regional corporations, the legislation permitted a 13th regional corporation without a land settlement for those Alaska Natives living out of the State of Alaska at the time of passage of ANCSA.

==Other business entities==
Almost every recognized type of organization carries out some economic activities (for example, the family). Other organizations that may carry out activities that are generally considered to be &quot;business&quot; exist under the laws of various countries:
*Consumers&#x27; cooperative
*Holding company
*Limited company (Ltd)
*Limited liability company (LLC)
*Limited liability limited partnership (LLLP)
*Limited liability partnership (LLP)
*Limited partnership (LP)
*Low-profit limited liability company (L3C)
*Not-for-profit corporation
*Open joint-stock company (OJSC)
*Partnership
*Sole proprietorship
*Trust company

== See also ==

*Aktieselskab
*Public–private partnership

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* The History of the Corporate Business Firm (PDF; archived copy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="2" end="21" title="Joint-stock company" label="joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="33" end="48" title="business entity" label="business entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="87" end="92" title="capital stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="119" end="130" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="203" end="209" title="share (finance)" label="shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169556" start="323" end="342" title="Perpetual succession" label="continued existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609670" start="374" end="387" title="corporate law" label="corporate law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178478" start="453" end="466" title="incorporation (business)" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="482" end="499" title="legal personality" label="legal personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q568338" start="532" end="549" title="limited liability" label="limited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="726" end="737" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="742" end="759" title="limited company" label="limited companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982983" start="767" end="779" title="jurisdiction (area)" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="882" end="896" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152511" start="982" end="1001" title="unlimited company" label="unlimited companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="3022" end="3026" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="3031" end="3045" title="Song Dynasty" label="Song dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q104815080" start="3694" end="3702" title="commenda" label="commenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3788" end="3794" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="3798" end="3806" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212861" start="3872" end="3895" title="Bazacle Milling Company" label="Bazacle Milling Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4051" end="4058" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q747265" start="4067" end="4072" title="Stora" label="Stora"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="4183" end="4189" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4304" end="4311" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625240" start="4320" end="4364" title="Company of Merchant Adventurers to New Lands" label="Company of Merchant Adventurers to New Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765656" start="4419" end="4434" title="Muscovy Company" label="Muscovy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="4474" end="4480" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4485" end="4492" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="4499" end="4512" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4580" end="4593" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="4602" end="4620" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="4642" end="4655" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4659" end="4676" title="Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="4746" end="4765" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="4873" end="4881" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="4910" end="4921" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="4954" end="4978" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5024" end="5048" title="Euronext#Amsterdam (1602–2000)" label="Amsterdam Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="5413" end="5418" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="5507" end="5515" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="5525" end="5539" title="London Company" label="London Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q917078" start="5548" end="5564" title="Plymouth Company" label="Plymouth Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="5622" end="5628" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="5765" end="5784" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q823288" start="5974" end="5989" title="working capital" label="working capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178478" start="6180" end="6193" title="Incorporation (business)" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="6210" end="6223" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664265" start="6227" end="6238" title="Local and Personal Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom" label="private act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="6451" end="6472" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867431" start="6545" end="6571" title="unincorporated association" label="unincorporated association"/>
<link wikidata="Q728646" start="6585" end="6596" title="partnership" label="partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269405" start="6858" end="6888" title="Joint Stock Companies Act 1844" label="Joint Stock Companies Act 1844"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7090" end="7107" title="Hallett v Dowdall" label="Hallett v Dowdall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137765" start="7119" end="7141" title="Court of the Exchequer" label="Court of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269407" start="7225" end="7255" title="Joint Stock Companies Act 1856" label="Joint Stock Companies Act 1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405647" start="7445" end="7477" title="Salomon v A Salomon &amp;amp; Co Ltd" label="Salomon v A Salomon &amp;amp; Co Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="7573" end="7590" title="legal personality" label="legal personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="8644" end="8659" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q334078" start="8660" end="8667" title="Richard Haldane, 1st Viscount Haldane" label="Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178478" start="9233" end="9246" title="incorporation (business)" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="9401" end="9421" title="financial statements" label="financial statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="9746" end="9756" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242836" start="10093" end="10108" title="double taxation" label="double taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901333" start="10778" end="10791" title="S corporation" label="S corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="10947" end="10962" title="publicly held company" label="publicly traded"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="11063" end="11086" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="11090" end="11096" title="Nasdaq" label="Nasdaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="11328" end="11342" title="Privately held company" label="privately held"/>
<link wikidata="Q823288" start="12264" end="12279" title="working capital" label="working capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="14233" end="14243" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="14272" end="14286" title="parent company" label="parent company"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="14482" end="14491" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="14532" end="14541" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056092" start="14627" end="14675" title="Australian Securities and Investments Commission" label="Australian Securities and Investments Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172546" start="14727" end="14748" title="Corporations Act 2001" label="Corporations Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="14767" end="14773" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="15388" end="15410" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="15492" end="15508" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="15517" end="15534" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="15546" end="15562" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="15605" end="15622" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="15715" end="15722" title="Private companies" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="15726" end="15737" title="State-owned enterprise" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778260" start="15759" end="15773" title="Economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian market"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="15841" end="15847" title="Share (finance)" label="shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="15965" end="15973" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47057" start="16105" end="16128" title="Sarajevo Stock Exchange" label="Sarajevo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384000" start="16132" end="16157" title="Banja Luka Stock Exchange" label="Banja Luka Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="16179" end="16187" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="16388" end="16394" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="16431" end="16439" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="16587" end="16605" title="Act of Parliament" label="Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="16705" end="16730" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="16789" end="16802" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="16828" end="16843" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029320" start="17029" end="17061" title="Canada Business Corporations Act" label="Canada Business Corporations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="17086" end="17091" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="17585" end="17590" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="17713" end="17719" title="Slovakia" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="17813" end="17820" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="17822" end="17829" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="17831" end="17842" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="17847" end="17860" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="17934" end="17958" title="public limited company" label="public limited companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17376040" start="18056" end="18079" title="private limited company" label="private limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="18094" end="18099" title="Italian Republic" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="18157" end="18179" title="public limited company" label="public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742388" start="18187" end="18205" title="società per azioni" label="società per azioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17376040" start="18229" end="18252" title="private limited company" label="private limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q909695" start="18441" end="18460" title="limited partnership" label="limited partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="18622" end="18627" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480675" start="18680" end="18698" title="Local Autonomy Act" label="Local Autonomy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q50337" start="18704" end="18718" title="Prefectures of Japan" label="47 prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054813" start="18749" end="18763" title="municipalities of Japan" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923776" start="18841" end="18851" title="Civil Code" label="Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480166" start="18966" end="18982" title="Kabushiki gaisha" label="Kabushiki gaisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887575" start="19063" end="19078" title="Mochibun kaisha" label="Mochibun kaisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="19311" end="19317" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740306" start="19400" end="19417" title="akciju sabiedrība" label="akciju sabiedrība"/>
<link wikidata="Q13641190" start="20468" end="20492" title="Open joint-stock company" label="Open joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="20518" end="20523" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="20647" end="20662" title="limited company" label="limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="20738" end="20760" title="public limited company" label="public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="20784" end="20793" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17376040" start="20806" end="20829" title="private limited company" label="private limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="20908" end="20942" title="limited liability company" label="partnership with limited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="21016" end="21023" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21123" end="21135" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="21291" end="21302" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663010" start="21336" end="21347" title="khozraschet" label="khozraschet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="21444" end="21475" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q376962" start="21705" end="21716" title="apparatchik" label="apparatchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="22484" end="22487" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155400" start="22654" end="22672" title="Companies Act 2006" label="Companies Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="22721" end="22736" title="limited company" label="limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="22888" end="22910" title="public limited company" label="public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152511" start="22945" end="22962" title="unlimited company" label="unlimited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172541" start="23102" end="23118" title="corporation sole" label="corporation sole"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="23337" end="23350" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196738" start="23882" end="23904" title="Dartmouth College case" label="Dartmouth College case"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="23923" end="23945" title="Chief Justice Marshall" label="Chief Justice Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="23953" end="23980" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666281" start="24620" end="24641" title="Internal Revenue Code" label="Internal Revenue Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246798" start="24763" end="24769" title="pro se" label="pro se"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="24812" end="24830" title="government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="24901" end="24918" title="United States Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="25120" end="25124" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184853" start="25139" end="25156" title="National Bank Act" label="National Bank Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803020" start="25216" end="25229" title="National bank (United States)" label="national bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881026" start="25281" end="25322" title="Office of the Comptroller of the Currency" label="Office of the Comptroller of the Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253299" start="27595" end="27603" title="Delaware corporation" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="27752" end="27759" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="27801" end="27807" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888224" start="27951" end="27981" title="Model Business Corporation Act" label="Model Business Corporation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="28043" end="28067" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q155076" start="28073" end="28089" title="juristic persons" label="juristic persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="28684" end="28699" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="28728" end="28746" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241254" start="28761" end="28801" title="President and Fellows of Harvard College" label="President and Fellows of Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="28987" end="29027" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Great and General Court of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="29358" end="29370" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="29537" end="29572" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="29651" end="29665" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="29921" end="29936" title="State of Alaska" label="State of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395324" start="30099" end="30105" title="family business" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q614084" start="30259" end="30286" title="Consumers&amp;#x27; cooperative" label="Consumers&amp;#x27; cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="30288" end="30303" title="Holding company" label="Holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="30305" end="30320" title="Limited company" label="Limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="30328" end="30353" title="Limited liability company" label="Limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549542" start="30361" end="30398" title="Limited liability limited partnership" label="Limited liability limited partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588658" start="30407" end="30436" title="Limited liability partnership" label="Limited liability partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q909695" start="30444" end="30463" title="Limited partnership" label="Limited partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998920" start="30470" end="30506" title="Low-profit limited liability company" label="Low-profit limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084016" start="30514" end="30540" title="Not-for-profit corporation" label="Not-for-profit corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13641190" start="30542" end="30566" title="Open joint-stock company" label="Open joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q728646" start="30575" end="30586" title="Partnership" label="Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912172" start="30588" end="30607" title="Sole proprietorship" label="Sole proprietorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8303885" start="30609" end="30622" title="Trust company" label="Trust company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624520" start="30641" end="30653" title="Aktieselskab" label="Aktieselskab"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="30655" end="30681" title="Public–private partnership" label="Public–private partnership"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362025" wikidata="Q583234" url="?curid=362025" title="Active noise control">
<text>Active noise control (ANC), also known as noise cancellation (NC), or active noise reduction (ANR), is a method for reducing unwanted sound by the addition of a second sound specifically designed to cancel the first. The concept was first developed in the late 1930s; later developmental work that began in the 1950s eventually resulted in commercial airline headsets with the technology becoming available in the late 1980s. The technology is also used in road vehicles, mobile telephones, earbuds, and headphones.

== Explanation ==
Sound is a pressure wave, which consists of alternating periods of compression and rarefaction. A noise-cancellation speaker emits a sound wave with the same amplitude but with an inverted phase (also known as antiphase) relative to the original sound. The waves combine to form a new wave, in a process called interference, and effectively cancel each other out – an effect which is called destructive interference.

Modern active noise control is generally achieved through the use of analog circuits or digital signal processing. Adaptive algorithms are designed to analyze the waveform of the background aural or nonaural noise, then based on the specific algorithm generate a signal that will either phase shift or invert the polarity of the original signal. This inverted signal (in antiphase) is then amplified and a transducer creates a sound wave directly proportional to the amplitude of the original waveform, creating destructive interference. This effectively reduces the volume of the perceivable noise.

A noise-cancellation speaker may be co-located with the sound source to be attenuated. In this case, it must have the same audio power level as the source of the unwanted sound in order to cancel the noise. Alternatively, the transducer emitting the cancellation signal may be located at the location where sound attenuation is wanted (e.g. the user&#x27;s ear). This requires a much lower power level for cancellation but is effective only for a single user. Noise cancellation at other locations is more difficult as the three-dimensional wavefronts of the unwanted sound and the cancellation signal could match and create alternating zones of constructive and destructive interference, reducing noise in some spots while doubling noise in others. In small enclosed spaces (e.g. the passenger compartment of a car) global noise reduction can be achieved via multiple speakers and feedback microphones, and measurement of the modal responses of the enclosure.

== Applications ==
Applications can be &quot;1-dimensional&quot; or 3-dimensional, depending on the type of zone to protect. Periodic sounds, even complex ones, are easier to cancel than random sounds due to the repetition in the waveform.

Protection of a &quot;1-dimension zone&quot; is easier and requires only one or two microphones and speakers to be effective. Several commercial applications have been successful: noise-canceling headphones, active mufflers, anti-snoring devices, vocal or center channel extraction for karaoke machines, and the control of noise in air conditioning ducts. The term &quot;1-dimension&quot; refers to a simple pistonic relationship between the noise and the active speaker (mechanical noise reduction) or between the active speaker and the listener (headphones).

Protection of a 3-dimensional zone requires many microphones and speakers, making it more expensive. Noise reduction is more easily achieved with a single listener remaining stationary but if there are multiple listeners or if the single listener turns their head or moves throughout the space then the noise reduction challenge is made much more difficult. High-frequency waves are difficult to reduce in three dimensions due to their relatively short audio wavelength in air. The wavelength in air of sinusoidal noise at approximately 800 Hz is double the distance of the average person&#x27;s left ear to the right ear; such a noise coming directly from the front will be easily reduced by an active system but coming from the side will tend to cancel at one ear while being reinforced at the other, making the noise louder, not softer. High-frequency sounds above 1000 Hz tend to cancel and reinforce unpredictably from many directions. In sum, the most effective noise reduction in three-dimensional space involves low-frequency sounds. Commercial applications of 3-D noise reduction include the protection of aircraft cabins and car interiors, but in these situations, protection is mainly limited to the cancellation of repetitive (or periodic) noise such as engine-, propeller- or rotor-induced noise. This is because an engine&#x27;s cyclic nature makes analysis and noise cancellation easier to apply.

Modern mobile phones use a multi-microphone design to cancel out ambient noise from the speech signal. Sound is captured from the microphone(s) furthest from the mouth (the noise signal(s)) and from the one closest to the mouth (the desired signal). The signals are processed to cancel the noise from the desired signal, producing improved voice sound quality.

In some cases, noise can be controlled by employing active vibration control. This approach is appropriate when the vibration of a structure produces unwanted noise by coupling the vibration into the surrounding air or water.

== Active vis-à-vis passive noise control ==
&quot;Noise control&quot; is an active or passive means of reducing sound emissions, often for personal comfort, environmental considerations, or legal compliance. &quot;Active&quot; noise control is sound reduction using a power source. &quot;Passive&quot; noise control is sound reduction by noise-isolating materials such as insulation, sound-absorbing tiles, or a muffler rather than a power source.

Active noise canceling is best suited for low frequencies. For higher frequencies, the spacing requirements for free space and zone of silence techniques become prohibitive. In acoustic cavity and duct-based systems, the number of nodes grows rapidly with increasing frequency, which quickly makes active noise control techniques unmanageable. Passive treatments become more effective at higher frequencies and often provide an adequate solution without the need for active control.

== History ==

The first patent for a noise control system——was granted to inventor Paul Lueg in 1936. The patent described how to cancel sinusoidal tones in ducts by phase-advancing the wave and canceling arbitrary sounds in the region around a loudspeaker by inverting the polarity. In the 1950s Lawrence J. Fogel patented systems to cancel the noise in helicopter and airplane cockpits. In 1957 Willard Meeker developed a working model of active noise control applied to a circumaural earmuff. This headset had an active attenuation bandwidth of approximately 50–500 Hz, with a maximum attenuation of approximately 20 dB. By the late 1980s the first commercially available active noise reduction headsets became available. They could be powered by NiCad batteries or directly from the aircraft power system.

== See also ==
*Active sound design
*Adaptive noise cancelling
*Coherence (physics)
*Noise-canceling microphone

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==
*BYU physicists quiet fans in computers, office equipment
* Anti-Noise, Quieting the Environment with Active Noise Cancellation Technology, &quot;IEEE Potentials&quot;, April 1992
*Christopher E. Ruckman&#x27;s ANC FAQ (This page was created in 1994 and maintained until approximately 2010, but is no longer active.)
*Waves of Silence: Digisonix, active noise control, and the digital revolution </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="0" end="20" title="Active noise control" label="Active noise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="22" end="25" title="Active noise control" label="ANC"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="42" end="60" title="Active noise control" label="noise cancellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="62" end="64" title="Active noise control" label="NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="70" end="92" title="Active noise control" label="active noise reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q583234" start="94" end="97" title="Active noise control" label="ANR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="134" end="139" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="340" end="358" title="commercial airline" label="commercial airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193170" start="359" end="367" title="Headset (audio)" label="headsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="472" end="488" title="mobile telephone" label="mobile telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="504" end="514" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208908" start="546" end="559" title="P-wave" label="pressure wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="602" end="613" title="Compression (physical)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294544" start="618" end="629" title="rarefaction" label="rarefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="693" end="702" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="745" end="754" title="antiphase" label="antiphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="846" end="858" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="926" end="950" title="destructive interference" label="destructive interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879301" start="967" end="980" title="noise control" label="noise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="1041" end="1066" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q51379" start="1400" end="1412" title="Proportionality (mathematics)" label="proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="1629" end="1639" title="Attenuation" label="attenuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="2445" end="2455" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q653752" start="2937" end="2963" title="noise-canceling headphones" label="noise-canceling headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165721" start="2972" end="2979" title="muffler" label="muffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q205835" start="2987" end="2994" title="snoring" label="snoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="3043" end="3058" title="karaoke machine" label="karaoke machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677595" start="5146" end="5170" title="active vibration control" label="active vibration control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165721" start="5734" end="5741" title="muffler" label="muffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504196" start="6553" end="6570" title="Lawrence J. Fogel" label="Lawrence J. Fogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q898377" start="7006" end="7021" title="Nickel–cadmium battery" label="NiCad batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205148" start="7083" end="7102" title="Active sound design" label="Active sound design"/>
<link wikidata="Q119150052" start="7104" end="7129" title="Adaptive noise cancelling" label="Adaptive noise cancelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="7131" end="7150" title="Coherence (physics)" label="Coherence (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047650" start="7152" end="7178" title="Noise-canceling microphone" label="Noise-canceling microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="7372" end="7376" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362029" wikidata="Q840111" url="?curid=362029" title="Giant order">
<text>In classical architecture, a giant order, also known as colossal order, is an order whose columns or pilasters span two (or more) storeys. At the same time, smaller orders may feature in arcades or window and door framings within the storeys that are embraced by the giant order.

The giant order was rare in antiquity. Vitruvius&#x27; depiction of the lost Basilica of Fanum contains columns spanning two stories. Roman architectural historian Mark Wilson Jones also cites the columns at the Basilica of Pompeii, the Baths of Diocletian, and the Temple of Baachus at Baalbek as early examples of the giant order. To an extent buildings with giant orders resemble a Roman temple adapted for post-classical use, as many were (the survivors have now usually been stripped of later filling-in).

==In Renaissance and Beaux-Arts architecture==

One of the earliest uses of this feature in the Renaissance was at the Basilica of Sant&#x27;Andrea, Mantua, designed by Leon Battista Alberti and begun in 1472; this adapted the Roman triumphal arch to a church facade. From designs by Raphael for his own palazzo in Rome on an island block it seems that all facades were to have a giant order of pilasters rising at least two stories to the full height of the piano nobile, &quot;a grandiloquent feature unprecedented in private palace design&quot;. He appears to have made these in the two years before his death in 1520, which left the building unstarted. It was further developed by Michelangelo at the Palaces on the Capitoline Hill in Rome (1564–1568), where he combined giant pilasters of Corinthian order with small Ionic columns that framed the windows of the upper story and flanked the loggia openings below.

The giant order became a major feature of later 16th century Mannerist architecture, and Baroque architecture. Its use by Andrea Palladio justified its use in the seventeenth century in the movement known as neo-Palladian architecture.

It continued to be used in Beaux-Arts architecture of 1880–1920 as, for example, in New York City&#x27;s James A. Farley Building, which claims the largest giant order Corinthian colonnade in the world.

==Gallery==
==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==
*Michelangelo&#x27;s innovative giant order at the Campidoglio.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="3" end="25" title="classical architecture" label="classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q840111" start="29" end="40" title="Giant order" label="giant order"/>
<link wikidata="Q840111" start="56" end="70" title="Giant order" label="colossal order"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="78" end="83" title="Classical order" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="90" end="96" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="101" end="109" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="187" end="194" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="320" end="329" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="518" end="537" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="Baths of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="666" end="678" title="Roman temple" label="Roman temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="691" end="705" title="Post-classical history" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581882" start="912" end="948" title="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea, Mantua" label="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea, Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="962" end="983" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="1026" end="1040" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="1077" end="1084" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1108" end="1112" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q815421" start="1252" end="1264" title="piano nobile" label="piano nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="1478" end="1490" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="1513" end="1528" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1532" end="1536" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="1587" end="1603" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="1615" end="1620" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466544" start="1688" end="1694" title="loggia" label="loggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="1773" end="1782" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="1801" end="1821" title="Baroque" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="1834" end="1849" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1920" end="1933" title="Palladian architecture#Neo-Palladianism" label="neo-Palladian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="1976" end="1999" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2033" end="2046" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466300" start="2054" end="2078" title="James A. Farley Building" label="James A. Farley Building"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362042" wikidata="Q3276479" url="?curid=362042" title="Tongs">
<text>Tongs are a type of tool used to and objects instead of holding them directly with hands. There are many forms of tongs adapted to their specific use. Design variations include resting points so that the working end of the tongs does not come into contact with a bench surface.

The first pair of tongs belongs to the Egyptians. Tongs likely started off as basic wooden tongs and then over time progressed to bronze bars as early as 3000BC. Over time they progressed to what we now know as modern-day tongs. An Egyptian wall painting from 1450 BCE shows a crucible supported between two metal bars.
# Tongs that have long arms terminating in small flat circular ends of tongs and are pivoted at a joint close to the handle used to handle delicate objects. Common fire-tongs, used for picking up pieces of coal and placing them on a fire without burning fingers or getting them dirty are of this type. Tongs for grilling, and tongs for serving salad or spaghetti are kitchen utensils of the same type. They provide a way to move, rotate and turn the food with delicate precision, or fetch a full serving in one grab.
# Tongs consist a single band of bent metal, as in sugar tongs, most asparagus tongs (which are no longer common) and the like. Sugar tongs are usually silver, with claw-shaped or spoon-shaped ends for serving lump sugar. Asparagus tongs are usually similar but larger, with a band near the head that limits how far the tongs can expand. Asparagus tongs for serving were introduced in 18th-century England, with smaller versions for eating asparagus appearing in the 19th century.
# Tongs in which the pivot or joint is placed close to the gripping ends are used to handle hard and heavy objects. Driller&#x27;s round tongs, blacksmith&#x27;s tongs or crucible tongs are of this type.

A myth contained in the classical Jewish text Pirkei Avot states that the first pair of tongs was created by God right before God rested on the Seventh Day. The reasoning is that a blacksmith must use a pair of tongs in order to fashion a new pair of tongs. Accordingly, God must have provided humankind with the first pair of tongs.
==See also==

*Fire iron
*Food preparation utensils
*Forceps
*Tweezers

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3276479" start="0" end="5" title="Tongs" label="Tongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="20" end="24" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q43471" start="622" end="625" title="arm" label="arm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="662" end="675" title="Friction#Coefficient of friction" label="ends of tongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q200266" start="716" end="722" title="handle (grip)" label="handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="805" end="809" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="832" end="836" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="911" end="919" title="grilling" label="grilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9266" start="943" end="948" title="salad" label="salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026" start="952" end="961" title="spaghetti" label="spaghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773693" start="966" end="981" title="kitchen utensil" label="kitchen utensil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="1154" end="1159" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36256949" start="1167" end="1178" title="sugar tongs" label="sugar tongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="1185" end="1194" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="1618" end="1623" title="lever" label="pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q526016" start="1627" end="1632" title="Joint (mechanics)" label="joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q890886" start="1713" end="1720" title="Drilling and threading" label="Driller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="1741" end="1751" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928827" start="1768" end="1782" title="crucible tongs" label="crucible tongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q740699" start="1848" end="1859" title="Pirkei Avot" label="Pirkei Avot"/>
<link wikidata="Q892774" start="2151" end="2160" title="Fire iron" label="Fire iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q8892" start="2162" end="2187" title="List of food preparation utensils" label="Food preparation utensils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378235" start="2189" end="2196" title="Forceps" label="Forceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q192504" start="2198" end="2206" title="Tweezers" label="Tweezers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362043" wikidata="Q4735065" url="?curid=362043" title="Alpha Kappa Psi">
<text>Alpha Kappa Psi (, often stylized as AKPsi) is the oldest and largest business fraternity to current date. Also known as &quot;AKPsi&quot;, the fraternity was founded on October 5, 1904, at New York University and was incorporated on May 20, 1905. It is currently headquartered in Noblesville, Indiana.

==History==
During the winter months of the 1903–1904 academic year at New York University, the idea of starting a business fraternity was first brought up. One of the founding members later suggested that it was Frederic R. Leach who first developed the idea for formation of a fraternity. Leach and Jefferson, along with Nathan Lane Jr. and George L. Bergen, came to be known as the &quot;Brooklyn Four&quot;. These men grew to be close friends while attending night classes, and they walked home together each night over the Brooklyn Bridge, hence their nickname. As the spirit of brotherhood grew stronger in the hearts and in the minds of the men from Brooklyn, they decided to suggest to the other members of their class that something be done to perpetuate it. They received hearty support from the men approached regarding their idea, and by the end of April 1904, things were beginning to take definite shape. Before the academic term came to a close, a date was set for a meeting to take place at the Hotel Saint Denis in which a plan for the organization would be outlined.

On June 9, 1904, The Brooklyn Four were joined at the Hotel St. Denis by Robert S. Douglas, Irving L. Camp, Daniel V. Duff, Morris S. Rachmil and Herbert M. Wright. William O. Tremaine was to be invited, but he was not in attendance at the meeting, as he later said that the invitation had never reached him. The nine men in attendance were all strongly in favor of forming a fraternity, and many points worthy of being incorporated into a constitution were suggested. The Brooklyn Four were appointed to draft a constitution and present it the next time all of the men met. On July 16, 1904, a group of them traveled by steamer to Sea Cliff, Long Island and, at this meeting, the draft of the constitution was presented. The social aspect of the fraternity was emphasized early on, as Jefferson later recounted, &quot;The greater part of the day, however, was spent in having summer fun, and although the party did no real work on the constitution, yet the friendships were strengthened.&quot;

After university resumed in the fall, a meeting was held on October 5, 1904, in the assembly room at 32 Waverly Place. All ten men, including Tremaine, were present at the October 5 meeting, and the decision was made to officially organize the fraternity along the lines of the constitution that had been presented by the Brooklyn Four. On written ballots, Robert Douglas was elected president, Howard Jefferson was elected secretary and Nathan Lane Jr. was elected treasurer.

In spring 1905, a formal application was made to the State of New York for a charter of incorporation for Alpha Kappa Psi. The application was approved and the charter of incorporation of the &quot;Alpha chapter&quot; was officially issued in the name of Alpha Kappa Psi on May 20, 1905.

===International expansion into Canada===
Alpha Kappa Psi became an international fraternity on Saturday, April 18, 1931, when the &quot;Beta Kappa chapter&quot; was installed at the University of Western Ontario in London, Ontario. The ceremony was held at the Hotel London, and it was conducted by Grand President O. Arthur Kirkman, Grand Secretary-Treasurer J.D. Sparks, District Councilor J.R. Gabell and members of &quot;Phi chapter&quot; of the University of Michigan, &quot;Beta Theta chapter&quot; of Detroit College, and &quot;Beta Iota chapter&quot; of Buffalo.

===Restrictive membership clause===
Membership in Alpha Kappa Psi was originally restricted to men who were &quot;of the Christian faith and Caucasian race&quot;. By 1950, the restrictive clause in the fraternity&#x27;s constitution was beginning to stir controversy on some college campuses. At the 1950 Alpha Kappa Psi Convention in Minnesota, delegates voted 66–44 in favor of dropping the restrictive membership clause from the national constitution.

===Women in ΑΚΨ===
In June 1972, Title IX of the &quot;Education Amendments Act of 1972&quot; was passed and it brought the beginning of the most significant change in the history of Alpha Kappa Psi. Title IX prohibited sex discrimination in federally assisted educational programs and amended parts of the &quot;Civil Rights Act&quot; of 1964. While social fraternities and sororities were exempt from the provisions of Title IX, professional fraternities were included. Around this time, the brothers of the &quot;Delta Chi chapter&quot; at Clarkson University introduced legislation to amend Alpha Kappa Psi&#x27;s Constitution to include women as brothers. While this move did gain the support of a few other chapters, the proposed amendments were easily defeated. In fall 1973, the &quot;Delta Chi chapter&quot; admitted four women into their chapter and soon granted females full rights and privileges, including participation in ritual. Delta Chi went on to elect a female president and attempted to send her to the 1974 national convention as their voting delegate. As a result, Alpha Kappa Psi revoked the charter of the &quot;Delta Chi chapter&quot;. The chapter proceeded by changing its name to Delta Chi Delta aiming to be completely independent from its former counterpart. During the same year, the&quot; Alpha Kappa chapter&quot; at the University of Idaho also admitted women to membership. As a result, Alpha Kappa Psi also moved forward with disciplinary action against the &quot;Alpha Kappa chapter&quot;. Upon having their charter revoked, the former &quot;Alpha Kappa chapter&quot; continued as an independent organization known as Pi Beta Sigma, and the organization&#x27;s advisor remarked, &quot;My sentiments are that if we are being excommunicated from the national because we failed to discriminate against women, then it&#x27;s a pleasure to get kicked out of that organization.&quot;

In December 1973, a complaint was filed with the Office of Civil Rights of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare against thirteen colleges and universities which recognized professional business fraternity chapters. In March 1973, representatives of several organizations formed to push for legislation that would exempt the groups from Title IX as it applied to professional fraternities. Out of these meetings, the Fraternal Alliance for Inalienable Rights (FAIR) was formed, which included Alpha Kappa Psi. FAIR was an inter-fraternity organization designed to seek legislative relief from Title IX. In October 1975, Alpha Kappa Psi initiated a fund drive to combat Title IX. A write-in campaign was also started as an attempt to sway legislators. At the national convention, the Committee on Female Membership moved that the fraternity should bar women, advocating a continuance of the struggle to secure legislation. Such legislation was eventually introduced in 1976, when Senator James McClure sponsored an amendment to S. 2657 of the Education Amendments of 1976 that would have limited the meaning of &quot;education program or activity&quot; to &quot;the curriculum or graduation requirements of the institutions&quot;. Senator Birch Bayh led an opposition that defeated the amendment. The 1975 convention voted the board of directors the authority to change Article III, Section 1 of the Constitution by deletion of the words &quot;must be men and&quot;, if no legislative recourse could be achieved. When it became apparent that legislation would not be approved, the board of directors voted, on August 7, 1976, to admit women into the fraternity.

=== International expansion into the United Kingdom and Hong Kong ===
In March 2000, the board of directors of AKPsi approved expansion of the fraternity into the United Kingdom. As a result, in 2001, new chapters were installed at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), University of Manchester and Manchester Metropolitan University. The installations were led by national president M.C. Moore, chairman of the board David P. Wendroff, foundation vice president R.K. Lee, CEO Gary L. Epperson and five other brothers. This expansion prompted the creation of the 14th region of the fraternity. In 2004, UMIST merged with University of Manchester and, at around the same time, the chapter at Manchester Metropolitan closed, leaving only one university chapter remaining in the UK. As a result, the United Kingdom Region was dissolved and the remaining chapter was moved under the authority of the Mideast Region.

Even though an expansion to London seemed like just a matter of time, as it is the business capital of the world, it finally happened after 16 years from the date of approval of the Manchester chapter. Thus, on 25 November 2016, the Queen Mary Colony was established at Queen Mary University of London. In March 2017, the board of directors approved a new chapter installation, and on March 25, 2017, Queen Mary Colony became &quot;Chi Eta (XH) chapter&quot;, creating, therefore, the first chapter in London, while being the second in the United Kingdom. The installations were led by president Alexander Sultan, executive VP Mike Dickerson, chief operating officer Brian Parker, regional director Jason Weinstein and many volunteers and alumni brothers. 36 founding colonists became brothers, starting a new AKPsi chapter, namely &quot;XH&quot;.

In March 2013, a colony of Alpha Kappa Psi was established at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. On May 18, 2013, it was chartered as the &quot;Chi Phi chapter&quot; of Alpha Kappa Psi. The then-foundation chairman David Wendroff was chief installing officer, assisted by convention chair Wendy Wendroff and local AKPsi alumni.

==Volunteer structure==
Alpha Kappa Psi is managed by a cadre of fraternity volunteers, all of whom are unpaid and provide their time, talent and treasure for the fraternity.

===Board of directors===
The board of directors is the supreme legislative, judicial and oversight body of the fraternity outside of meetings of the chapter congress (held every two years at the convention). The board was originally known as the grand council, and it was made up of the president, vice presidents and regional directors. In 1959, the term &quot;board of directors&quot; replaced &quot;grand council.&quot; In 1995, the present-day structure of the board was formed and the president, vice presidents, and regional director positions were moved out of the board and over to the national management team. The board of directors is now made up of nine alumni, elected for three-year terms, staggering three elected each year. BOD officers are the board chair, vice chair, the secretary, and the treasurer. The chair of the board position is now the highest-ranking officer position of Alpha Kappa Psi, equivalent to the former national president position prior to 1995 and grand president position prior to 1959. As of August 2023, the chair of the board is Michael G. Dickerson.

===Management Team===
The Management Team is made up of the elected and appointed executive-level operational leadership of the fraternity. This body was known as the grand council until 1959, when it became known as the board of directors. In 1995, a separate board of directors was formed, so the president, vice presidents and regional directors then became known as the national management team. In 2005 &quot;National&quot; was dropped from the title to reflect the fraternity&#x27;s international scope, even though the fraternity has actually been international since 1931. Members of the Management Team as of April 1, 2024 include the fraternity president, executive vice president, and four regional directors of volunteer development. The head of the management team is the fraternity president.

*Fraternity President. A fraternity officer, the president is the presiding officer at all meetings of the chapter congress and the management team and has general supervision, direction and control of the business and affairs of the fraternity subject to the direction of the board of directors. The current fraternity president is Corey Reddy.
*Fraternity Executive Vice President. A fraternity officer, the executive vice president (EVP) assists the president and has such other duties as the president may direct. In the absence of the president, the EVP shall serve as president of the fraternity until such time the president can resume his or her duties or until the term of the president&#x27;s office has expired if the president is permanently unable to resume his or her duties. The EVP constitutionally serves as the director of the alumni chapter region of Alpha Kappa Psi. The current fraternity EVP is De&#x27;Sean Keys.
*Regional Director of Volunteer Development (4). Appointed jointly by the fraternity president and the CEO, with approval by the board of directors. Regional Directors of Volunteer Development focus on the Volunteer Development Process in recruiting, onboarding, and delivering training materials to chapter advisors.

===Other volunteer roles===
*Program Manager of Chapter Achievement (12). The PM-CAs focus on coaching and mentoring chapter advisors who work with student officers utilizing the Chapter Achievement Pathway process and chapter operations resources. Chapters are organized into twelve districts, with an approximately equal number of chapters working with one of the PM-CAs.
*Chapter Advisor. Responsible for the proper conduct of the college chapter in all local, regional and fraternity matters, and is accountable to the regional director. In that advisory and representative capacity, it is the chapter advisor&#x27;s duty to report to the regional director any violations of the laws or policies of the fraternity within the college chapter. The chapter advisor is the front-line and most important position in AKPsi, as it has been proved that chapters with a long-term and involved advisor succeed more.

===Foundation Board of Trustees Executive Committee===
The foundation board of trustees executive committee (FBOTEC) manages the Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation. The Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation was established in 1951 as a public, charitable and educational foundation. Its mission is &quot;Providing resources for enhancing the educational experience of future business leaders&quot;. Currently, the foundation distributes more than 30 grants and scholarships to undergraduate and graduate students. It also supports educational programs that develop leadership and professional development skills. The foundation also publishes &quot;The Diary of Alpha Kappa Psi&quot;. The current chair of the foundation board is Tim Daniels.

==Professional staff==
In 1923, Alpha Kappa Psi became the first professional fraternity to have a headquarters facility and, since then, has moved from location to location as the fraternity grew. Today, AKPsi occupies a building near Indianapolis that is the headquarters for both the Alpha Kappa Psi Fraternity and Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation. The two corporations were operating from the Heritage Center from April 2005 until 2021, when they moved to the new Howell + Wendroff Professional Center, which was dedicated in March 2022. The members of the professional staff of Alpha Kappa Psi are the fraternity&#x27;s only full-time paid employees. Working collaboratively with the members of the fraternity management team, the fraternity office staff are a source of input, advice and feedback to the board of directors, and implements programs in the areas of education, marketing, membership growth and general fraternal development for students, alumni and volunteers. C. Steven Hartman was appointed Chief Executive Officer in 2013.

==Leadership programs==
===Principled Business Leadership Institute===
The Principled Business Leadership Institute (PBLI) is an annual weekend program held each February in five cities across the United States. PBLI offers several curriculum tracks, facilitated by a mix of Alpha Kappa Psi alumni and successful business leaders, focusing on the values of principles business leadership. In addition to the educational leadership development tracks, the fraternity&#x27;s Case Competition also takes place during PBLI. PBLI began in 2009 as a retooled and updated version of the fraternity&#x27;s similar Success Institute, which was originally introduced in 1996.

===Case Competition===
Alpha Kappa Psi began holding the annual Case Competition at the 2008 Success Institutes. Case Competition is sponsored by the Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation and it awards $1,500, $750 and $500 scholarships to the top three teams in each of the five cities where the annual competition takes place. Case Competition is designed to introduce students to the realities of decision making and give them first-hand experience in analyzing business situations to prepare them for future managerial decision making.

===College of Leadership===
The College of Leadership is held every two years in conjunction with the fraternity&#x27;s convention. The College of Leadership is a two-day series of sessions focusing on personal development, professional development and chapter leadership. Facilitators include fraternity staff and volunteer leaders, successful alumni members and special guests from the business community.

===The Academy===
The Academy is an all-expense-paid leadership conference sponsored by the Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation. The Academy is held each summer at the Waycross Conference and Retreat Center in Morgantown, Indiana, and attendance is limited to 20 exceptional student leaders who demonstrate qualities of future business leaders. The Academy was first held in 2001.

==Statistics==
The following numbers include all collegiate initiates, new expansion initiates as well as all faculty and honorary initiates:
*Initiates in 2005-06: 5,697
*Initiates in 2006-07: 6,001
*Initiates in 2007-08: 5,988
*Initiates in 2008-09: 5,863
*Initiates in 2009-10: 6,365
*Initiates in 2010-11: 6,552
*Initiates in 2011-12: 6,905
*Initiates in 2012-13: 6,482
*Initiates since 1904: more than 252,853
*Number of current student members: 12,948
*2005 Convention attendance (Las Vegas): 805
*2007 Success Institute attendance: 2,351
*2007 Convention registrations (Washington, D.C.): 825
*2008 Success Institute attendance: 3,077

==Objects==
# To further the individual welfare of its members;
# To foster scientific research in the fields of commerce, accounts and finance;
# To educate the public to appreciate and demand higher ideals therein; and
# To promote and advance in institutions of college rank courses leading to degrees in business administration.

==ΑΚΨ literature==

===&quot;The Diary of Alpha Kappa Psi&quot;===
The official magazine of the fraternity first appeared on January 1, 1908, as &quot;The Alpha Diary&quot;. Howard M. Jefferson chaired the editorial committee that published the original four page monthly pamphlet of the Alpha chapter. The name was changed in 1913 to &quot;The Diary of Alpha Kappa Psi Fraternity&quot; to reflect its new fraternity-wide scope. The format remained the same, although increasing in number of pages, until it became a full-fledged magazine, 6 x in size, in 1917. The title was also changed that year to &quot;The Alpha Kappa Psi Diary&quot;. John D. Sparks was appointed editor in 1928 and the page size of &quot;The Diary&quot; was increased to 8½ x with two and three column pages and a different two-color cover for each issue. In 1929, under Sparks, the magazine also adopted its current name, &quot;The Diary of Alpha Kappa Psi&quot;.

&quot;The Diary&quot; is currently published three times a year in October, February and June, by the Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation. It has information on fraternity and foundation news, as well as educational articles focusing on professional development. In recent years, the magazine has earned several College Fraternity Editors Association (CFEA) awards.
* 3rd place Web Site (2008)
* 2nd place Logo Design (2008)
* 3rd place Total Communications (2008)
* 3rd place Fred F. Yoder Award for Overall Excellence (2008)
* 2nd place Content and Design award for Annual Report (2006)
* 3rd place Design Award for Two-Page or Less Layout (2006)
* 1st place Design Award for Two-Page or Less Layout (2005)
* 3rd place Design Award for Cover Design (2005)
* 3rd place Fred F. Yoder Award for Overall Excellence (2005)
* 2nd place Fred F. Yoder Award for Overall Excellence (2004)
* 2nd place Banta Total Communications Award (2004)
* 2nd place Design Award for Critic&#x27;s Choice Cover (2004)
* 2nd place Design Award for Logo Design (2004)
* 3rd place Design Award for Two-Page or Less Layout (2004)

===&quot;The Handbook of Alpha Kappa Psi&quot;===
&quot;The Handbook of Alpha Kappa Psi&quot; is a comprehensive information source and guide for members and officers of the fraternity. The publication includes topics such as a detailed history of AKPsi, a directory of notable alumni, organizational structure, awards, emblems, alumni information, chapter administration, finances, public relations, ritual and a great deal of other useful information. The origin of the handbook is traced to 1926 when Ralph L. Power of &quot;Nu chapter&quot;, issued a publication titled &quot;Handbook of Alpha Kappa Psi, a Manual for Nu Chapter&quot;. The handbook was first published fraternity-wide in 1934, and it has been followed by several more comprehensive and revised editions. The seventh edition was published in 1997, edited by Theodore G. Ehrsam. Ehrsam was working on the eighth edition before he died in July 2004. The eighth edition was to be published in fall 2004 as part of the fraternity&#x27;s centennial celebration.

=== Anthem ===
&quot;Tune: Auld Lang Syne&quot;

==Chapters==
Alpha Kappa Psi has charated 354 chapters since its founding. It has 229 active chapters and five colonies.

== Notable members ==
Members of Alpha Kappa Psi have held almost every major political position in the United States, including the presidency and vice-presidency. Many members have gained notable positions on boards of directors and executive management teams of some of the world&#x27;s most well known companies. Notable alumni include Ronald Reagan (former U.S. President), Richard Nixon (former U.S. President), Joyce C. Hall (founder, Hallmark Cards), Samuel F. Hinkle, president (The Hershey Company), Harrison Jones (chairman, The Coca-Cola Company).

== See also ==
* Professional fraternities and sororities

==References==
==External Links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4735065" start="0" end="15" title="Alpha Kappa Psi" label="Alpha Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735065" start="17" end="17" title="Alpha Kappa Psi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q4735065" start="37" end="42" title="Alpha Kappa Psi" label="AKPsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248071" start="79" end="89" title="Professional fraternities and sororities" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="190" end="209" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645069" start="281" end="292" title="Noblesville" label="Noblesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="294" end="301" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="832" end="847" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448869" start="2022" end="2044" title="Sea Cliff, New York" label="Sea Cliff, Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="3336" end="3365" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="3369" end="3384" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q955218" start="7094" end="7107" title="James A. McClure" label="James McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q864992" start="7345" end="7355" title="Birch Bayh" label="Birch Bayh"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7932" end="7946" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272498" start="8005" end="8065" title="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology" label="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="8075" end="8099" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888771" start="8104" end="8138" title="Manchester Metropolitan University" label="Manchester Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q195668" start="8988" end="9019" title="Queen Mary University of London" label="Queen Mary University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333303" start="9633" end="9679" title="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology" label="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="10118" end="10136" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255921" start="12041" end="12050" title="President (corporate title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="12402" end="12426" title="executive vice president" label="executive vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q644950" start="17731" end="17750" title="Morgantown, Indiana" label="Morgantown, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248071" start="22694" end="22734" title="Professional fraternities and sororities" label="Professional fraternities and sororities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362044" wikidata="Q411205" url="?curid=362044" title="Pivot">
<text>Pivot may refer to:
*Pivot, the point of rotation in a lever system
*More generally, the center point of any rotational system
*Pivot joint, a kind of joint between bones in the body
*Pivot turn, a dance move

==Companies==
*Incitec Pivot, an Australian chemicals and explosives manufacturer
*Pivot Legal Society, a legal advocacy organization based in Vancouver, British Columbia
*Pivot Wireless, a cell phone service, created by a joint venture between Sprint and multiple cable companies

==Computing==
*Apache Pivot, an open-source platform for building applications in Java
*Microsoft Live Labs Pivot, a data search application
*Morrow Pivot and Morrow Pivot II, early laptop computers
*Pivot, an element of the quicksort algorithm
*Pivot display, a display which can change orientation
*Pivot Stickfigure Animator, stick-figure animation software
*Pivot table, a data summarization tool in spreadsheets
*Pivotal Games, a former UK video game developer
*Pivoting, a computer security exploit used by hackers to use a compromised computer for attacks

==Linguistics==
*Syntactic pivot, the argument of the verb around which the sentence revolves
*Pivot language, an artificial or natural language used as an intermediary language for translation

==Mathematics==
*Pivot element, a non-zero element of a matrix selected by an algorithm
*Pivotal quantity, in statistics

==Music==
*Pivot, the former name of the experimental rock band PVT
*&quot;Pivot&quot; (album), by Amoeba
*Pivot chord, a chord that is diatonic to more than one key or, in other words, is &quot;common&quot; to two keys

==Places==
*Mount Pivot, a mountain in the western part of the Shackleton Range
* Pivot Area or Heartland, the theme of &quot;The Geographical Pivot of History&quot;
*Pivot Peak, the highest point in Wilkniss Mountains, Victoria Land

==Sports==
*Pivot, a player position in futsal
*Pivot, a player position in roller derby
*Pivot, a player position in team handball
*Pivot, another term for five-eighth, one of the rugby league positions
*Pivot, another term for fly-half, one of the rugby union positions
*Pivot or center (basketball), a player position in basketball
*Pivot turn (skiing), a technique of turning in place in skiing
*In baseball, the action of a second baseman on an infield double play in making the turn from catching to throwing

==Other uses==
*Pivot, a lean startup method for developing businesses and products by changing direction
*Pivot point (stock market), a price point in the financial, commodity, and securities markets
*Pivot (card game), a casual card game released by Wizards of the Coast in 1998
*Kakekotoba, or pivot word, a technique in Japanese poetry
*Bernard Pivot (1935–2024), French journalist
* &quot;The Geographical Pivot of History&quot; by H.J. Mackinder
*Pivot (TV network), a defunct American digital cable and satellite television network
*USS &quot;Pivot&quot;

== See also ==
* Center pin
* Pivotal (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411205" start="0" end="5" title="Pivot" label="Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="55" end="60" title="lever" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="109" end="117" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474177" start="128" end="139" title="Pivot joint" label="Pivot joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199659" start="184" end="194" title="Pivot turn" label="Pivot turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660969" start="225" end="238" title="Incitec Pivot" label="Incitec Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199651" start="293" end="312" title="Pivot Legal Society" label="Pivot Legal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199654" start="382" end="396" title="Pivot Wireless" label="Pivot Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q616999" start="507" end="519" title="Apache Pivot" label="Apache Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312392" start="580" end="605" title="Microsoft Live Labs Pivot" label="Microsoft Live Labs Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948577" start="651" end="666" title="Morrow Pivot II" label="Morrow Pivot II"/>
<link wikidata="Q486598" start="717" end="726" title="quicksort" label="quicksort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282315" start="738" end="751" title="Pivot display" label="Pivot display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474827" start="793" end="819" title="Pivot Stickfigure Animator" label="Pivot Stickfigure Animator"/>
<link wikidata="Q613906" start="854" end="865" title="Pivot table" label="Pivot table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911412" start="910" end="923" title="Pivotal Games" label="Pivotal Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="971" end="996" title="Exploit (computer security)#Pivoting" label="computer security exploit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662655" start="1073" end="1088" title="Syntactic pivot" label="Syntactic pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663110" start="1151" end="1165" title="Pivot language" label="Pivot language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425280" start="1268" end="1281" title="Pivot element" label="Pivot element"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199665" start="1340" end="1356" title="Pivotal quantity" label="Pivotal quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359910" start="1437" end="1440" title="PVT (band)" label="PVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199648" start="1442" end="1467" title="Pivot (album)" label="&amp;quot;Pivot&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477223" start="1480" end="1491" title="Common chord (music)" label="Pivot chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922793" start="1606" end="1617" title="Mount Pivot" label="Mount Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298164" start="1720" end="1753" title="The Geographical Pivot of History" label="The Geographical Pivot of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002558" start="1761" end="1771" title="Pivot Peak" label="Pivot Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="1869" end="1875" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080" start="1905" end="1917" title="roller derby" label="roller derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="1947" end="1960" title="team handball" label="team handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311945" start="1986" end="1997" title="five-eighth" label="five-eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="2010" end="2032" title="rugby league positions" label="rugby league positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583019" start="2079" end="2100" title="rugby union positions" label="rugby union positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="2111" end="2130" title="center (basketball)" label="center (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199660" start="2165" end="2184" title="Pivot turn (skiing)" label="Pivot turn (skiing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="2258" end="2272" title="second baseman" label="second baseman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2287" end="2298" title="Double play#Slang" label="double play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2370" end="2382" title="Lean startup#Pivot" label="lean startup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17828314" start="2452" end="2478" title="Pivot point (stock market)" label="Pivot point (stock market)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199650" start="2547" end="2564" title="Pivot (card game)" label="Pivot (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q939895" start="2627" end="2637" title="Kakekotoba" label="Kakekotoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101521" start="2686" end="2699" title="Bernard Pivot" label="Bernard Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298164" start="2739" end="2772" title="The Geographical Pivot of History" label="The Geographical Pivot of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995403" start="2798" end="2816" title="Pivot (TV network)" label="Pivot (TV network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872928" start="2885" end="2906" title="USS Pivot" label="USS &amp;quot;Pivot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2925" end="2935" title="List of railroad truck parts#Center pin" label="Center pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15148967" start="2938" end="2962" title="Pivotal (disambiguation)" label="Pivotal (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362045" wikidata="Q1093438" url="?curid=362045" title="Citizen X">
<text>Citizen X is a 1995 American television film which covers the efforts of detectives in the Soviet Union to capture an unknown serial killer of women and children in the 1980s, and the bureaucratic obstacles they encounter. The film is based upon the true story of Soviet serial killer Andrei Chikatilo, who was convicted in 1992 of the murder of 52 women and children committed between 1978 and 1990. It stars Stephen Rea, Donald Sutherland, and Max Von Sydow. The film is based on Robert Cullen&#x27;s non-fiction book &quot;The Killer Department&quot;, published in 1993.

==Plot==
A body is discovered on a collective farm during harvesting in 1982. A subsequent search of adjacent woods, authorized by the new forensic specialist, Viktor Burakov, turns up seven more bodies in varying stages of decomposition. The film tells the story of the subsequent eight-year hunt by Burakov for the serial killer responsible for the mutilation and murder of 53 people, 52 of them below the age of 35. Burakov is promoted to detective and eventually aided, covertly at first, by Col. Mikhail Fetisov, his commanding officer and the shrewd head of the provincial committee for crime and much later, by Alexandr Bukhanovsky, a psychiatrist with a particular interest in what he calls &quot;abnormal psychology&quot;.

As well as taking on the form of a crime thriller, the movie depicts Soviet propaganda and bureaucracy that contributed to the failure of law enforcement agencies to capture the killer, Andrei Chikatilo, for almost a decade. Chikatilo&#x27;s crimes were not reported publicly for years. Local politicians were fearful such revelations would have a negative impact on the USSR&#x27;s image, since serial killers were associated with &quot;decadent, Western&quot; moral corruption.

Chikatilo first came under scrutiny early in the search when he was spotted at a station and found holding a satchel bag containing a knife. He was promptly arrested. Unfortunately, he was shielded from investigation and released due to his membership in the Communist Party. Soviet crime labs erroneously reported that his blood type did not match that found at the murders. All this changed under the political reforms of &quot;glasnost&quot; and &quot;Perestroika&quot; and the search for the killer began to make progress.

With the passage of time and easing of political restrictions, Burakov devises a plan to blanket almost all the railroad stations, where the serial killer preys upon the young and unsuspecting, with conspicuous uniformed men to discourage the killer. Three small stations are left unattended, except for undercover agents. Chikatilo is eventually discovered and identified through the diligence of a local, plain-clothes soldier.

Arrested, Andrei Chikatilo is interrogated for seven consecutive days by Gorbunov, a Soviet hardliner who insists that he be the one to extract a confession. Chikatilo will not yield and under pressure from Fetisov and Burakov, Gorbunov agrees to another approach. Psychiatrist Bukhanovsky is introduced into the interview room. He recites from his lengthy analysis and speculation, made three years earlier, of the personality and tendencies of this sexually frustrated killer, whom he had entitled &quot;Citizen X&quot;. Bukhanovsky eventually strikes a nerve and a weeping Chikatilo finally admits his guilt and answers specific questions about the details of some murders. Afterwards, Chikatilo leads law enforcement officials to the crime scenes and three undetected graves.

Held in a metal cage during his trial, a wild-eyed Chikatilo is convicted and sentenced to death. The film concludes with Chikatilo being led to a nameless prison chamber and shows him staring in shock at a central drain in the room&#x27;s floor as a uniformed soldier delivers a pistol shot to the back of the killer&#x27;s head.

==Cast==
* Stephen Rea as Lieutenant / Colonel Viktor Burakov
* Donald Sutherland as Colonel / General Mikhail Fetisov
* Jeffrey DeMunn as Andrei Chikatilo
* Max von Sydow as Alexandr Bukhanovsky
* Joss Ackland as Bondarchuk
* John Wood as Gorbunov
* Ion Caramitru as Tatevsky
* Imelda Staunton as Ms. Burakova

==Production==
===Locations===
The film was shot in Hungary. The station where Chikatilo picks his victims is the Hatvan railway station, northeast of Budapest. The smaller, arched train shelter scene was shot in Nagymaros, Gödöllő, and Szokolya. Several other scenes were shot in the Gödöllő Railway Station.

===Director===
The film was directed by Chris Gerolmo, who wrote the screenplay (adapted from Robert Cullen&#x27;s 1993 non-fiction book &quot;The Killer Department&quot;) in addition to playing a minor role in the film as a militiaman.

===Soundtrack===
The score for &quot;Citizen X&quot; was composed and conducted by Randy Edelman. It has been released on CD in the US by Varèse Sarabande.

==Reception==
===Critical reception===
&quot;Citizen X&quot; was met with positive reviews from critics and audiences. It earned an 86% score on the movie review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes. Scott Weinberg of eFilmCritic.com described it as &quot;Fascinating and absorbing. One of HBO&#x27;s finest made-for-cable flicks.&quot;

===Awards and nominations===
==Home media==
&quot;Citizen X&quot; has been released on DVD in the US (HBO, region 1 NTSC), Germany (Cargo Records, region 2 PAL), Denmark (Scanbox, region 2 PAL) and the Netherlands (Paradiso Home Entertainment, region 2 PAL). The film received theatrical release in some territories and was exhibited in the widescreen 1.85:1 aspect ratio. Only the German DVD has a widescreen transfer; all others reflect the 1990s 1.33:1 TV aspect ratio, as originally broadcast.

==See also==
* Crime in the Soviet Union

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="29" end="44" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="91" end="103" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="126" end="139" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="184" end="196" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="264" end="270" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44496" start="285" end="301" title="Andrei Chikatilo" label="Andrei Chikatilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313042" start="410" end="421" title="Stephen Rea" label="Stephen Rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="423" end="440" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="446" end="459" title="Max Von Sydow" label="Max Von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744323" start="526" end="547" title="The Killer Department" label="The Killer Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="610" end="625" title="collective farming" label="collective farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="714" end="722" title="forensic science" label="forensic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="1384" end="1394" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="1399" end="1410" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="1446" end="1461" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q44496" start="1494" end="1510" title="Andrei Chikatilo" label="Andrei Chikatilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q945895" start="1746" end="1754" title="Decadence" label="decadent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1756" end="1763" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="2048" end="2063" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q47657" start="2113" end="2123" title="blood type" label="blood type"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="2219" end="2227" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="2244" end="2255" title="Perestroika" label="Perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q313042" start="3872" end="3883" title="Stephen Rea" label="Stephen Rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="3925" end="3942" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127691276" start="3964" end="3979" title="Mikhail Fetisov" label="Mikhail Fetisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q443343" start="3982" end="3996" title="Jeffrey DeMunn" label="Jeffrey DeMunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44496" start="4000" end="4016" title="Andrei Chikatilo" label="Andrei Chikatilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="4019" end="4032" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q471879" start="4059" end="4071" title="Joss Ackland" label="Joss Ackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599439" start="4088" end="4097" title="John Wood (English actor)" label="John Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272196" start="4112" end="4125" title="Ion Caramitru" label="Ion Caramitru"/>
<link wikidata="Q234798" start="4140" end="4155" title="Imelda Staunton" label="Imelda Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="4225" end="4232" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q629849" start="4287" end="4293" title="Hatvan" label="Hatvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="4324" end="4332" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q282460" start="4386" end="4395" title="Nagymaros" label="Nagymaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q209988" start="4397" end="4404" title="Gödöllő" label="Gödöllő"/>
<link wikidata="Q924169" start="4410" end="4418" title="Szokolya" label="Szokolya"/>
<link wikidata="Q737289" start="4524" end="4537" title="Chris Gerolmo" label="Chris Gerolmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744323" start="4627" end="4648" title="The Killer Department" label="The Killer Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q954231" start="4805" end="4818" title="Randy Edelman" label="Randy Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186369" start="4860" end="4876" title="Varèse Sarabande" label="Varèse Sarabande"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="5057" end="5072" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="5164" end="5167" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="5314" end="5317" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="5328" end="5332" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="5368" end="5371" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5571" end="5583" title="aspect ratio (image)#Aspect ratio releases" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185419" start="5726" end="5751" title="Crime in the Soviet Union" label="Crime in the Soviet Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362048" wikidata="Q5162890" url="?curid=362048" title="Consequences of Nazism">
<text>Nazism and the acts of Nazi Germany affected many countries, communities, and people before, during and after World War II. Nazi Germany&#x27;s attempt to exterminate several groups viewed as subhuman by Nazi ideology was eventually stopped by the combined efforts of the wartime Allies headed by the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the United States.

==Jewish people==
Of the world&#x27;s 18 million Jews in 1939, more than a third were murdered in the Holocaust. Of the three million Jews in Poland, the heartland of European Jewish culture, fewer than 60,000 survived. Most of the remaining Jews in Eastern and Central Europe became refugees, unable or unwilling to return to countries that became Soviet puppet states or countries that had betrayed them to the Nazis.

==Poland==

The Nazis intended to destroy the Polish nation completely. In 1941, the Nazi leadership decided that Poland was to be fully cleared of ethnic Poles within 10 to 20 years and settled by German colonists to further their policy of Lebensraum. From the beginning of the occupation, Germany&#x27;s policy was to plunder and exploit Polish territory, turning it into a giant concentration camp for Poles who were to be exterminated as &quot;Untermenschen&quot;. The policy of plunder and exploitation inflicted material losses to Polish industry, agriculture, infrastructure and cultural landmarks, with the cost of the destruction by Germans alone estimated at €525 billion or $640 billion. Remaining Polish industry was mostly destroyed, or transported to Russia by Soviet forces after the war.

The official Polish government report of war losses prepared in 1947 reported 6,028,000 war victims out of a population of 27,007,000 ethnic Poles and Jews alone. For political reasons, the report excluded the losses to the Soviet Union and the losses among Polish citizens of Ukrainian and Belarusian origin.

Poland&#x27;s eastern border was significantly moved westwards to the Curzon Line. The resulting territorial loss of 188,000 km2 (formerly populated by 5.3 million ethnic Poles) was to be compensated by the addition of 111,000 km2 of former German territory east of the Oder–Neisse line (formerly populated by 11.4 million ethnic Germans). Kidnapping of Polish children by Germany also took place, in which children who were believed to hold German blood were taken away; around 20,000 Polish children were taken away from their parents. Out of the abducted only 10–15% returned home. Polish elites were decimated and over half of the Polish intelligentsia were murdered. Some professions lost 20–50% of their members, for example 58% of Polish lawyers, 38% of medical doctors and 28% of university workers were exterminated by the Nazis. The Polish capital Warsaw was razed by German forces and most of its old and newly acquired cities lay in ruins (e.g. Wrocław) or lost to the Soviet Union (e.g. Lwów). In addition Poland became a Soviet satellite state, remaining under a Soviet-controlled communist government until 1989. Russian troops did not withdraw from Poland until 1993, after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.

===See also===
*Nazi crimes against the Polish nation
*Expulsion of Poles by Germany
*Generalplan Ost
*German AB-Aktion in Poland
*The Holocaust in Poland
*Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)
*Operation Tannenberg
*Intelligenzaktion
*Chronicles of Terror

==Central Europe==

As a consequence of the war and Soviet occupation, Central European countries found themselves under the &quot;Soviet sphere of influence&quot; (as agreed upon at the Yalta Conference). Immediately following the war, Soviet style socialist governments were established in all of these countries and any forms of western style democracy that existed before the war were abolished. As a result of the Warsaw Pact not participating in the Marshall Plan, as well as industrial infrastructure being taken by the Soviets, economic recovery was slowed significantly.

==Soviet Union==

About 26 million Soviet citizens perished as a result of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, including around 10,651,000 soldiers who died in battle against Hitler&#x27;s armies or died in POW camps. According to Russian historian Vadim Erlikhman, Soviet losses amounted to 26.5 million war related deaths. Millions of civilians also died from starvation, exposure, atrocities, and massacres, and a huge area of the Soviet Union from the suburbs of Moscow and the Volga River to the western border had been destroyed, depopulated, and reduced to rubble. The mass death and destruction there badly damaged the Soviet economy, society, and national psyche. The death toll included c.a. 1.5 million Soviet Jews killed by the German invaders. The mass destruction and mass murder was one of the reasons why the Soviet Union installed satellite states in Central Europe; as the government hoped to use the countries as a buffer zone against any new invasions from the West. This helped break down the wartime alliance between the Soviet Union and the Western Allies, setting the stage for the Cold War, which lasted until 1989, two years before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Soviet culture in the 1950s was defined by results of the Great Patriotic War.

Close to 60% of the European war dead were from the Soviet Union. Military losses of 10.6 million include 7.6 million killed or missing in action and 2.6 million POW dead, plus 400,000 paramilitary and Soviet partisan losses. Civilian deaths totaled 15.9 million which included 1.5 million from military actions. 7.1 million victims of Nazi genocide and reprisals; 1.8 million deported to Germany for forced labor; and 5.5 million famine and disease deaths. Additional famine deaths which totaled 1 million during 1946–47 are not included here. These losses are for the entire territory of the USSR including territories annexed in 1939–40.

To the north, the Germans reached Leningrad (Saint Petersburg) in August 1941. The city was surrounded on 8 September, beginning a 900-day siege during which about 1.2 million citizens perished.

Of the 5.7 million Soviet prisoners of war captured by the Germans, more than 3.5 million had died while in German captivity by the end of the war. On 11 February 1945, at the conclusion of the Yalta Conference, the United States and United Kingdom signed a Repatriation Agreement with the USSR. The interpretation of this Agreement resulted in the forcible repatriation of all Soviets regardless of their wishes. Millions of Soviet POWs and forced laborers transported to Germany are believed to have been treated as traitors, cowards and deserters on their return to the USSR (see Order No. 270). Statistical data from Soviet archives, that became available after Perestroika, attest that the overall increase of the Gulag population was minimal during 1945–46 and only 272,867 of repatriated Soviet POWs and civilians (out of 4,199,488) were imprisoned.

===Belarus===
Belarus lost a quarter of its pre-war population, including almost all of its intellectual elite, and 90% of its Jewish population. Following bloody encirclement battles, all of the territory of present-day Belarus was occupied by the Germans by the end of August 1941. The Nazis imposed a brutal regime, deporting some 380,000 young people for slave labour, and killing hundreds of thousands of other civilians. At least 5,295 Belarusian settlements were destroyed by the Nazis and either some or all of their inhabitants were killed (out of 9,200 settlements that were burned or otherwise destroyed in Belarus during World War II). More than 600 villages like Khatyn were burned along with their entire populations. More than 209 cities and towns (out of 270 total) were destroyed. Himmler had pronounced a plan according to which 3/4 of Belarusian population was designated for &quot;eradication&quot; and 1/4 of racially cleaner population (blue eyes, light hair) would be allowed to serve Germans as slaves (Ostarbeiter).

Some recent estimates raise the number of Belarusians who perished in War to &quot;3 million 650 thousand people, unlike the former 2.2 million. In other words, not every fourth inhabitant but about 40% of the pre-war Belarusian population perished (considering the present-day borders of Belarus).&quot; This compares to 15% of Poland&#x27;s post war borders and 19% of Ukrainian population in post war border and comparing to 2% of Czechoslovakian population that perished in post war borders.

===Ukraine===
Estimates of population losses in Ukraine range from 7 million to 11 million. More than 700 cities and towns and 28,000 villages were destroyed.

===See also===
*Forced settlements in the Soviet Union
*Generalplan Ost
*Hunger Plan
*Occupation of Belarus by Nazi Germany
*Operation Keelhaul
*World War II casualties

==Yugoslavia==

It is estimated that 1,700,000 people were killed during World War II in Yugoslavia from 1941 to 1945. Very high losses were suffered by the Serbs who lived in Bosnia and Croatia, as well as by Jewish and Romani minorities, and losses were also high among all other non-collaborating populations. In the summer of 1941, the Serbian uprising occurred during the German invasion of the USSR. The Nazi response was the execution of 100 Serbian civilians for every German soldier who was killed and the execution of 50 Serbian civilians for every German soldier who was wounded. The Yugoslav Partisans waged a guerrilla campaign against the Axis occupiers and they also waged a civil war against the Chetniks. The Independent State of Croatia was established as a Nazi puppet-state, ruled by the fascist militia which was known as the Ustaše. During that time, the Independent State of Croatia constructed extermination camps for anti-fascists, communists, Serbs, Muslims, Romanies and Jews, one of the most infamous extermination camps was the Jasenovac concentration camp. A large number of men, women and children, mostly Serbs, were murdered in these camps.

==Western Europe==

Britain and France, two of the victors, were exhausted and bankrupted by the war, and Britain lost its superpower status. With Germany and Japan in ruins as well, the world was left with two dominant powers, the United States and the Soviet Union. Economic and political reality in Western Europe would soon force the dismantling of the European colonial empires, especially in Africa and Asia.

One of the most important political consequences of the Nazi experience in Western Europe was the establishment of new political alliances which eventually became the European Union and an international military alliance of European countries known as NATO to counterbalance the Soviets&#x27; Warsaw Pact and until communist rule in Eastern Europe ended in the late 1980s.

The Communists emerged from the war sharing the vast prestige of the victorious Soviet armed forces, and for a while it looked as though they might take power in France, Italy and Greece. The West quickly acted to prevent this from happening, hence the Cold War.

==Greece==
In Greece, the German occupation (April 1941 – October 1944) destroyed the economy through war reparations, plundering of the country&#x27;s resources and hyper-inflation. In addition, the Germans left most of the country&#x27;s infrastructure in ruins as they withdrew in 1944. As a result of an Allied blockade and German indifference to local needs, the first winter of the occupation was marked by widespread famine in the main urban centres, with as many as 300,000 civilians dead from starvation. Although these levels of starvation were not repeated in the following years, malnourishment was common throughout the occupation. In addition, thousands more were executed by German forces as reprisals for partisan activities. As part of the Holocaust, Greece&#x27;s Jewish community was almost wiped out, especially the large Sephardi community of Thessaloniki, which had earned the city the sobriquet &quot;Mother of Israel&quot; and had first settled there in the early 16th century at the invitation of the then-ruling Ottoman Empire. In total, at least 81% (ca. 60,000) of Greece&#x27;s total pre-war Jewish population was murdered.

The bitterest and longest-lasting legacy of the German occupation was the social upheaval it wrought. The old political elites were sidelined, and the Resistance against the Axis brought to the fore the leftist National Liberation Front (EAM), arguably the country&#x27;s first true mass-movement, where the Communists played a central role. In an effort to oppose its growing influence, the Germans encouraged the pre-war conservative establishment to confront it, and allowed the creation of armed units. As elsewhere in Eastern Europe, in the last year of the occupation, conditions in Greece often approximated a civil war between EAM and other powers. The rift would become permanent in December 1944, when EAM and the British-backed government clashed in Athens, and again in a fully fledged civil war from 1946 to 1949.

==Germany==

More than 8 million Germans, including almost 2 million civilians, died during World War II (see World War II casualties). After the end of the war in Europe additional casualties were incurred during the Allied occupation and also during the population expulsions that followed.

After the war, the German people were often viewed with contempt because they were blamed by other Europeans for Nazi crimes. Germans visiting abroad, particularly in the 1950s and 1960s, attracted insults from locals, and from foreigners who may have lost their families or friends in the atrocities. Today in Europe and worldwide (particularly in countries that fought against the Axis), Germans may be scorned by elderly people who were alive to experience the atrocities committed by Nazi Germans during World War II. This resulted in a feeling of controversy for many Germans, causing numerous discussions and rows among scholars and politicians in Post-War West Germany (for example, the &quot;Historikerstreit&quot; [historians&#x27; argument] in the 1980s) and after Reunification. Here, the discussion was mainly about the role that the unified Germany should play in the world and in Europe. Bernard Schlink&#x27;s novel &quot;The Reader&quot; concerns how post-war Germans dealt with the issue.

Following World War II, the Allies embarked on a program of denazification, but as the Cold War intensified these efforts were curtailed in the west.

Germany itself and the German economy were devastated, with great parts of most major cities destroyed by the bombings of the Allied forces, sovereignty taken away by the Allies and the territory filled with millions of refugees from the former eastern provinces which the Allies had decided were to be annexed by the Soviet Union and Poland, moving the eastern German border westwards to the Oder-Neisse line and effectively reducing Germany in size by roughly 25% (see also Potsdam Conference). The remaining parts of Germany were divided among the Allies and occupied by British (the north-west), French (the south-west), American (the south) and Soviet (the east) troops.

The expulsions of Germans from the lost areas in the east (see also Former eastern territories of Germany), the Sudetenland, and elsewhere in eastern Europe went on for several years. The number of Germans expelees totaled roughly 15,000,000. Estimates of number of deaths in connection with expulsion range from under 500,000 to 3 million.

After a short time, the Allies broke over ideological problems (Communism versus Capitalism), and thus both sides established their own spheres of influence, creating a previously non-existent division in Germany between East and West (although the division largely followed the borders of states which had existed in Germany before Bismarck&#x27;s unification less than 100 years before).

A constitution for East Germany was drafted on 30 May 1949. Wilhelm Pieck, a leader of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) party (which was created by a forced merger of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) and Communist Party of Germany (KPD) in the Soviet sector), was elected first President of the German Democratic Republic.

West Germany, officially the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), received &quot;de facto&quot; semi-sovereignty in 1949, as well as a constitution, called the &quot;Grundgesetz&quot; (Basic Law). The document was not called a Constitution officially, as at this point, it was still hoped that the two German states would be reunited in the near future.

The first free elections in West Germany were held in 1949, which were won by the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU, conservatives) by a slight margin. Konrad Adenauer, a member of the CDU, was the first &quot;Bundeskanzler&quot; (Chancellor) of West Germany.

Both German states introduced, in 1948, their own money, colloquially called &quot;West-Mark&quot; and &quot;Ost-Mark&quot; (Western Mark and Eastern Mark).

Foreign troops still remain in Germany today, for example Ramstein Air Base, but the majority of troops left following the end of the Cold War (By 1994 for Soviet troops, mandated under the terms of the Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany and in the mid-1990s for Western forces). The Bush Administration in the United States in 2004 stated intentions to withdraw most of the remaining American troops out of Germany in the coming years. During the years 1950–2000 more than 10,000,000 U.S. military personnel were stationed in Germany.

The West German economy was by the mid-1950s rebuilt thanks to the abandonment in mid-1947 of some of the last vestiges of the Morgenthau Plan and to fewer war reparations imposed on West Germany (see also Wirtschaftswunder). After lobbying by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Generals Clay and Marshall, the Truman administration realized that economic recovery in Europe could not go forward without the reconstruction of the German industrial base on which it previously had been dependent.
In July 1947, President Harry S. Truman rescinded on &quot;national security grounds&quot; the punitive JCS 1067, which had directed the U.S. forces of occupation in Germany to &quot;take no steps looking toward the economic rehabilitation of Germany.&quot; It was replaced by JCS 1779, which instead stressed that &quot;[a]n orderly, prosperous Europe requires the economic contributions of a stable and productive Germany.&quot;

The dismantling of factories in the western zones, for further transport to the Soviet Union as reparations, was in time halted as frictions grew between East and West. Limits were placed on permitted levels of German production in order to prevent resurgence of German militarism, part of which included severely restricting German steel production and affected the rest of the German economy very negatively (see &quot;The industrial plans for Germany&quot;). Dismantling of factories by France and Great Britain as reparations and for the purpose of lowering German war and economic potential under the &quot;level of industry plans&quot; took place (halted in 1951), but to nowhere near the scale of the dismantling and transport to the Soviet Union of factories in the eastern zone of occupation. The Eastern Bloc did not accept the Marshall Plan, denouncing it as American economic imperialism, and thus it (East Germany included) recovered much more slowly than their Western counterparts. German political and economic control of the Ruhr area was for a time under international control: the International Authority for the Ruhr (IAR) was created as part of the agreement negotiated at the London Six-Power Conference in June 1948 to establish the Federal Republic of Germany. In the end, German control of the Ruhr was restored, with the start of the Cold War and the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). The ECSC led to the pooling of German coal and steel markets within a multinational community in 1951. The neighboring Saar area, containing much of Germany&#x27;s remaining coal deposits, handed over by the U. S. to French economic administration as a protectorate in 1947 and did not politically return to Germany until January 1957, with economic reintegration occurring a few years later. Upper Silesia, Germany&#x27;s second largest center of mining and industry, had been handed over to Poland at the Potsdam Conference.

The Allies confiscated intellectual property of great value, all German patents, both in Germany and abroad, and used them to strengthen their own industrial competitiveness by licensing them to Allied companies. Beginning immediately after the German surrender and continuing for the next two years the U.S. pursued a vigorous program to harvest all technological and scientific know-how as well as all patents in Germany. John Gimbel comes to the conclusion, in his book &quot;Science Technology and Reparations: Exploitation and Plunder in Postwar Germany&quot;, that the &quot;intellectual reparations&quot; taken by the U.S. and the UK amounted to close to $10 billion. During the more than two years that this policy was in place, no industrial research in Germany could take place, as any results would have been automatically available to overseas competitors who were encouraged by the occupation authorities to access all records and facilities. Meanwhile, thousands of the best German researchers were being put to work in the Soviet Union and in the U.S. (see also Operation Paperclip)

For several years following the surrender German nutritional levels were very low, resulting in very high mortality rates. Throughout all of 1945 the U.S. forces of occupation ensured that no international aid reached ethnic Germans. It was directed that all relief went to non-German displaced persons, liberated Allied POWs, and concentration camp inmates. During 1945 it was estimated that the average German civilian in the US and UK occupation zones received 1200 calories a day. Meanwhile, non-German displaced persons were receiving 2300 calories through emergency food imports and Red Cross help. In early October 1945 the UK government privately acknowledged in a cabinet meeting that German civilian adult death rates had risen to 4 times the pre-war levels and death rates amongst the German children had risen by 10 times the pre-war levels. The German Red Cross was dissolved, and the International Red Cross and the few other allowed international relief agencies were kept from helping Germans through strict controls on supplies and travel. The few agencies permitted to help Germans, such as the indigenous Caritasverband, were not allowed to use imported supplies. When the Vatican attempted to transmit food supplies from Chile to German infants the US State Department forbade it. The German food situation reached its worst during the very cold winter of 1946–1947 when German calorie intake ranged from 1,000 to 1,500 calories per day, a situation made worse by severe lack of fuel for heating. Meanwhile, the Allies were well fed, average adult calorie intake was; U.S. 3200–3300; UK 2900; U.S. Army 4000. German infant mortality rate was twice that of other nations in Western Europe until the close of 1948.

As agreed by the Allies at the Yalta conference Germans were used as forced labor as part of the reparations to be extracted to the countries ruined by Nazi aggression. By 1947 it is estimated that 4,000,000 Germans (both civilians and POWs) were being used as forced labor by the U.S., France, the UK and the Soviet Union. German prisoners were for example forced to clear minefields in France and the low countries. By December 1945 it was estimated by French authorities that 2,000 German prisoners were being killed or maimed each month in accidents. In Norway the last available casualty record, from 29 August 1945, shows that by that time a total of 275 German soldiers died while clearing mines, while 392 had been maimed. Death rates for the German civilians doing forced labor in the Soviet Union ranged between 19% and 39%, depending on category. (see also Forced labor of Germans in the Soviet Union).

Norman Naimark writes in &quot;The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945–1949&quot;, that although the exact number of women and girls who were raped by members of the Red Army in the months preceding and years following the capitulation will never be known, their numbers are likely in the hundreds of thousands, quite possibly as high as the 2,000,000 victims estimate made by Barbara Johr, in &quot;Befreier und Befreite&quot;. Many of these victims were raped repeatedly. Naimark states that not only had each victim to carry the trauma with her for the rest of her days, it inflicted a massive collective trauma on the East German nation (the German Democratic Republic). Naimark concludes &quot;The social psychology of women and men in the soviet zone of occupation was marked by the crime of rape from the first days of occupation, through the founding of the GDR in the fall of 1949, until – one could argue – the present.&quot;

The post-war hostility shown to the German people is exemplified in the fate of the War children, sired by German soldiers with women from the local population in nations such as Norway where the children and their mothers after the war had to endure many years of abuse. In the case of Denmark the hostility felt towards all things German also showed itself in the treatment of German refugees during the years 1945 to 1949. During 1945 alone 7000 German children under the age of 5 died as a result of being denied sufficient food and denied medical attention by Danish doctors who were afraid that rendering aid to the children of the former enemy would be seen as an unpatriotic act. Many children died of easily treatable ailments. As a consequence &quot;more German refugees died in Danish camps, &quot;than Danes did during the entire war.&quot;&quot;

During the Cold War, it was difficult for West Germans to visit East German relatives and friends and impossible vice versa. For East Germans, especially after the building of the Berlin Wall on 13 August 1961 and until Hungary opened up its border to the West in the late 1980s, thus allowing hundreds of thousands of vacationing East Germans to flee into Western Europe, it was only possible to get to West Germany by illegally fleeing across heavily fortified and guarded border areas.

44 years after the end of World War II, the Berlin Wall fell on 9 November 1989. The East and West parts of Germany were reunited on 3 October 1990.

Economic and social divisions between East and West Germany continue to play a major role in politics and society in Germany at present. It is likely the contrast between the generally well-off and economically diverse West and the weaker, heavy-industry reliant East will continue at least into the foreseeable future.

===See also===
* Berlin Wall
* Cold War
* German reunification
* Germany
** East Germany
** West Germany
* History of Germany since 1945
* Marshall Plan
* Ostpolitik

==World politics==

The war led to the discrediting and dissolution of the League of Nations and it also led to the founding of the United Nations (UN) on 24 October 1945. Like its predecessor, the UN was established in order to help prevent the outbreak of another world war and to contain or stop smaller conflicts. The principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations are a testament to the world&#x27;s attitudes after the defeat of Nazi Germany. Geopolitically, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as the two new dominant rivaling superpowers. Consequently, two political blocks arose, one around the US and another around the USSR. The rivalry resulted in the Cold War and led to several proxy conflicts. Briefly, before its final decline as a superpower, Great Britain also counted as a member of the &quot;Big Three&quot;, a term used to refer to the world&#x27;s major global powers (the US, USSR and Britain at the time).

==International law==
The effect the Nazis had on present-day international law was substantial. The United Nations Genocide Convention, a series of laws that made genocide a crime, was approved in 9 December 1948, three years after the Nazi defeat. That same month, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights also became a part of international law. The Nuremberg trials, followed by other Nazi war crimes trials, also created an unwritten rule stating that government officials who &quot;follow orders&quot; from leaders in committing crimes against humanity cannot use such a motive to excuse their crimes. It also had an effect through the Fourth Geneva Convention (Art 33) in making collective punishments a war crime.

==Racism==

After the world viewed the Nazi death camps, many Western people began to outwardly oppose ideas of racial superiority. Liberal anti-racism became a staple of many Western governments, with openly racist publications looked down upon. The move towards tolerance of different cultures in Western societies has continued to develop until the present day. Since the collapse of Nazi Germany, Western populations have been wary of racial political parties and they have actively discouraged white ethnocentrism, fearing the recurrence of a catastrophe which would be similar to the purges which were carried out in Germany by the Nazis. On the other hand, it can be argued that the conception of multiculturalism has gained importance as one of the pillars of contemporary Western society because of the same reaction. The actions of the Nazis caused an increase in anti-German sentiment.

==Military==
German military doctrine under the Nazi regime, characterized with some controversy as blitzkrieg, called for air strikes that softened an intended victim for attack by motorized, mechanized, and airborne forces on the schwerpunkt (focal point), followed by encirclement by motorized forces, and exploitation of the gap by conventional infantry forces. Radio communication allowed for the close coordination necessary for such attacks, and allowed for coordination of the air force. The Nazis as much broke the rules of engagement which previously governed nations at war (such violations often deemed after the war as crimes against peace) as they innovated techniques of war. Axis reverses beginning with Allied routs of overextended German forces in El Alamein and Stalingrad resulted from British and Soviet forces adopting Nazi field strategies, and as the United States became a participant in the war it adopted much the same techniques of aerial attack upon Nazi Germany, if with greater force than the Luftwaffe could ever inflict.

As Nazi Germany faced severe defeat after the Battle of Kursk and especially the cross-channel invasion it introduced cross-channel use of the V-1 flying bomb and V-2 rocket, although too late and too ineffectively to turn the war to its advantage. The German military machine was developing jet aircraft as fighters and bombers and long-range missiles, but far too late (they were only in the design and test stages) to change the outcome of the war. The victorious Allies would incorporate the early innovations of jet technology and long-distance rocket-based missiles into their armed forces, but only after the end of World War II after getting them beyond the developmental stages of design and testing.

==References==
*Steven Bela Vardy and T. Hunt Tooley, eds. &quot;Ethnic Cleansing in Twentieth-Century Europe&quot; . subsection by Richard Dominic Wiggers, &quot;The United States and the Refusal to Feed German Civilians after World War II&quot;

==Footnotes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="0" end="6" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="23" end="35" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="110" end="122" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="192" end="200" title="Untermensch" label="subhuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="204" end="217" title="Racial policy of Nazi Germany" label="Nazi ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="301" end="315" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="321" end="333" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="343" end="356" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="457" end="470" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="501" end="507" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="535" end="549" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="609" end="616" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="621" end="635" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="643" end="650" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="708" end="728" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet puppet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="826" end="839" title="Polish people" label="Polish nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="894" end="900" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="1022" end="1032" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="1229" end="1240" title="Untermensch" label="Untermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="1727" end="1732" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="1863" end="1872" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="1877" end="1887" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q335255" start="1967" end="1978" title="Curzon Line" label="Curzon Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="2167" end="2183" title="Oder–Neisse line" label="Oder–Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="2220" end="2234" title="ethnic Germans" label="ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833200" start="2237" end="2277" title="Kidnapping of Polish children by Germany" label="Kidnapping of Polish children by Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="2539" end="2553" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2755" end="2761" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="2854" end="2861" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="2897" end="2901" title="Lviv" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="2939" end="2954" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="3146" end="3183" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421758" start="3185" end="3214" title="Expulsion of Poles by Germany" label="Expulsion of Poles by Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="3216" end="3231" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q286474" start="3233" end="3259" title="German AB-Aktion in Poland" label="German AB-Aktion in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587808" start="3261" end="3284" title="The Holocaust in Poland" label="The Holocaust in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="3286" end="3318" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q702638" start="3320" end="3340" title="Operation Tannenberg" label="Operation Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487920" start="3342" end="3359" title="Intelligenzaktion" label="Intelligenzaktion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29002222" start="3361" end="3381" title="Chronicles of Terror" label="Chronicles of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="3570" end="3586" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3633" end="3654" title="socialism" label="socialist governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="3715" end="3738" title="liberal democracy" label="western style democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="4043" end="4076" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="4095" end="4114" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="10,651,000 soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q121066797" start="4127" end="4133" title="list of battles" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4142" end="4155" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070290" start="4174" end="4182" title="POW camp" label="POW camp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4216" end="4231" title="Vadim Erlikhman" label="Vadim Erlikhman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4401" end="4413" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="4449" end="4460" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137429" start="4681" end="4692" title="Soviet Jews" label="Soviet Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="4749" end="4760" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="4901" end="4912" title="buffer zone" label="buffer zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5073" end="5081" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="5129" end="5160" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="5412" end="5415" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="5459" end="5467" title="Soviet partisans" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="5591" end="5599" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="5651" end="5663" title="forced labor" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="5681" end="5687" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5926" end="5935" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5937" end="5953" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="6021" end="6036" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="a 900-day siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571785" start="6107" end="6130" title="Soviet prisoners of war" label="Soviet prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="6282" end="6298" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600973" start="6437" end="6458" title="Operation Keelhaul" label="forcible repatriation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6530" end="6545" title="History of slavery#Modern Europe" label="forced laborers"/>
<link wikidata="Q717489" start="6671" end="6684" title="Order No. 270" label="Order No. 270"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="6960" end="6967" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843161" start="7073" end="7079" title="History of the Jews in Belarus" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="7305" end="7317" title="slave labour" label="slave labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q430700" start="7622" end="7628" title="Khatyn" label="Khatyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="7744" end="7751" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="7965" end="7971" title="unfree labour" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q662057" start="7973" end="7984" title="Ostarbeiter" label="Ostarbeiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8533" end="8540" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063747" start="8661" end="8699" title="Forced settlements in the Soviet Union" label="Forced settlements in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="8701" end="8716" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q546403" start="8718" end="8729" title="Hunger Plan" label="Hunger Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150089" start="8731" end="8768" title="Occupation of Belarus by Nazi Germany" label="Occupation of Belarus by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600973" start="8770" end="8788" title="Operation Keelhaul" label="Operation Keelhaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q471779" start="8790" end="8813" title="World War II casualties" label="World War II casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="8888" end="8914" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="8972" end="8977" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="8991" end="8997" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="9002" end="9009" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="9036" end="9042" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="9101" end="9114" title="collaborationism" label="collaborating"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="9410" end="9428" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="9437" end="9446" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="9468" end="9472" title="Axis powers of World War II" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="9505" end="9514" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="9527" end="9535" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="9541" end="9569" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="9662" end="9668" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="9733" end="9752" title="extermination camps" label="extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144567" start="9813" end="9817" title="The Holocaust in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="9872" end="9900" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="9952" end="9957" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10010" end="10017" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10022" end="10028" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="10356" end="10372" title="colonialism" label="colonial empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="10573" end="10587" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="10658" end="10662" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="10699" end="10710" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="11033" end="11041" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q703550" start="11070" end="11087" title="Axis Occupation of Greece" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="11146" end="11161" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="11468" end="11474" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="11546" end="11556" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365756" start="11751" end="11760" title="reprisals" label="reprisals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="11797" end="11810" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="11886" end="11894" title="Sephardi" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="11908" end="11920" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12082" end="12096" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q490035" start="12349" end="12359" title="Greek Resistance" label="Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192254" start="12409" end="12434" title="National Liberation Front (Greece)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q663751" start="12692" end="12703" title="Security Battalions" label="armed units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473722" start="12948" end="12955" title="Dekemvriana" label="clashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="12996" end="13023" title="Greek Civil War" label="civil war from 1946 to 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q471779" start="13136" end="13159" title="World War II casualties" label="World War II casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q697929" start="14020" end="14036" title="Historikerstreit" label="Historikerstreit"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="14095" end="14108" title="German reunification" label="Reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q311449" start="14257" end="14267" title="The Reader" label="The Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="14387" end="14401" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="14414" end="14422" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="14619" end="14630" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="14649" end="14655" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="14698" end="14705" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="14871" end="14887" title="Oder-Neisse line" label="Oder-Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="14954" end="14972" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="15128" end="15134" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q700842" start="15223" end="15260" title="Former eastern territories of Germany" label="Former eastern territories of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="15267" end="15278" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="15353" end="15369" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="Germans expelees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255936" start="15398" end="15456" title="Estimates of number of deaths in connection with expulsion of Germans after WWII" label="Estimates of number of deaths in connection with expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="15528" end="15559" title="Cold War" label="broke over ideological problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="15830" end="15838" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="15907" end="15919" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q65917" start="15948" end="15961" title="Wilhelm Pieck" label="Wilhelm Pieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="15979" end="16011" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="16069" end="16103" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="16114" end="16140" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="16205" end="16231" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="16234" end="16246" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="16398" end="16409" title="Grundgesetz" label="Grundgesetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="16669" end="16706" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="16748" end="16763" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="16990" end="16994" title="Mark (money)" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q161348" start="17073" end="17090" title="Ramstein Air Base" label="Ramstein Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q159644" start="17218" end="17272" title="Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany" label="Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="17319" end="17338" title="George W. Bush administration" label="Bush Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="17699" end="17714" title="Morgenthau Plan" label="Morgenthau Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="17728" end="17743" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="17778" end="17795" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="17820" end="17841" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="17856" end="17860" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="17865" end="17873" title="George Marshall" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="18088" end="18103" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q661995" start="18168" end="18176" title="JCS 1067" label="JCS 1067"/>
<link wikidata="Q896234" start="18917" end="18949" title="The industrial plans for Germany" label="The industrial plans for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19237" end="19249" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="19334" end="19347" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27862467" start="19375" end="19395" title="economic imperialism" label="economic imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="19538" end="19547" title="Ruhr area" label="Ruhr area"/>
<link wikidata="Q464194" start="19596" end="19632" title="The Ruhr Agreement" label="International Authority for the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q316368" start="19694" end="19721" title="London Six-Power Conference" label="London Six-Power Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="19752" end="19779" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q161549" start="19894" end="19927" title="European Coal and Steel Community" label="European Coal and Steel Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="20055" end="20064" title="Saar (protectorate)" label="Saar area"/>
<link wikidata="Q81011" start="20329" end="20342" title="Upper Silesia" label="Upper Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="20443" end="20461" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16021" start="21130" end="21137" title="1000000000 (number)" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21502" end="21514" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q444698" start="21541" end="21560" title="Operation Paperclip" label="Operation Paperclip"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="21848" end="21864" title="displaced person" label="displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="21884" end="21887" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="21894" end="21912" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q694104" start="22421" end="22437" title="German Red Cross" label="German Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="22755" end="22762" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="22835" end="22851" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="23328" end="23344" title="Yalta conference" label="Yalta conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="23366" end="23378" title="forced labor" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="23700" end="23713" title="low countries" label="low countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467530" start="24071" end="24103" title="forced labor in the Soviet Union" label="forced labor in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204208" start="24165" end="24208" title="Forced labor of Germans in the Soviet Union" label="Forced labor of Germans in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q550881" start="24212" end="24226" title="Norman Naimark" label="Norman Naimark"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="24412" end="24420" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030017" start="24843" end="24860" title="collective trauma" label="collective trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="24892" end="24918" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q829465" start="25267" end="25279" title="War children" label="War children"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="26223" end="26234" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q700754" start="26488" end="26530" title="Inner German border" label="heavily fortified and guarded border areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="27021" end="27032" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="27035" end="27043" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="27046" end="27066" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27069" end="27076" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="27080" end="27092" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="27096" end="27108" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204290" start="27111" end="27140" title="History of Germany since 1945" label="History of Germany since 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="27143" end="27156" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169505" start="27159" end="27169" title="Ostpolitik" label="Ostpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="27246" end="27263" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="27303" end="27317" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="27521" end="27550" title="Charter of the United Nations" label="Charter of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="27631" end="27645" title="Geopolitics" label="Geopolitically"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="27651" end="27664" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27673" end="27685" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="27857" end="27865" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="27885" end="27900" title="Proxy war" label="proxy conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="27953" end="27966" title="British Empire" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q865344" start="28225" end="28259" title="Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide" label="United Nations Genocide Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="28288" end="28296" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="28395" end="28432" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="28478" end="28494" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q715434" start="28514" end="28529" title="Nazi war crimes" label="Nazi war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q973748" start="28767" end="28791" title="Fourth Geneva Convention" label="Fourth Geneva Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="28887" end="28903" title="Extermination camp" label="Nazi death camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="28980" end="28987" title="Liberalism" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q582965" start="28988" end="28999" title="anti-racism" label="anti-racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="29112" end="29143" title="Multiculturalism" label="tolerance of different cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="29347" end="29352" title="white people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="29353" end="29366" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262732" start="29438" end="29443" title="purge" label="purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="29552" end="29568" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="29722" end="29743" title="anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="29846" end="29856" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496097" start="30378" end="30398" title="crimes against peace" label="crimes against peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="30512" end="30522" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="30527" end="30537" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="30847" end="30862" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="30882" end="30904" title="D-Day" label="cross-channel invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="30925" end="30932" title="English Channel" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="30944" end="30959" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="30964" end="30967" title="V-2" label="V-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12816759" start="31528" end="31545" title="Steven Bela Vardy" label="Steven Bela Vardy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362052" wikidata="Q3182423" url="?curid=362052" title="John Sanderson">
<text>Lieutenant General John Murray Sanderson, (born 4 November 1940) is a retired senior Australian Army officer and vice-regal representative. He served as Force Commander of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia from 1992 to 1993, Chief of Army from 1995 to 1998, and was the 29th Governor of Western Australia from 2000 to 2005.

==Early life==
Born in Geraldton, Western Australia on 4 November 1940, John Sanderson completed his secondary education at Bunbury High School in 1957 before entering the Royal Military College, Duntroon in 1958. He graduated in 1961 and was commissioned into the Royal Australian Engineers in December 1961.

==Military career==
After completing a Fellowship Diploma in civil engineering at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Sanderson had a series of regimental postings. These included second in command of the 10th Field Squadron and troop commander and construction officer of the 21st Construction Squadron on operational service in Sabah, Malaysia. He was promoted to captain in 1965.

Following eighteen months as a staff officer in the Office of the Engineer in Chief, he was posted as the exchange instructor at the Royal School of Military Engineering in Chattenden, United Kingdom from 1967 to 1969. He returned to Australia to command the 23rd Construction Squadron at Holsworthy Barracks, prior to taking up command of the 17th Construction Squadron in South Vietnam at the end of 1970.

Returning to Australia in late 1971, he was the senior instructor at the School of Military Engineering throughout 1972 before attending the Army Command and Staff College at Fort Queenscliff in 1973.

Sanderson was promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1975 after serving for a short period as a Staff Officer at the Headquarters of Field Force Command. His initial appointment as Staff Officer Grade 1 at the Directorate of Engineers was followed by two years (1976–1978) as the Exchange Instructor at the British Army&#x27;s Staff College, Camberley.

Sanderson commanded the 1st Field Engineer Regiment from 1979 to 1980, and then attended the Joint Services Command and Staff College in 1981. Sanderson was appointed as the military assistant to the Chief of the General Staff in late 1981, serving in that capacity until being promoted to colonel as director of army plans in 1983.

From June 1985 to the middle of 1986, he attended the U.S. Army War College, returning to Australia with the rank of brigadier. After a six-month period as chairman of the Army Reserve Review Committee, he assumed command of the 1st Brigade at Holsworthy.

Sanderson served as chief of staff, land command, for a brief period in 1989 and was then promoted to major general and appointed as assistant chief of defence policy. In this role he was tasked to develop and carry out major reforms to the Higher Australian Defence Force Staff, which resulted in him becoming the first assistant chief of defence force development at the end of 1989.

From October 1991, Sanderson became engaged directly in the United Nations process to bring peace to Cambodia, first as adviser to the Secretary General of the United Nations, and then from March 1992, in the rank of lieutenant general, as the commander of the 16,000-strong international military component of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

After the successful completion of the UN mission in October 1993, Sanderson returned to Australia to be appointed as the first commander, Joint Forces Australia, (now Chief of Joint Operations), and developed this role until becoming Chief of the General Staff in June 1995. This position was renamed to Chief of Army in 1997, and Sanderson continued in this position until his retirement from the army on 23 June 1998.

==Governor of Western Australia==
On 18 August 2000, Sanderson was sworn in as 29th governor of Western Australia.

Sanderson retired as Governor of Western Australia in June 2005 after his term of office expired, but agreed to stay on until 31 October 2005 to assist with the transition to the new governor. His successor, Ken Michael, was sworn in on 18 January 2006.

==Publications==
*1999 &quot;Australia&#x27;s role in Asia&quot;
*1999 &quot;International humanitarian law and the Balkans : the dilemma of a superpower&quot;
*2005 &quot;Ride the whirlpool : selected speeches of Lieutenant General John Sanderson AC Governor of Western Australia 2000–2005&quot;, University of Western Australia Press. &quot;(Table of Contents, Catalogue entries: NLA)&quot;
*2009 &quot;The reconciliation journey&quot;

==Honours and awards==








==References==
==External links==
* Swearing In Ceremony – Address in Reply (John Sanderson), Governor of Western Australia
*Portrait, 1989-04-18, Major General John Sanderson, Assistant Chief of Defence Force Policy. (Copyright, Australian War Memorial)
*Timeline, Lieutenant General John Murray Sanderson, AC. (Copyright, Australian War Memorial)
*2005 portrait by Heide Smith</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6544462" start="0" end="18" title="Lieutenant general (Australia)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182423" start="19" end="40" title="John Sanderson" label="John Murray Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="85" end="100" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="176" end="225" title="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia" label="United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097001" start="245" end="258" title="Chief of Army (Australia)" label="Chief of Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372518" start="295" end="324" title="Governor of Western Australia" label="Governor of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="368" end="396" title="Geraldton, Western Australia" label="Geraldton, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997429" start="469" end="488" title="Bunbury Senior High School" label="Bunbury High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171074" start="517" end="549" title="Royal Military College, Duntroon" label="Royal Military College, Duntroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373749" start="610" end="636" title="Royal Australian Engineers" label="Royal Australian Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057890" start="742" end="781" title="RMIT University" label="Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="995" end="1000" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="1031" end="1038" title="Captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374801" start="1182" end="1218" title="Royal School of Military Engineering" label="Royal School of Military Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206850" start="1338" end="1357" title="Holsworthy Barracks" label="Holsworthy Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="1423" end="1436" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824072" start="1599" end="1629" title="Army Command and Staff College" label="Army Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077989" start="1633" end="1649" title="Fort Queenscliff" label="Fort Queenscliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="1686" end="1704" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596549" start="1982" end="2006" title="Staff College, Camberley" label="Staff College, Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269376" start="2102" end="2142" title="Joint Services Command and Staff College" label="Joint Services Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097001" start="2209" end="2235" title="Chief of Army (Australia)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q635078" start="2397" end="2418" title="U.S. Army War College" label="U.S. Army War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="2460" end="2469" title="brigadier" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738072" start="2702" end="2715" title="Major general (Australia)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="2848" end="2872" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3047" end="3061" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3088" end="3096" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="3122" end="3161" title="Secretary General of the United Nations" label="Secretary General of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544462" start="3204" end="3222" title="Lieutenant general (Australia)" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3302" end="3316" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="3353" end="3358" title="UNTAC" label="UNTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097027" start="3530" end="3555" title="Chief of Joint Operations (Australia)" label="Chief of Joint Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097001" start="3667" end="3680" title="Chief of Army (Australia)" label="Chief of Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="3880" end="3897" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185788" start="4108" end="4119" title="Ken Michael" label="Ken Michael"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362059" wikidata="Q954361" url="?curid=362059" title="Hill Valley (Back to the Future)">
<text>Hill Valley is a fictional town in California that serves as the setting of the &quot;Back to the Future&quot; trilogy and its animated spin-off series. In the trilogy, Hill Valley is seen in four different time periods – 1885, 1955, 1985, and 2015 – as well as in a dystopian alternate 1985. The films contain many sight gags, verbal innuendos and detailed set design elements, from which a detailed and consistent history of the area can be derived.

The city name &quot;Hill Valley&quot; is a joke, being an oxymoron. However, an early script for &quot;Back to the Future Part II&quot; mentioned that Hill Valley was named after its founder, William &quot;Bill&quot; Hill.

==Production==
For &quot;Back to the Future&quot;, the producers considered filming the town square scenes in the real city of Petaluma, California, but soon realized it would be prohibitively expensive and impractical to alter a real place to suit the different eras. Instead, filming was completed on the Universal Studios backlot, where they had more control. The town square set was called Mockingbird Square after the 1962 film &quot;To Kill a Mockingbird&quot;, but was later known as Courthouse Square. It had been used for many films and television shows dating back to 1948&#x27;s &quot;An Act of Murder,&quot; including the first 1959 episode of the sci-fi series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, called &quot;Where Is Everybody?&quot; 

The Hill Valley courthouse can be seen in the movies &quot;Bruce Almighty&quot;, &quot;Gremlins&quot;, &quot;Bye Bye Birdie&quot;, &quot;Sneakers&quot;, The Offspring&#x27;s music video &quot;Why Don&#x27;t You Get a Job?&quot;, an episode of &quot;Major Dad&quot; entitled &quot;Who&#x27;s That Blonde&quot;, and an episode of &quot;Buffy The Vampire Slayer&quot;. The clock tower was a removable addition, one of many ways in which the Courthouse building has been redressed over the years to suit the needs of a production.

Many of the cars that appear in the 2015 scenes are either modified for the film or concept cars. Examples include Ford Probe, Saab EV-1, Citroën DS 21, Pontiac Banshee Concept, Pontiac Fiero and Volkswagen Beetle. Cars reused from other science fiction films include the &quot;Star Car&quot; from &quot;The Last Starfighter&quot; (1984) and a &quot;Spinner&quot; from &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982). Griff&#x27;s car is a modified BMW 633, which was never sold in the convertible form seen in the film.

For &quot;Back to the Future Part III&quot;, Hill Valley 1885 was filmed in Sonora, California. The producers were able to use the land rent-free under an agreement to leave the set buildings on site. All buildings except the clock tower were left intact after production completed.

On November 6, 1990, an arson fire on the Universal Studios Hollywood backlot destroyed much of Courthouse Square, the setting in which all the other time periods were filmed. The Courthouse survived the devastation and other facades were reconstructed. Another fire on September 6, 1997 damaged Courthouse Square. The backlot facades were rebuilt, with the exception of the facades used for Hill Valley 1885.

On February 14, 1999, a fire at Whittier High School, California, where some, mostly exterior scenes were filmed, destroyed the men&#x27;s gym there. On June 1, 2008, another fire destroyed part of the rebuilt Courthouse Square backlot and damaged the clock tower.

===Real-life locations===
Other real-life shooting locations of Hill Valley landmarks include:
* Doc&#x27;s house in 1955 is the Gamble House in Pasadena, California. Doc&#x27;s garage in 1985 was a façade set up next to a Burger King on North Victory Boulevard in Burbank, California.
* Twin Pines/Lone Pine Mall is actually the Puente Hills Mall in Industry, California.
* Marty&#x27;s Lyon Estates house in 1985 is actually at 9303 Roslyndale Avenue, Pacoima, California.
* The 1955 Lyon Estates field is actually along farmland between the city borders of Chino, California and Corona, California.
* Peabody&#x27;s Twin Pines Ranch is really at Golden Oak Ranch, which is owned by The Walt Disney Company and used in many Disney productions.
* The houses of George McFly, Lorraine Baines, and Biff Tannen in 1955 are all in South Pasadena, California.
* The train that hit the DeLorean and the Futuristic Train were parked in Port Hueneme, California.
* John F. Kennedy Drive is actually Victory Boulevard in Burbank, California.
* The River Road Tunnel is actually Observatory Tunnel at Griffith Park in Los Angeles. The actual tunnel is only a fraction of the length of the one depicted in Part II.
* The Pohatchee Drive-In Theater where Marty initially travels from 1955 back to 1885 was not a real theater. It was constructed full-scale for the third film in Monument Valley, Utah (near the Arizona/Utah border) and was torn down after that portion of filming was completed.
* Marty&#x27;s race with Needles was shot on Doris Avenue in Oxnard, California.
* Hilldale in 1985 was filmed at Doris Avenue and Oxford Drive in Oxnard, California.
* Hilldale in 2015 was filmed at Oakhurst Street and Somerset Avenue in El Monte, California.
* Hill Valley High School was filmed at Whittier High School in Whittier, California.

==Location==
According to an 1885 Central Pacific Railroad map in &quot;Back to the Future Part III&quot;, Hill Valley is located in Northern California in the Sierra Nevada. Dialogue in &quot;Back to the Future Part II&quot; and &quot;Back to the Future Part III&quot; places it in &quot;Hill County&quot;, a fictional county in California.

After Marty decides against racing Needles at the end of Back to the Future Part III, the zip code 95420 is visible on the letterhead of the printout Jennifer brought back with her from 2015 announcing Marty&#x27;s termination from Cusco. This zip code corresponds with Caspar, California, an unincorporated community in Mendocino County.

==Fictional history==
The following information is taken directly from places and events shown or mentioned in the three films:

===Early settlement===
The town of Hill Valley was first settled in 1850 and incorporated in 1865. By the 1880s, it was connected by railroad to San Francisco. Construction of a new county courthouse was well underway in 1885, the setting of &quot;Back to the Future Part III&quot;, in which a new clock was dedicated for the building. The Shonash Ravine Bridge was completed in the summer of 1886, around the same time the ravine was renamed Clayton Ravine in memory of Clara Clayton, a school teacher who died from falling into the chasm. In a revised timeline where Doc Brown saved Clara&#x27;s life, the town renamed it Eastwood Ravine when it is believed that &quot;Clint Eastwood&quot; (an alias used by Marty McFly) fell into the ravine.

===Town square===
By 1955, as seen in the first two &quot;Back to the Future&quot; films, the area around the courthouse has developed into the downtown of Hill Valley. In front of the courthouse is a grass-covered town square, with stores, two movie theaters, Essex and Town, and cafés on the surrounding streets. Downtown also features a Texaco station, a Bank of America branch, and a Studebaker dealership. A key moment in the town&#x27;s fictional history takes place on Saturday, November 12, 1955, at 10:04 p.m. PST, when lightning strikes the courthouse&#x27;s clock tower, freezing the clock at 10:04. The clock is never repaired and becomes a local landmark, left in its non-functional state at the behest of the Hill Valley Preservation Society. In the revised timeline, the broken piece of ledge from Doc Brown&#x27;s successful attempt to channel lightning from the clock tower is likewise never repaired, as can be seen when Marty returns to 1985 and in 2015, but not in the alternate 1985.

In Marty&#x27;s original timeline, many of the town square businesses have moved or closed down by 1985. The new businesses which replaced them include a second-hand shop, a yoga studio, and an adult book store, and the Studebaker dealership becomes a Toyota dealership, but is still owned by the Statlers, though the Texaco station and Bank of America branch remained. The Essex movie theater now shows porno movies while the Town Theater is used for church services, and the courthouse is in a state of disrepair, and at night at least one homeless person (called &quot;Red&quot; by Marty) sleeps on the town square park benches. 

The grassy park outside of the courthouse has been converted into a parking lot. &quot;That was always one of the major elements of the story even in its earliest incarnation,&quot; screenwriter Bob Gale says in &quot;The Making of Back to the Future&quot;, &quot;was to take a place and show what happens to it over a period of thirty years. What happened to everybody&#x27;s home town is obviously the same thing. They built the mall out in the boonies, and killed all the business downtown, and everything changed.&quot;

By the 21st century, the downtown area has experienced a revival. The courthouse has been converted into the Courthouse Mall. Businesses have begun to move back into and around the town square and the parking lot has been replaced by a pond. The clock on top of the courthouse is still preserved at 10:04 and the mall&#x27;s logo is an illustration of a lightning bolt striking the clock tower. The Town Theater/Assembly of Christ building has been converted to an art museum with a mural painted on the front side of the building above the marquee. The Texaco station remains, while the Toyota dealership is now a Pontiac dealership, though in reality General Motors discontinued the Pontiac brand in 2010 as part of its bankruptcy.

Signs that say &quot;Welcome to Hill Valley&quot; are seen in 1955, 1985 and 2015. Both 1955 and 2015 signs have symbols representing the Rotary, Kiwanis and Lions clubs. The 1955 sign has the logos of the YMCA, Jaycees, and Future Farmers of America while the 2015 sign has those of the Neighborhood Crime Watch eye logo and the 4-H Club clover logo. The &quot;Welcome to Hill Valley&quot; sign in 1985 does not contain any signage representing any clubs and mentions the name of Mayor Goldie Wilson. 

In the alternate 1985, Marty is seen walking over the sign, which has been knocked down and an &#x27;E&#x27; has been spray painted over the &#x27;I&#x27; in HILL VALLEY making the name &quot;HELL VALLEY.&quot; This sign does not display the name of the mayor but instead the words &quot;A Nice Place to Live&quot; as seen in 1955. A sign referencing US Highway 395 is shown next to the Town Square in 1955.

===Twin Pines Mall / Lone Pine Mall===

Twin Pines Mall is a shopping center located outside Hill Valley, where Doctor Emmett Brown first tests his time machine, making his dog Einstein the first time traveler in the world. The site where the mall was filmed for the movie is actually Puente Hills Mall, located in City of Industry, California. The J.C. Penney location seen in the movie has been shut down and is now occupied by a 24 Hour Fitness center. The mall&#x27;s name changed to Lone Pine Mall after Marty went back to 1985, because he accidentally destroyed one of the two baby pine trees for which it was named, as he fled an irate Old Man Peabody, whose barn the DeLorean crashed into upon arriving in 1955.

===Alternate history===
In &quot;Back to the Future Part II&quot;, a nightmarish alternate version of Hill Valley, dubbed 1985A by Doc, is depicted with a partial history. Due to the influence of the powerful and corrupt Biff Tannen, gambling was legalized in 1979. Tannen&#x27;s toxic waste reclamation plants were built downtown, polluting the air and leading to pollution alerts to be issued. All of the local businesses in the downtown area closed or relocated and were replaced with strip clubs, porn theaters, and brothels. Tannen bought off the police. Consequently, crime increased and biker gangs settled in the city. Hill Valley&#x27;s public schools burned down and the courthouse was converted into Biff Tannen&#x27;s Pleasure Paradise Casino and Hotel. 

The clock on the courthouse remains at 10:04, although despite the damage the Doc did to the tower&#x27;s platform in 1955, for whatever reason, it now seems to have disappeared. Biff murdered George McFly, Marty&#x27;s dad, on March 15, 1973, so that he could marry George&#x27;s wife Lorraine, Marty&#x27;s mom, making him a corrupt family man as well as town ruler. He helped Richard Nixon remain President of the United States until at least 1985. Biff&#x27;s effect on history affected the whole world – in this version of history, the Vietnam War was still ongoing by May 1983.

According to the original script for &quot;Back to the Future Part II&quot; a partial view of the alternate 2015 was also to be depicted. By this time Biff now owns half the state of California with his influence having gained his son, Biff Jr., the seat of governor and they uphold their power and corruption with an army of large, powerful cyborg police officers, which now has its 5 star resort in what would have been the courthouse mall in 2015.

===&quot;Back to the Future: The Game&quot; alternate history===
Another timeline, branching off the events of &quot;Back to the Future: The Game&quot;, sees Irving &quot;Kid&quot; Tannen, the father of Biff Tannen and a prohibitionism era mafioso, avoid his lengthy incarceration for illegal consumption and sale of alcohol. In the alternate 1986 Biff Tannen has two brothers, and the Tannen family is a recognized crime family, ruling over Hill Valley with an iron grip.

In yet another alternate history, branching off the events of &quot;Back to the Future: The Game&quot;, in 1931 a teen Emmett Brown, fell in love with the young journalist Edna Strickland: as a result she married Emmett, convincing him to pursue sociological and political goals. She managed to win him over by keeping him interested in science, but in a manner that his scientific skills could be used to control people instead of using science to understand mysteries and for the betterment of humanity. Under &quot;Citizen Brown&quot;&#x27;s influence, by 1985 Hill Valley is a technological dystopia, where Emmett Brown oversees a fascist regime, controlling every single activity of his citizens, routinely brainwashed and spied over.

In this new Hill Valley, in a reversal of their usual roles, Marty McFly is a &quot;square&quot;, serious and devoted to Emmett Brown to a fault, as the &quot;original&quot; McFly is dismayed to discover, and Jennifer is a rebellious rocker, a wild child with an unpredictable streak. Lorraine is again a mildly obese, inebriated sad woman. George has reverted to be the loser he is in the first, original timeline, although his oppressor is big government instead of Biff. George reprises his &quot;peeping Tom&quot; activities as seen in &quot;Back to the Future&quot;, under the guise of monitoring security camera footage for Citizen Brown.

Biff Tannen is now one part of the &quot;Citizen Plus&quot; program, brainwashed into obedience. Hill Valley is a technologically advanced marvel, owned by a now rich and powerful Emmett Brown, with even the iconic Town Hall replaced by a huge pane with the &quot;E. Brown Industries&quot; symbol. Since in this timeline Emmett Brown never developed time-travel technology, the events of the original series never took place, and the &quot;Eastwood Ravine&quot; is still known as the &quot;Clayton Ravine&quot;, as no one saved Clara from her death.

The last attempt to fix the damages involved with the events of &quot;Back to the Future: The Game&quot; ends with even a more radical change. Edna Strickland travels under an assumed name to 1876 to act as a moral guide of the newly founded Hill Valley. After a failed confrontation with Beauregard Tannen, a Confederate soldier who built and founded the Palace Saloon, she accidentally causes a conflagration that consumes Hill Valley, turning it into a ghost town with herself as the only resident. As a result of her actions, Marty and Doc witness 1931 Hill Valley disappear and be replaced by a valley made of hills, implying that this was how Hill Valley got its name in the first place.

Again, Marty and Doc manage to restore the continuity, that now sports minor alterations: Arthur and Silvia, Marty&#x27;s grandparents, prepone their marriage to 1931. It was 1936 in the original timeline. Doc Brown spends more time in 1986 and less traveling through time. Kid Tannen is now reformed, married to Edna Strickland and having a better influence over Biff.

==Places==
Many family businesses are passed down from generation to generation in Hill Valley. As a result, the city changes but remains similar from one generation to the next, as businesses are updated but rarely change. These recurring elements were a deliberate choice on the part of the filmmakers. The production designer of &quot;Back to the Future Part II&quot;, Rick Carter, is quoted in a DVD extra as saying, &quot;The future is built on the present.&quot; Director Robert Zemeckis adds that the continuity between the different eras in Hill Valley&#x27;s history is an example of the adage, &quot;the more things change, the more they stay the same&quot;.

The following is a list of such places. When a place is not seen or mentioned in a movie, it is marked &quot;unknown&quot;. Some buildings shown in 1885 scenes are actually located further down the street in an area not shown in the first two movies.

==Reception==
&quot;Back to the Future&quot; has been criticized for presenting an idealized 1950s setting almost entirely populated by White people, and contrasting this with a more troubled 1985 town run by a Black mayor. In &quot;Black Space: Imagining Race in Science Fiction Film&quot;, Adilifu Nama writes, &quot;The film performs robust semiotic work around race by symbolically associating the degraded cityscape of Hill Valley with inept black leadership. Marty&#x27;s personal family crisis, marked by a socially impotent father and an alcoholic mother, is mirrored in the condition of Hill Valley. Boarded-up businesses, schoolyard graffiti, and an adult-video bookstore placed in the center of town indicate that the Hill Valley of 1985 is suffering from severe economic and moral decline. Alongside these visual signifiers of socioeconomic crisis are posters of the Black mayor, Goldie Wilson, scattered throughout downtown Hill Valley.&quot;

==See also==
*&quot;Back to the Future&quot; (franchise)

==References==
==External links==
*The &quot;Back to the Future&quot; Tour
*Movie Locations Guide.com: &quot;Back to the Future&quot; filming locations
*Back to Hill Valley - &quot;Back to the Future&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q954361" start="0" end="11" title="Hill Valley (Back to the Future)" label="Hill Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712005" start="17" end="31" title="fictional town" label="fictional town"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="35" end="45" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q91558" start="80" end="118" title="Back to the Future trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Back to the Future&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="127" end="151" title="Back to the Future: The Animated Series" label="animated spin-off series"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="267" end="275" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109331" start="277" end="291" title="Back to the Future Part II" label="alternate 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191969" start="316" end="326" title="Visual gag" label="sight gags"/>
<link wikidata="Q169429" start="511" end="519" title="oxymoron" label="oxymoron"/>
<link wikidata="Q109331" start="556" end="582" title="Back to the Future Part II" label="Back to the Future Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q91540" start="702" end="720" title="Back to the Future" label="Back to the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q720087" start="804" end="824" title="Petaluma, California" label="Petaluma, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="984" end="1001" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q478969" start="1002" end="1009" title="backlot" label="backlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q177922" start="1116" end="1137" title="To Kill a Mockingbird (film)" label="To Kill a Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178521" start="1168" end="1185" title="Courthouse Square" label="Courthouse Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749709" start="1273" end="1289" title="An Act of Murder" label="An Act of Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="1357" end="1374" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675185" start="1395" end="1414" title="Where Is Everybody?" label="Where Is Everybody?"/>
<link wikidata="Q207816" start="1482" end="1496" title="Bruce Almighty" label="Bruce Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q241958" start="1510" end="1518" title="Gremlins" label="Gremlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018482" start="1532" end="1546" title="Bye Bye Birdie (musical)" label="Bye Bye Birdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q497082" start="1560" end="1568" title="Sneakers (1992 film)" label="Sneakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="1576" end="1596" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722036" start="1615" end="1644" title="Why Don&amp;#x27;t You Get a Job?" label="Why Don&amp;#x27;t You Get a Job?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814946" start="1672" end="1681" title="Major Dad" label="Major Dad"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="1757" end="1781" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (TV series)" label="Buffy The Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q938781" start="2066" end="2076" title="Ford Probe" label="Ford Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113383" start="2078" end="2087" title="Saab EV-1" label="Saab EV-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q465966" start="2089" end="2102" title="Citroën DS" label="Citroën DS 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228221" start="2104" end="2127" title="Pontiac Banshee" label="Pontiac Banshee Concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q348019" start="2129" end="2142" title="Pontiac Fiero" label="Pontiac Fiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="2147" end="2164" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="2189" end="2204" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888138" start="2255" end="2275" title="The Last Starfighter" label="The Last Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="2326" end="2338" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q636732" start="2384" end="2391" title="BMW 633" label="BMW 633"/>
<link wikidata="Q230552" start="2467" end="2494" title="Back to the Future Part III" label="Back to the Future Part III"/>
<link wikidata="Q953567" start="2533" end="2551" title="Sonora, California" label="Sonora, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337576" start="2783" end="2810" title="Universal Studios Hollywood" label="Universal Studios Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178521" start="2837" end="2854" title="Courthouse Square" label="Courthouse Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="3068" end="3074" title="facade" label="facade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996874" start="3184" end="3216" title="Whittier High School, California" label="Whittier High School, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q64605287" start="3319" end="3331" title="2008 Universal Studios fire" label="another fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519656" start="3547" end="3559" title="Gamble House (Pasadena, California)" label="Gamble House"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="3563" end="3583" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q177054" start="3641" end="3652" title="Burger King" label="Burger King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927470" start="3656" end="3679" title="Victory Boulevard (Los Angeles)" label="North Victory Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="3683" end="3702" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258504" start="3748" end="3765" title="Puente Hills Mall" label="Puente Hills Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q927094" start="3769" end="3789" title="City of Industry, California" label="Industry, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994419" start="3872" end="3891" title="Pacoima, California" label="Pacoima, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q506395" start="3978" end="3995" title="Chino, California" label="Chino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q494707" start="4000" end="4018" title="Corona, California" label="Corona, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030313" start="4067" end="4083" title="Golden Oak Ranch" label="Golden Oak Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="4103" end="4126" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q852581" start="4246" end="4272" title="South Pasadena, California" label="South Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q983853" start="4348" end="4372" title="Port Hueneme, California" label="Port Hueneme, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="4431" end="4450" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340614" start="4510" end="4523" title="Griffith Park" label="Griffith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q852197" start="4785" end="4806" title="Monument Valley, Utah" label="Monument Valley, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="4962" end="4980" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="5140" end="5160" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996874" start="5202" end="5222" title="Whittier High School" label="Whittier High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="5226" end="5246" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053930" start="5283" end="5307" title="Central Pacific Railroad" label="Central Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="5382" end="5401" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="5409" end="5422" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q665477" start="5862" end="5880" title="Caspar, California" label="Caspar, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108087" start="5913" end="5929" title="Mendocino County" label="Mendocino County"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6206" end="6219" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="6732" end="6746" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338941" start="6771" end="6782" title="Marty McFly" label="Marty McFly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050303" start="6951" end="6959" title="downtown" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="7052" end="7065" title="movie theater" label="movie theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="7088" end="7092" title="café" label="café"/>
<link wikidata="Q775060" start="7147" end="7153" title="Texaco" label="Texaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="7165" end="7180" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q938876" start="7195" end="7205" title="Studebaker" label="Studebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="7336" end="7345" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068804" start="7967" end="7983" title="Used goods" label="second-hand shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="7987" end="7991" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q221618" start="8007" end="8023" title="Sex shop" label="adult book store"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="8065" end="8071" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="8217" end="8229" title="porno movies" label="porno movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="8355" end="8363" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="9587" end="9594" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="9625" end="9639" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532041" start="9694" end="9704" title="General Motors Chapter 11 reorganization" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="9845" end="9851" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586640" start="9853" end="9860" title="Kiwanis" label="Kiwanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q270029" start="9865" end="9870" title="Lions Clubs International" label="Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="9913" end="9917" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890699" start="9919" end="9926" title="Jaycees" label="Jaycees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="9932" end="9957" title="National FFA Organization" label="Future Farmers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q127930" start="9995" end="10019" title="Neighborhood Watch" label="Neighborhood Crime Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q238139" start="10037" end="10040" title="4-H" label="4-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337004" start="10732" end="10751" title="Emmett Brown" label="Doctor Emmett Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258504" start="10905" end="10922" title="Puente Hills Mall" label="Puente Hills Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q927094" start="10935" end="10951" title="City of Industry, California" label="City of Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="10969" end="10980" title="J.C. Penney" label="J.C. Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631849" start="11052" end="11067" title="24 Hour Fitness" label="24 Hour Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q109331" start="11374" end="11400" title="Back to the Future Part II" label="Back to the Future Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537674" start="11562" end="11573" title="Biff Tannen" label="Biff Tannen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682277" start="11627" end="11644" title="waste reclamation" label="waste reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586445" start="11829" end="11840" title="strip clubs" label="strip clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q52815" start="11842" end="11854" title="porn theater" label="porn theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="11861" end="11869" title="brothels" label="brothels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849110" start="11935" end="11946" title="Motorcycle gang" label="biker gangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12488" end="12501" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="12509" end="12539" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="12650" end="12661" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="13036" end="13042" title="cyborg" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13263" end="13291" title="Back to the Future: The Game" label="Back to the Future: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146701" start="13367" end="13381" title="prohibitionism" label="prohibitionism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13688" end="13716" title="Back to the Future: The Game" label="Back to the Future: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="14215" end="14223" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="14595" end="14599" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q91540" start="14907" end="14925" title="Back to the Future" label="Back to the Future"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15628" end="15656" title="Back to the Future: The Game" label="Back to the Future: The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q109331" start="16962" end="16988" title="Back to the Future Part II" label="Back to the Future Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q91558" start="18517" end="18559" title="Back to the Future (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Back to the Future&amp;quot; (franchise)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362060" wikidata="Q76440" url="?curid=362060" title="Kurt Eisner">
<text>Kurt Eisner (; 14 May 1867 21 February 1919) was a German politician, revolutionary, journalist, and theatre critic. As a socialist journalist, he organized the socialist revolution that overthrew the Wittelsbach monarchy in Bavaria in November 1918, which led to him being described as &quot;the symbol of the Bavarian revolution&quot;. He is used as an example of &quot;charismatic authority&quot; by Max Weber. Eisner subsequently proclaimed the People&#x27;s State of Bavaria but was assassinated by far-right German nationalist Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley in Munich on 21 February 1919.

==Life and career==
Kurt Eisner was born in Berlin on 14 May 1867, to Emanuel Eisner and Hedwig Levenstein, both Jewish. Newspaper reports of his death identify him as being born in the Kingdom of Galicia. From 1892 to 1917 he was married to painter Elisabeth Hendrich with whom he had five children. After they divorced Eisner married Elise Belli, an editor. With her, he had two daughters.

Eisner studied philosophy, but then became a journalist in Marburg. From 1890 to 1895, he was contributing editor of the &quot;Frankfurter Zeitung&quot;, during which time he wrote an article attacking Kaiser Wilhelm II, and for which he spent nine months in prison. Eisner was always an open republican as well as a Social-Democrat, joining the SPD in 1898, although for tactical reasons, German Social-Democracy, particularly in its later stages, rather cold-shouldered anything in the shape of republican propaganda as unnecessary and included in general Social-Democratic aims. Consequently, he fought actively for political democracy as well as Social-Democracy. He became editor of &quot;Vorwärts&quot; after the death of Wilhelm Liebknecht in 1900, but in 1905 was called upon to resign by a majority of the editorial board, which favored more orthodox Marxists. After that, his activities were confined in the main to Bavaria, though he toured other parts of Germany. He was chief editor of the &quot;Fränkische Tagespost&quot; in Nuremberg from 1907 to 1910, and afterward became a freelance journalist in Munich.

Eisner joined the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany in 1917, at the height of World War I, and was convicted of treason in 1918 for his role in inciting a strike of munitions workers. He spent nine months in Cell 70 of Stadelheim Prison, but was released during the General Amnesty in October of that year.

After his release from prison, Eisner organized the revolution that overthrew the monarchy in Bavaria (&quot;see German Revolution&quot;). He declared Bavaria to be a free state and republic, the People&#x27;s State of Bavaria, on 8 November 1918, becoming the first republican premier of Bavaria. On 23 November 1918, he leaked documents from the Bavarian plenipotentiary in Berlin during July and August 1914 that he thought proved that the war was caused by &quot;a small horde of mad Prussian military&quot; men as well as &quot;allied&quot; industrialists, capitalists, politicians, and princes. At the Berne Conference of Socialists held in Bern, Switzerland, he attacked moderate German socialists for their refusal to acknowledge Germany&#x27;s part in bringing about World War I. For that speech, and for his uncompromising hostility to Prussia, he became bitterly hated by large sections of the German people.

==Death and legacy==
Eisner was assassinated in Munich when German nationalist Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley shot him in the back on 21 February 1919. At the time, Eisner had been on his way to present his resignation to the Bavarian parliament. His assassination resulted in the elected government of the People&#x27;s State of Bavaria fleeing Munich and the establishment of the short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic and parliament.

Arco-Valley was tried for murder in January 1920. He was found guilty and sentenced to death, but his sentence was reduced to life imprisonment. The State Prosecutor said of him, &quot;If the whole German youth were imbued with such a glowing enthusiasm we could face the future with confidence.&quot; He served his sentence at Landsberg Prison in cell 70, and in 1924 he was evicted from his cell to make way for Adolf Hitler. He was released in 1925, and was on probation until 1927, when he was pardoned. In June 1945, Arco-Valley was killed in a traffic accident in Salzburg, after the horse-drawn carriage which he was riding in collided with a U.S. Army vehicle.

Eisner had a very large funeral with thousands of attendants coming to mourn his death. One guest who was there was Adolf Hitler. In surviving footage of Eisner&#x27;s funeral, Hitler can be seen wearing a black armband to symbolize the mourning of Eisner, as well as a red armband which represented support for the socialist revolution in Munich.

When the Passau labor union tried to stage a play about Eisner at the bishopric theater in 1920, Reichswehr soldiers and high school students sabotaged it, using weapons from the military arsenal. Among other things, 11 machine guns were used. The incident, dubbed the &quot;Passau Theater Scandal&quot;, triggered media headlines and a variety of judicial procedures.

Eisner was buried in the Munich &quot;Ostfriedhof&quot;. On 1 May 1922 the Free Trades Unions of Munich (&quot;Münchner Freien Gewerkschaften&quot;) commissioned a monument dedicated to &quot;the Dead of the Revolution&quot;. The urn containing Eisner&#x27;s ashes was walled into its pedestal. Shortly after the National Socialists took power the Monument to the Revolution was destroyed: it was demolished on 22 June 1933, and the urn with Eisner&#x27;s ashes was moved to the New Jewish Cemetery, where it is still buried. The monument in the Ostfriedhof was re-created after World War II by the artist Konstantin Frick as a faithful copy of the original.

In 1989, a monument was installed in the pavement at the site of Eisner&#x27;s assassination. It reads, &quot;Kurt Eisner, der am 9. November 1918 die Bayerische Republik ausrief, nachmaliger Ministerpräsident des Volksstaates Bayern, wurde an dieser Stelle am 21. Februar 1919 ermordet&quot; (&quot;Kurt Eisner, who proclaimed the Bavarian republic on 8 November 1918 – later Prime Minister of the Republic of Bavaria – was murdered here on 21 February 1919&quot;).

==Works==
Eisner was the author of various books and pamphlets, including:
* &quot;Psychopathia Spiritualis&quot; (1892, &quot;Spiritual Psychopathy&quot;)
* &quot;Eine Junkerrevolte&quot; (1899, &quot;A Junker revolt&quot;)
* &quot;Wilhelm Liebknecht&quot; (1900)
* &quot;Feste der Festlosen&quot; (1903, &quot;Fortress of those without feasts&quot;)
* &quot;Die Neue Zeit&quot; (1919, &quot;The New Age&quot;)

==References==
==Further reading==
* Universitätsbibliothek Regensburg – Bosls bayrische Biographie – Kurt Eisner (in German), author: Karl Bosl, publisher: Pustet, page 172
* Biography Kurt Eisner (in German)

==External links==

* Obituary for Kurt Eisner, &quot;Justice&quot;, 27th February 1919.
* Picture of Kurt Eisner, taken in early 1918 Historisches Lexikon Bayerns
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76440" start="0" end="11" title="Kurt Eisner" label="Kurt Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="85" end="95" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="201" end="212" title="Wittelsbach" label="Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="225" end="232" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063251" start="372" end="393" title="charismatic authority" label="charismatic authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="403" end="412" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251605" start="449" end="479" title="People&amp;#x27;s State of Bavaria" label="People&amp;#x27;s State of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q63060" start="533" end="563" title="Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley" label="Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="567" end="573" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="640" end="646" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="709" end="715" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="793" end="800" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1004" end="1014" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="1048" end="1055" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q561972" start="1116" end="1135" title="Frankfurter Zeitung" label="Frankfurter Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="1198" end="1208" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="1335" end="1338" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q467800" start="1683" end="1691" title="Vorwärts" label="Vorwärts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127" start="1717" end="1735" title="Wilhelm Liebknecht" label="Wilhelm Liebknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="2028" end="2037" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="2080" end="2089" title="Freelancer" label="freelance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="2090" end="2100" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q310296" start="2131" end="2177" title="Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2204" end="2215" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="2238" end="2245" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="2281" end="2287" title="Strike action" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q674722" start="2345" end="2362" title="Stadelheim Prison" label="Stadelheim Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389210" start="2516" end="2535" title="King of Bavaria" label="monarchy in Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="2547" end="2564" title="German Revolution" label="German Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q836915" start="2601" end="2611" title="Free state (government)" label="free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="2616" end="2624" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251605" start="2630" end="2660" title="People&amp;#x27;s State of Bavaria" label="People&amp;#x27;s State of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q684380" start="2712" end="2730" title="List of Premiers of Bavaria" label="premier of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217354" start="2791" end="2806" title="plenipotentiary" label="plenipotentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28418489" start="3042" end="3072" title="Berne International" label="Berne Conference of Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="3081" end="3085" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3087" end="3098" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3210" end="3221" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="3387" end="3399" title="Assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3403" end="3409" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q63060" start="3434" end="3464" title="Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley" label="Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q641439" start="3581" end="3600" title="Landtag of Bavaria" label="Bavarian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251605" start="3662" end="3692" title="People&amp;#x27;s State of Bavaria" label="People&amp;#x27;s State of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q58738" start="3749" end="3773" title="Bavarian Soviet Republic" label="Bavarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4205" end="4217" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="4289" end="4297" title="Pardon" label="pardoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="4361" end="4369" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="4441" end="4450" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4577" end="4589" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190" start="4819" end="4825" title="Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="4907" end="4917" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035479" start="5205" end="5235" title="Ostfriedhof (Munich)" label="Munich &amp;quot;Ostfriedhof&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="5493" end="5512" title="National Socialists" label="National Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5759" end="5771" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101989" start="6512" end="6518" title="Junker" label="Junker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127" start="6541" end="6559" title="Wilhelm Liebknecht" label="Wilhelm Liebknecht"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362063" wikidata="Q1451250" url="?curid=362063" title="Gauleiter">
<text>A Gauleiter () was a regional leader of the Nazi Party (NSDAP) who served as the head of a &quot;Gau&quot; or &quot;Reichsgau&quot;. &quot;Gauleiter&quot; was the third-highest rank in the Nazi political leadership, subordinate only to &quot;Reichsleiter&quot; and to the &quot;Führer&quot; himself. The position was effectively abolished with the fall of the Nazi regime on 8 May 1945.

==History and development==
=== Origin and early years ===
The first use of the term &quot;Gauleiter&quot; by the Nazi Party was in 1925 around the time Adolf Hitler re-founded the Party on 27 February, after the lifting of the ban that had been imposed on it in the aftermath of the Beer Hall Putsch of 9 November 1923. The word can be singular or plural in German usage, depending on its context, and derives from the German words &quot;Gau&quot; and &quot;leiter&quot; (&quot;leader&quot;). The word &quot;Gau&quot; is an old term for a region of the German &quot;Reich&quot; (Empire). The Frankish Realm and the Holy Roman Empire were both subdivided into &quot;Gaue&quot; (the plural form of &quot;Gau&quot;) which corresponds roughly with the English word &quot;shire.&quot; It is still in use today as a generic component in the names of some regions mainly in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Belgium. (see: &quot;Gau&quot; Legacy).
In its formative years, local political activists organized the Party at the municipal level in their home areas. In effect, they were self-selected or had won out in local struggles for control. Though they were required to be approved by Hitler, this was usually a formality in these early years when he was still banned from speaking throughout most of Germany and had to rely on these home-grown leaders to organize the Party at the grass roots. In fact, it was not uncommon for local branch leaders to be selected by the Party members themselves. This was not officially prohibited by Hitler until 1929. By creating the position of &quot;Gauleiter&quot;, Hitler provided a means for him to exert more direct control over the local Party organizations. The &quot;Gauleiter&quot; was placed in charge of a specified geographical jurisdiction consisting of several &quot;Ortsgruppe&quot; (Local Groups).

The &quot;Gaue&quot; did not necessarily mirror the existing administrative or electoral divisions within the Weimar Republic. In these early years (1925-1927) it was not unusual for the local and regional organizations to be divided, dissolved, merged and renamed as the Party struggled to develop an improved organizational structure.

The number of &quot;Gaue&quot; fluctuated over the years. In 1928 there were 35 and by the end of the Nazi regime there were 43, including the non-territorial &quot;Gau Auslands-Organisation&quot; that represented Germans abroad.

The &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were appointed by Hitler (though in the earliest years Gregor Strasser had provisionally selected some in Northern Germany who still had to be confirmed in their position by Hitler). They were personally responsible to Hitler, served at his pleasure and were subject to immediate dismissal, but otherwise could not be removed without his consent. They were his personal representatives to the &quot;Gau&quot; and were, in effect, his viceroys in Party matters.

The Organization Book of the NSDAP described the &quot;Gauleiter’s&quot; relationship to Hitler in this manner:

The &quot;Gauleiter&quot; is directly subordinate to the &quot;Führer&quot;. He is appointed by the &quot;Führer&quot;. The &quot;Gauleiter&quot; bears overall responsibility to the &quot;Führer&quot; for the sector of sovereignty entrusted to him. The rights, duties, and jurisdiction of the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; result primarily from the mission assigned by the &quot;Führer&quot; and, apart from that, from detailed directives.

&quot;Gauleiters&quot; were the regional heads of the Nazi Party&#x27;s Political Organization and headed the &quot;Gauleitung&quot; (&quot;Gau&quot; Leadership) office. The responsibility and function of the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; was to ensure the authority of the Nazi Party within his area, to coordinate the activities of the Party and all its affiliated organizations, and to enlarge the influence of the Party over people and life in his &quot;Gau&quot;.
However, &quot;Gauleiters&quot; did not have direct supervisory control over the &quot;Gau&quot; paramilitary personnel, such as the &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA) or the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS). In addition, subordinate &quot;Gau&quot; officials such as the Propaganda Leader, the Agricultural Expert and others owed a dual allegiance to the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; in their particular geographic area and to the head of the affiliate organization for their specific policy area at the national level. This made the &quot;Gauleiter’s &quot; coordination and control of all Party activities difficult and, at times, conflictive.

The authority of the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; extended down through the Party organization to all members through a strict vertical chain of command. The &quot;Gauleiter&quot; had direct authority over the &quot;Kreisleiters&quot; (County Leaders) who administered some 650 &quot;Kreise&quot; in Germany proper (913 at the height of expansion after 1941) and were established as an intermediary level between the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; and the local leaders in early 1929. These &quot;Kreisleiters&quot; in turn directed the &quot;Ortsgruppenleiters&quot; who oversaw towns or villages or part of a larger city, usually 1500 to 3000 households. &quot;Ortsgruppenleiters&quot; directed &quot;Zellenleiters&quot; (Cell Leaders) responsible for 160 to 480 households. &quot;Zellenleiters&quot; supervised the lowest local leaders, &quot;Blockleiters&quot; (Block Leaders) each of whom had charge of 40 to 60 households.

As the Party evolved its goal from revolutionary overthrow of the Weimar Republic to obtaining power through constitutional means, tactics for obtaining electoral success became paramount. In 1928, in preparation for more effectively contesting the upcoming &quot;Reichstag&quot; election, a major reorganization took place and most &quot;Gaue&quot; boundaries were adjusted to correspond with the existing &quot;Reichstag&quot; electoral constituencies, though a handful continued to be idiosyncratic. The role of the &quot;Gauleiters&quot; also evolved to become more administrative, involved in propaganda, organization and electioneering. Success was measured in terms of increased Party membership and voter turnout.

At the local level, &quot;Gauleiters&quot; often were elected as city councilors, as mayors and as deputies to the &quot;Landtags&quot; of the German States (Länder) where they headed the Nazi Party parliamentary faction. The first State to install its &quot;Gauleiter&quot; as Minister-president was Oldenburg on 16 June 1932, followed by Thuringia on 26 August 1932. Once in office, they proceeded to politicize all aspects of life within their control, and staffed civil service positions solely with candidates previously screened and approved by Party functionaries.

In July 1932, Strasser, now the Party &quot;Reichsorganisationsleiter&quot; (National Organization Leader) attempted to impose an additional centralized control over the &quot;Gauleiters&quot;. Therefore, they were subordinated to ten new officials with the title of &quot;Landesinspektor&quot;, mainly drawn from among the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; corps, each in charge of several &quot;Gaue&quot; within a larger geographic area. This intermediate level of bureaucracy limited &quot;Gauleiters&quot;&#x27; access to Hitler and they chafed under this new arrangement, which they saw as an attempt by Strasser to undermine their special relationship with Hitler.

This reorganization was short-lived and was repealed on 15 December 1932, after Strasser&#x27;s resignation in a policy dispute with Hitler over whether to join in a national coalition government as a junior partner or to hold out for the Chancellorship. Hitler then reemphasized the special relationship between himself and the &quot;Gauleiters&quot; and they resumed their direct access to him.

===After the Nazi seizure of power===
On 30 January 1933, the Nazi Party took power and established the state of Nazi Germany. At the national government level, Hitler selected two &quot;Gauleiters&quot; to also become &quot;Reichsministers&quot; of two of the new ministries that he established: the Reich Ministry of Propaganda in March 1933 and the Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture in May 1934.

As for regional governments, the &quot;Gauleiters&quot; quickly became the key agents in extending Nazi control over the German States (Länder) and Prussian provincial governments. &quot;Gauleiters&quot; soon obtained unquestioned authority in their jurisdiction. Party control over the civil administration became institutionalized when in most (but not all) cases the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; was appointed to the supreme civil administrative post in his area. Under the &quot;Second Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich&quot; of 7 April 1933, the new position of &quot;Reichsstatthalter&quot; (Reich Governor) was created. Given broad powers, this official was charged with ensuring State compliance with the policies of the Reich central government, and was described by Hitler as a &quot;viceroy of the Reich.&quot; Hitler staffed these posts almost exclusively with &quot;Gauleiters&quot;. Similarly, in the Prussian provinces, the &quot;Oberpräsident&quot; (High President) positions also were largely taken over by &quot;Gauleiters&quot;. Most &quot;Gauleiters&quot; thus united under their control the highest Party and governmental offices in their jurisdictions. However, since all Party &quot;Gau&quot; boundaries and State/provincial boundaries still did not necessarily coincide, this arrangement sometimes led to overlapping jurisdictions and added to the administrative conflict typical of Nazi Germany.

On 2 June 1933 Hitler created the new political rank of &quot;Reichsleiter&quot; (Reich Leader) in the Nazi Party and conferred it on 16 individuals with areas of broad national policy responsibility (e.g., propaganda, agriculture, the press, youth education). &quot;Gauleiter&quot; then became the third-highest rank in the Nazi political leadership, just below &quot;Reichsleiter&quot;. Importantly, however, the &quot;Reichsleiters&quot; were not given direct line authority over the &quot;Gauleiters&quot; who continued to have direct access to Hitler and remained his personal agents in the &quot;Gaue&quot;. 
After the &quot;Anschluss&quot; with Austria (12 March 1938) and the seizure of the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia (30 September 1938) the newly annexed territories were eventually organized into eight &quot;Reichsgaue&quot; and placed under the administration of &quot;Reichsstatthalters,&quot; all of whom were also the local &quot;Gauleiters&quot;. As in Germany proper, they controlled, in personal union, Party and State leadership. Several former leaders of the previously outlawed Austrian and Czechoslovak Nazi parties, in recognition of their past services, were accorded the title of &quot;Gauleiter ehrenhalber&quot; (honorary &quot;Gauleiter&quot;), which carried no &quot;Gaue&quot; assignments or responsibilities.

The &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were responsible for executing all the Party&#x27;s policies, including its racial discrimination and persecution policies against the Jewish populace. One of the most infamous pogroms of the Nazi era, the &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; of 9–10 November 1938, had its origin at a meeting of the Nazi Party hierarchy in Munich commemorating the 15th anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch. During the meeting, in response to the news of the assassination by a Jew of a German diplomat in Paris, Joseph Goebbels gave such an inflammatory address against the Jews that it sent the assembled &quot;Gauleiters&quot; rushing to the telephones to order punitive riots in their &quot;Gaue&quot;. On their orders, their local Political Organizations, together with SA members, unleashed an orgy of violence, arson, looting and destruction, resulting in deaths, injuries and massive property loss among Germany&#x27;s Jewish population.

===World War II===
On the launching of World War II in Europe on 1 September 1939, fifteen &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were appointed Reich Defense Commissioners &quot;(Reichsverteidigungskommissar)&quot; one in each military district (&quot;Wehrkreis&quot;) of Germany and Austria. They were charged with organizing civil defense and mobilization activities, including air defense and evacuation. They also oversaw wartime rationing measures and efforts to control the black market. Again, due to the additional overlapping and incongruent territorial jurisdictions, this contributed to ongoing jurisdictional squabbles.

After the conquest and annexation of Polish territory in October 1939, the newly added areas were organized into two new &quot;Reichsgaue&quot; and subjected to rule by &quot;Reichsstatthalters&quot; who were also Nazi Party &quot;Gauleiters&quot;. Here they were placed in charge of a ruthless policy of Germanization and genocide.

In 1940-1941 as additional military conquests occurred, four &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were selected to concurrently administer other occupied lands not directly annexed to the Reich. Granted the title of &quot;Reichskommissar,&quot; they ruled vast swaths of territory encompassing Norway, Belgium &amp; Northern France, Ukraine and ”Ostland”. Another six &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were named Chief of Civil Administration of areas adjacent to their &quot;Gaue&quot; in Alsace, Lorraine, Luxembourg, Lower Styria, Upper Carniola and Bezirk Bialystok.

On 16 November 1942, the jurisdiction of the Reich Defense Commissioners was changed from the &quot;Wehrkreis&quot; to the &quot;Gau&quot; level, and all 42 territorial &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were appointed as Reich Defense Commissioners in their jurisdictions. They were charged with maximizing the mobilization of all internal manpower resources by registering men and women between the ages of sixteen and sixty for war-related work assignments. They were even put in charge of the construction of defensive fortifications with the use of forced labor and the civilian population. This led to further jurisdictional conflict between the military and civil authorities.

As the war progressed and the direction of the war effort consumed most of Hitler&#x27;s time and attention, he became increasingly inaccessible to the &quot;Gauleiters&quot;. Almost constantly away at his military headquarters, Hitler decreed that all Party matters should be communicated to him only through Martin Bormann, who headed the Nazi Party Chancellery from May 1941 and was made “Secretary to the &quot;Führer&quot;” in April 1943. All communications between government ministries and the &quot;Gauleiters&quot; also was routed through Bormann.

In an interrogation before the Nuremberg Trials, &quot;Reichsminister&quot; of Armaments and War Production Albert Speer described the difficulty &quot;Reichsministers&quot; had in dealing with the fiercely independent &quot;Gauleiters&quot;:

[the &quot;Gauleiters’&quot;] general attitude was that they were bound only by orders coming directly from Hitler. They would accept decisions by other agencies only as long as they suited them, but if the &quot;Gauleiters&quot; disapproved they simply failed to carry them out. This applied also to directives from the Reich Ministries … [if] an order or directive did not suit a &quot;Gauleiter&quot; he would immediately declare that he was taking orders from Hitler only. Bormann, in order to strengthen this attitude, issued most of his own orders in the name of the &quot;Führer&quot;.

In October 1944, the Nazi Party mobilized a national militia, the &quot;Volkssturm&quot;. Each &quot;Gauleiter&quot; was charged with the organization, enrollment, training and leadership of the &quot;Volkssturm&quot; battalions in their jurisdiction. These units were staffed by conscripting males between the ages of 16 and 60 who were not already serving in the military. The &quot;Volkssturm&quot; comprised one of the final components of the total war effort promulgated by Goebbels in his role of Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War.

Towards the end of the war, the &quot;Gauleiters&quot;, in their capacity as Reich Defense Commissioners, were given a key role in implementing Hitler&#x27;s scorched earth policy as laid out in the Nero Decree of 19 March 1945. Many &quot;Gauleiters&quot;, knowing the war was lost, refused to carry out the orders, but several of the most fanatical among them ordered the destruction of bridges, utility plants, factories, and other important infrastructure ahead of the advancing Allied troops.

===Background and characteristics===
Approximately 125 men held the position of &quot;Gauleiter&quot;. Many shared a common background. Most of them, particularly during the early years, were drawn from the cadre of &quot;old fighters&quot; that had helped Hitler forge the Party during the Kampfzeit (Time of Struggle). Most had been born in the last decade of the 19th century and came of age during World War I. They had fought in the war, and afterward many served in the paramilitary &quot;Freikorps&quot;, battling Communists and other left-wing groups. Most had at least a secondary school education and many had some higher education. Many were teachers or commercial clerks. Though advanced degrees were rare, there were some Ph.D.s, lawyers, medical doctors and a dentist among their numbers. Most were middle class, with very few from the proletarian working class. Many experienced interrupted education and careers that were not resumed because of their war service. Drawn to right wing, antisemitic and völkisch organizations, they gravitated to the Nazi Party in the immediate post-war years.

Those that were appointed in later years, particularly after the start of the Second World War, tended to be younger and better educated. Born in the first decade of the twentieth century, most were products of a later phase of the Party&#x27;s development. They had some experience in the Party bureaucracy, either at the &quot;Gau&quot; level or in the Party Chancellery under Bormann, and were trained as administrators.

Though their tenure in office fluctuated, once the geographical re-organizations and personnel instability of the early years had passed, it was not unusual for &quot;Gauleiters&quot; to remain in their posts until they died. Though a small number were removed for corruption, cowardice or other malfeasance, a handful also managed to remain in office throughout the entire 20 years from 1925 to 1945.
Most &quot;Gauleiters&quot; were members of one or more of the Nazi Party&#x27;s paramilitary units, the &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA), the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) or the National Socialist Motor Corps (NSKK) in which they usually carried the rank of &quot;Obergruppenführer&quot;.

&quot;Gauleiters&quot; comprised one-third of the Nazi Party electoral list for the parliamentary election of 1928 and were among the first 12 Nazis elected. After the Nazis came to power, &quot;Gauleiters&quot; routinely sat as deputies in the &quot;Reichstag&quot;. In addition, those whose &quot;Gaue&quot; were in Prussia were also made members of the Prussian State Council. This was a revised non-legislative advisory body established by Prussian Minister-president Hermann Göring in July 1933, and which replaced the earlier Prussian State Council, which had been the second chamber of the Prussian legislature.

===Fate===
Of the 43 &quot;Gauleiters&quot; serving at the end of the Nazi regime in May 1945:

* Twelve committed suicide either before being captured or while in Allied custody. 
* Two died in battles during the final weeks of the war. 
* One was killed while escaping from Czech partisans. 
* One went missing, was presumed captured by the Soviets and eventually declared dead by a German court.
* Eight were arrested, tried, convicted and executed as war criminals by the Nuremberg Trials, the Dachau Trials or the governments of the Allied nations. 
* Sixteen were arrested, tried, convicted and imprisoned by these tribunals or special German denazification courts for war crimes or for their Nazi leadership role. One of these died in a Polish prison while serving a life sentence. The remaining fifteen served their sentences and were released.
* Two, though arrested, escaped from Allied custody, never faced trial and managed to flee to Italy or to Argentina. 
* One went underground at the war&#x27;s end, escaped to Canada and was never apprehended.
In addition, many former &quot;Gauleiters&quot; who had been either removed from office or promoted to other positions also committed suicide (four), died in captivity (four), were imprisoned and released (four), or were executed (one).

==Insignia==
By 1939, the entire Nazi Party paramilitary rank system had been overhauled, introducing completely new insignia consisting of pips, bars, and as many as four miniature oak leaves per collar to represent Nazi Party political rank. The &quot;Gauleiter&quot; insignia, however, was considered too well &quot;entrenched&quot; to change and thus was not incorporated into the new insignia system. Instead, the Gauleiter continued to wear the pre-war two oak leaf insignia, with the rank seen as existing outside of the hierarchy, senior to all other Nazi Party ranks, with the exception of &quot;Reichsleiter&quot;. Both &quot;Gauleiter&quot; and &quot;Reichsleiter&quot; insignia was modified slightly to display a more pronounced national eagle crest, and both ranks were permitted to wear special party armbands.

Gauleiter also had the right to display a special vehicle flag when traveling, as a status symbol of their position.

===Relationship with other insignia===
All political leaders working at the &quot;Gau&quot; level had rhomboid collar tabs with red facings (not brown), with a dark wine-red (burgundy) colored piping around the outer edges. Reich-level collar tabs had a bright crimson facing, with gold piping; &quot;Kreis&quot; level tabs had a dark chocolate brown facing, with white piping, while &quot;Ort&quot; level tabs had a light brown facing with light blue piping. The political leader collar-tab system was quite complicated and underwent four changes (complexity increasing with each change); the final (fourth) pattern as described above, was introduced around the end of 1938—by this time, with many more job positions within each level; this made the fourth pattern collar tab rank system by far the most complicated of all. The &quot;Gauleiter&quot; had authority over the district leaders (&quot;kreisleiter&quot;), who in turn directed chapter leaders (&quot;Ortsgruppenleiter&quot;). An &quot;Ortsgruppe&quot; (chapter) encompassed 1500 households—usually a city suburb or a few villages. Chapter leaders directed cell leaders (&quot;Zellenleiter&quot;), responsible for 160 to 480 households. &quot;Zellenleiter&quot; had control over the lowest local leaders, &quot;Blockleiter&quot;, each of whom had charge of one block consisting of 40 to 60 households. The cell and block leaders at the bottom of the hierarchy gave the party a strong hold on the civilian populace.

The original insignia for a &quot;Gauleiter&quot; consisted of Army-styled collar tabs, accompanied by a braided shoulder cord worn on a brown Nazi Party shirt. After 1933, the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; adopted a two oak leaf insignia worn on a brown colored collar patch. The &quot;Stellvertreter-Gauleiter&quot; (&quot;Deputy-Gauleiter&quot;) wore a single oak leaf.

==Deputy Gauleiter==
The positional title immediately subordinate to the &quot;Gauleiter&quot; was the &quot;Stellvertreter-Gauleiter&quot; (Deputy Gau Leader). Between 1933 and 1939, this position was an actual rank, annotated by a single oak leaf collar patch, in contrast to the two used for the &quot;Gauleiter&quot;. Due to the infighting of Nazi party politics, regulations had been introduced by 1935 to prevent a Deputy Gauleiter from succeeding his own superior, thus discouraging acts of discrediting a &quot;Gauleiter&quot; in the hopes that the Deputy would take his place.

The World War II era Nazi ranks incorporated the &quot;Stellvertreter-Gauleiter&quot; rank as a positional title, paired with a corresponding Nazi Party paramilitary rank and doing away with the previous single leaf insignia and the actual rank of Deputy Gauleiter. Accordingly, with the single leaf political insignia discontinued, the insignia of &quot;Gauleiter&quot; displayed two leaves although a single leaf insignia no longer existed.

==See also==
* List of Gauleiters
== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="44" end="54" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q440902" start="97" end="100" title="Administrative divisions of Nazi Germany" label="Gau"/>
<link wikidata="Q642961" start="116" end="125" title="Reichsgau" label="Reichsgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424724" start="177" end="214" title="Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party" label="rank in the Nazi political leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991957" start="242" end="254" title="Reichsleiter" label="Reichsleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="278" end="284" title="Führer" label="Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="541" end="553" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="672" end="688" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="808" end="820" title="German language" label="German words"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252884" start="827" end="830" title="Gau (territory)" label="Gau"/>
<link wikidata="Q960541" start="955" end="960" title="Reich" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="981" end="995" title="Frankish Realm" label="Frankish Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1004" end="1021" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="1156" end="1161" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1256" end="1263" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1265" end="1272" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1274" end="1285" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1291" end="1302" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1307" end="1314" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1322" end="1344" title="Gau (territory)#Legacy in topography" label="&amp;quot;Gau&amp;quot; Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="2364" end="2379" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166269" start="2757" end="2782" title="Nazi Party/Foreign Organization" label="Gau Auslands-Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76638" start="2905" end="2920" title="Gregor Strasser" label="Gregor Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="4458" end="4472" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="4497" end="4510" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199652" start="5164" end="5175" title="Kreisleiter" label="Kreisleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356832" start="5482" end="5499" title="Ortsgruppenleiter" label="Ortsgruppenleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575147" start="5642" end="5654" title="Zellenleiter" label="Zellenleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q314169" start="5785" end="5796" title="Blockleiter" label="Blockleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="6133" end="6142" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="6713" end="6720" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712151" start="6735" end="6748" title="States of the Weimar Republic" label="German States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099723" start="6870" end="6888" title="Minister-president" label="Minister-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372248" start="6893" end="6902" title="Free State of Oldenburg" label="Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="6932" end="6941" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038481" start="7438" end="7453" title="Inspekteur (NSDAP)" label="Landesinspektor"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="8001" end="8021" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="8065" end="8079" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="8297" end="8307" title="Machtergreifung" label="took power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8337" end="8349" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q570663" start="8449" end="8463" title="Reichsminister" label="Reichsminister"/>
<link wikidata="Q158689" start="8525" end="8553" title="Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda" label="Reich Ministry of Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q476299" start="8576" end="8624" title="Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture" label="Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712151" start="8760" end="8773" title="States of the Weimar Republic" label="German States"/>
<link wikidata="Q574299" start="8787" end="8806" title="Provinces of Prussia" label="Prussian provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534171" start="9115" end="9174" title="Second Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich" label="Second Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q646040" start="9224" end="9241" title="Reichsstatthalter" label="Reichsstatthalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q314584" start="9596" end="9609" title="Oberpräsident" label="Oberpräsident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991957" start="10135" end="10147" title="Reichsleiter" label="Reichsleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="10704" end="10713" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="10725" end="10732" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="10772" end="10783" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="10789" end="10803" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="11623" end="11629" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="11658" end="11671" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="11760" end="11766" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12405" end="12417" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139827" start="12495" end="12521" title="Reich Defense Commissioner" label="Reich Defense Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q689690" start="12603" end="12612" title="Wehrkreis" label="Wehrkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="12678" end="12691" title="civil defense" label="civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="12785" end="12794" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="12831" end="12843" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276549" start="13021" end="13037" title="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany" label="Polish territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="13289" end="13302" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="13307" end="13315" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q695843" start="13526" end="13541" title="Reichskommissar" label="Reichskommissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335200" start="13598" end="13604" title="Reichskommissariat Norwegen" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015178" start="13606" end="13635" title="Reichskommissariat of Belgium and Northern France" label="Belgium &amp;amp; Northern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q46315" start="13637" end="13644" title="Reichskommissariat Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156031" start="13649" end="13658" title="Reichskommissariat Ostland" label="”Ostland”"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068927" start="13706" end="13735" title="Chief of Civil Administration" label="Chief of Civil Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="13783" end="13789" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="13791" end="13799" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025876" start="13801" end="13811" title="Civil Administration Area of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="13813" end="13825" title="Styria (Slovenia)" label="Lower Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q909928" start="13827" end="13841" title="Upper Carniola" label="Upper Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q525638" start="13846" end="13862" title="Bezirk Bialystok" label="Bezirk Bialystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="14407" end="14419" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="14848" end="14862" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q320593" start="14879" end="14901" title="Nazi Party Chancellery" label="Nazi Party Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="15127" end="15143" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q570663" start="15151" end="15165" title="Reichsminister" label="Reichsminister"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="15204" end="15216" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157912" start="16006" end="16016" title="Volkssturm" label="Volkssturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792154" start="16437" end="16472" title="Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War" label="Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="16633" end="16654" title="scorched earth policy" label="scorched earth policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163067" start="16674" end="16685" title="Nero Decree" label="Nero Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q438070" start="17196" end="17208" title="Alter Kämpfer" label="old fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="17265" end="17274" title="Kampfzeit" label="Kampfzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17376" end="17387" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="17469" end="17478" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="17495" end="17505" title="Communism" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="17824" end="17835" title="proletariat" label="proletarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="17975" end="17986" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="17991" end="17999" title="völkisch" label="völkisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="18991" end="19003" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q301856" start="19090" end="19120" title="National Socialist Motor Corps" label="National Socialist Motor Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q154633" start="19176" end="19193" title="Obergruppenführer" label="Obergruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q878525" start="19453" end="19462" title="Reichstag (Nazi Germany)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292888" start="19558" end="19580" title="Prussian State Council (Nazi Germany)" label="Prussian State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="19674" end="19688" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q164420" start="19734" end="19756" title="Prussian State Council" label="Prussian State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="20298" end="20314" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q565682" start="20320" end="20333" title="Dachau Trials" label="Dachau Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="20471" end="20485" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991957" start="21727" end="21739" title="Reichsleiter" label="Reichsleiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21931" end="21945" title="Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party#Armband system" label="party armbands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="23756" end="23759" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="23760" end="23764" title="leaf" label="leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24500" end="24512" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056405" start="24955" end="24973" title="List of Gauleiters" label="List of Gauleiters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362066" wikidata="Q1501183" url="?curid=362066" title="Vintersorg">
<text>Vintersorg (; &quot;Winter Sorrow&quot; in English) is a Swedish band from Skellefteå, formed in 1994 under the name Vargatron (Wolfthrone in English). Musically, Vintersorg has covered a wide number of heavy metal genres; while the band is mostly rooted in extreme metal styles, particularly black metal and Viking/folk metal, it has also expanded into progressive metal and avant-garde metal. Lyrically, the band deals with topics on fantasy, mythology, nature, the cosmos, and metaphysics. Vintersorg means &quot;Winter Sorrow,&quot; but the name was taken from &quot;The Legend of the Ice People&quot; series by Margit Sandemo, where the character Vintersorg is the son of a great pagan leader.

==History==
The project was originally formed in 1994 to &quot;push the limits&quot; of black metal music, where the vocals are mostly clean sung, and only a few parts per song that had the traditional screaming vocals. The sound of Vintersorg has vastly changed over the years, as their earlier sound had more of a folk influence, and later on, more of an experimental sound. This transformation was most notably marked with the release of the &quot;Cosmic Genesis&quot; album, and the change in sound progressed from album to album, with the 2004 album &quot;The Focusing Blur&quot; being an extremely avant-garde album. The band&#x27;s vocal elements have changed from album to album as well, starting out with low-pitched, powerful baritone singing, and gradually shifting towards softer, higher-pitched delivery with more use of harmony and layering with black metal vocals. &quot;Solens rötter&quot;, marked a return to the earlier folk metal style, while retaining the more complex and non-traditional guitar arrangements and song structures of later albums. On &quot;Jordpuls&quot; and &quot;Orkan&quot; there was a continuation with the Swedish sung material and nature oriented themes. &quot;Till fjälls: Part II&quot;, a double album was released in June 2017.

Along with this change in musical style, the lyrical topics began to shift as well. On earlier albums, the lyrics are all written and performed in Swedish, and dealt with topics of nature and paganism. With the advent of &quot;Cosmic Genesis&quot;, the lyrics were now written and sung mostly in English, and now dealt with scientific ideas such as astronomy and cosmology, philosophies such as metaphysics, and other ideas such as astrology. In the &quot;Cosmic Genesis&quot; booklet, Vintersorg extends thanks to Dr. Carl Sagan, author of the book Cosmos. Since, then, the band has alternated between both English and Swedish lyrics, sometimes using both on the same album. In keeping with the band&#x27;s return to its folk roots, the latter albums are also sung entirely in Swedish and deal with more traditional themes.

Andreas Hedlund (a.k.a. Vintersorg) is constantly creating music. He is the front-man of several bands including Otyg, Borknagar, Havayoth, Fission, Cronian and Waterclime.

==Band members==
* Andreas &quot;Vintersorg&quot; Hedlund – composer, vocals, guitars, keyboard, programing
* Mattias Marklund – guitars
* Simon Lundström - bass guitar, backing vocals

===Session musicians===
* Vargher – keyboards on &quot;Hedniskhjärtad&quot;, &quot;Till fjälls&quot;, and &quot;Ödemarkens son&quot;
* Cia Hedmark – female vocals on &quot;Hedniskhjärtad&quot;, &quot;Till fjälls&quot;, and &quot;Ödemarkens son&quot; and violin on &quot;Ödemarkens son&quot;, female vocals on &quot;Norrskenssyner&quot;.
* Andreas Frank – guest lead guitar on &quot;För kung och fosterland&quot; &amp; &quot;Asatider&quot; on &quot;Till fjälls&quot;
* Nisse Johansson – additional keys on &quot;Till fjälls&quot; and analog synth, loop editing on &quot;Visions from the Spiral Generator&quot; and Hammond on &quot;Universums dunkla alfabet&quot;
* Jan Erik &quot;Tyr&quot; Torgersen – live bass
* Steve Di Giorgio – bass guitar on &quot;Visions from the Spiral Generator&quot; and &quot;The Focusing Blur&quot;
* Asgeir Mickelson – drums on &quot;Visions from the Spiral Generator&quot; and &quot;The Focusing Blur&quot;
* Lars &quot;Lazare&quot; Nedland – Hammond organ on &quot;Visions from the Spiral Generator&quot; and Hammond organ, vocals, and lyricist on &quot;The Focusing Blur&quot;
* Benny Hägglund – live drums
* Johan Lindgren – live bass, bass on &quot;Solens rötter&quot;
* Andreas Stenlund – live guitar until 2002

==Discography==
* &quot;Hedniskhjärtad&quot; (EP, 1998) (&quot;Paganhearted&quot;)
* &quot;Till fjälls&quot; (1998) (&quot;To the Mountains&quot;)
* &quot;Ödemarkens son&quot; (1999) (&quot;Son of the Wilderness&quot;)
* &quot;Cosmic Genesis&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Visions from the Spiral Generator&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Focusing Blur&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Solens rötter&quot; (2007) (&quot;Roots of the Sun&quot;)
* &quot;Jordpuls&quot; (2011) (&quot;Earthpulse&quot;)
* &quot;Orkan&quot; (2012) (&quot;Hurricane&quot;)
* &quot;Naturbål&quot; (2014) (&quot;Natural Bonfire&quot;)
* &quot;Till fjälls: Del II&quot; (2017) (&quot;To the mountains: Part II&quot;)
* &quot;Vattenkrafternas spel&quot; (2025) (&quot;The play of Water Powers&quot;)

==References==
==External links==
* Vintersorg at Napalm Records
* Interview on www.avantgarde-metal.com 
*Lyric translations on archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501183" start="0" end="10" title="Vintersorg" label="Vintersorg"/>
<link wikidata="Q54344" start="75" end="85" title="Skellefteå" label="Skellefteå"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501183" start="117" end="126" title="Vintersorg" label="Vargatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501183" start="128" end="138" title="Vintersorg" label="Wolfthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="203" end="214" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="258" end="271" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="293" end="304" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213149" start="309" end="315" title="Viking metal" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q484179" start="316" end="326" title="folk metal" label="folk metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q484344" start="354" end="371" title="progressive metal" label="progressive metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q641357" start="376" end="393" title="avant-garde metal" label="avant-garde metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="436" end="443" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="445" end="454" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="456" end="462" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="468" end="474" title="cosmos" label="cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="480" end="491" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051223" start="516" end="529" title="Seasonal affective disorder" label="Winter Sorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215940" start="571" end="599" title="The Legend of the Ice People" label="The Legend of the Ice People"/>
<link wikidata="Q262199" start="616" end="630" title="Margit Sandemo" label="Margit Sandemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q335499" start="902" end="918" title="death grunt" label="screaming vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501183" start="1151" end="1165" title="Cosmic Genesis" label="Cosmic Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="1436" end="1444" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277535" start="1775" end="1783" title="Jordpuls" label="Jordpuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10341508" start="1800" end="1805" title="Orkan (album)" label="Orkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1846" end="1853" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="2165" end="2173" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2322" end="2331" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="2336" end="2345" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="2405" end="2414" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="2488" end="2502" title="Carl Sagan" label="Dr. Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194705" start="2523" end="2529" title="Cosmos (Sagan book)" label="Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710343" start="2799" end="2814" title="Andreas Hedlund" label="Andreas Hedlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041578" start="2912" end="2916" title="Otyg" label="Otyg"/>
<link wikidata="Q893858" start="2918" end="2927" title="Borknagar" label="Borknagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420952" start="2939" end="2946" title="Fission (band)" label="Fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003716" start="2948" end="2955" title="Cronian" label="Cronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710343" start="2960" end="2970" title="Waterclime" label="Waterclime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710343" start="2992" end="3030" title="Andreas Hedlund" label="Andreas &amp;quot;Vintersorg&amp;quot; Hedlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791776" start="3083" end="3099" title="Mattias Marklund" label="Mattias Marklund"/>
<link wikidata="Q728753" start="3872" end="3888" title="Steve Di Giorgio" label="Steve Di Giorgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811612" start="3988" end="4004" title="Asgeir Mickelson" label="Asgeir Mickelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263122" start="4098" end="4129" title="Lars Nedland" label="Lars &amp;quot;Lazare&amp;quot; Nedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501183" start="4431" end="4445" title="Hedniskhjärtad" label="Hedniskhjärtad"/>
<link wikidata="Q568881" start="4498" end="4509" title="Till fjälls" label="Till fjälls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454813" start="4562" end="4576" title="Ödemarkens son" label="Ödemarkens son"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936252" start="4670" end="4703" title="Visions from the Spiral Generator" label="Visions from the Spiral Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277535" start="4830" end="4838" title="Jordpuls" label="Jordpuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10341508" start="4885" end="4890" title="Orkan (album)" label="Orkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49096351" start="4936" end="4944" title="Naturbål" label="Naturbål"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4996" end="5015" title="Till fjälls: Del II" label="Till fjälls: Del II"/>
<link wikidata="Q693194" start="5202" end="5216" title="Napalm Records" label="Napalm Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362067" wikidata="Q553245" url="?curid=362067" title="Duke Xiao of Qin">
<text>Duke Xiao of Qin (; 381–338 BC), personal name Ying Quliang, was the ruler of the Qin state from 361 to 338 BC. Duke Xiao is best known for employing the Legalist statesman Shang Yang from the Wey state and authorizing him to conduct a series of ground breaking political, military and economic reforms in Qin. Although the reforms were controversial and drew violent opposition from many Qin politicians, Duke Xiao supported Shang Yang fully and the reforms did help to transform Qin into a dominant superpower among the Seven Warring States.

==Biography==
Duke Xiao ascended to the throne of the Qin state in 361 BC at the age of 21, succeeding his father, Duke Xian. Duke Xiao was determined to restore the Qin state to its former glory as one of the Five Hegemons during the reign of his ancestor, Duke Mu. Hence, the duke sent out an announcement, calling for men of talent to aid him in strengthening Qin, promising them rewards of high offices and lands in return for their service. Wei Yang (later known as Shang Yang), a scholar from the Legalist School, responded to the duke&#x27;s call as he had been unsuccessful in attempting to start his career in other states.

Wei Yang was introduced to Duke Xiao by Jing Jian and had two audiences with the duke, during which he proposed ideas on governance based on the principles of Confucianism, Taoism and other schools of thought, but the duke was not impressed. During the third meeting, Wei proposed his ideas on strict governance, based on ideas from Legalism, and captured the duke&#x27;s attention. Duke Xiao and Wei Yang had a discussion that lasted for three days and three nights, after which they drafted plans for reform. The plans were put into effect in 363 BC, but several Qin politicians objected strongly to the reforms. However, Duke Xiao supported Wei Yang fully and ensured that the reforms were implemented as planned.

The reforms caused ground breaking changes in the Qin state and transformed it into a strict, controlling, militaristic state, which governed by using tough and oppressive laws. Agriculture was expanded through forced migration to new regions, and citizens were rewarded or punished based on their military or agricultural achievements.

In 366 BC, the Qin armies defeated the allied forces from the states of Han and Wei at the Battle of Shimen. The Qin soldiers and officers were promoted to higher ranks based on the number of enemy heads they collected during battle. The Qin state pushed on to seize lands from the Wei state, which managed to survive only with the help of the Zhao state, and Wei was drastically weakened by its losses and defeats.

==Legacy==
Duke Xiao ruled Qin for 24 years and died at the age of 44 in 338 BC. He was succeeded by his son King Huiwen of Qin. Duke Xiao was given the posthumous name of &quot;Xiao&quot;, which means &quot;filial&quot;. The reforms that took place during his reign helped to lay a strong foundation for Qin&#x27;s eventual unification of China under the Qin dynasty, under the leadership of Duke Xiao&#x27;s descendant, Zheng, who became Qin Shi Huang (First Emperor of Qin).

Duke Xiao was also the last ruler of Qin to be addressed as &quot;duke&quot; (), as his successors titled themselves &quot;kings&quot; (). The change was an indication of the loss of authority of the central government (Zhou dynasty), as rulers of several other feudal states had begun to call themselves &quot;kings&quot; instead of &quot;dukes&quot;.

==Family==
Concubines:
* Lady, of Han, the mother of Prince Ji

Sons:
* Crown Prince Si (; 356–311 BC), ruled as King Huiwen of Qin from 338–311 BC
* Prince Ji (; d. 300 BC)
** Known by his fiefdom, Master of Chuli (), or by his title, Lord Yan ()
** Served as the Prime Minister () of Qin from 306–300 BC
* Prince Hua ()

==Ancestry==
==References==
==External links==
*Duke Xiao of Qin - Chinese Text Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q553245" start="0" end="16" title="Duke Xiao of Qin" label="Duke Xiao of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q553245" start="47" end="59" title="Duke Xiao of Qin" label="Ying Quliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="82" end="91" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="154" end="162" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q351345" start="173" end="183" title="Shang Yang" label="Shang Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147897" start="193" end="202" title="Wey (state)" label="Wey state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276649" start="522" end="542" title="Seven Warring States" label="Seven Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="599" end="608" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q553840" start="660" end="669" title="Duke Xian of Qin (Shixi)" label="Duke Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267977" start="755" end="768" title="Five Hegemons" label="Five Hegemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146646" start="803" end="810" title="Duke Mu of Qin" label="Duke Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q351345" start="991" end="999" title="Shang Yang" label="Wei Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="1048" end="1063" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalist School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1219" end="1228" title="Jing Jian" label="Jing Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="1338" end="1350" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="1352" end="1358" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="1369" end="1387" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="schools of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574130" start="2307" end="2310" title="Han (Warring States)" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q912052" start="2315" end="2318" title="Wei (state)" label="Wei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2326" end="2342" title="Battle of Shimen" label="Battle of Shimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q197430" start="2579" end="2589" title="Zhao (state)" label="Zhao state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="2679" end="2682" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q564282" start="2761" end="2779" title="King Huiwen of Qin" label="King Huiwen of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="2805" end="2820" title="posthumous name" label="posthumous name"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="2860" end="2866" title="Filial piety" label="filial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="3008" end="3019" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="3092" end="3105" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="3351" end="3363" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574130" start="3519" end="3522" title="Han (Warring States)" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q564282" start="3598" end="3616" title="King Huiwen of Qin" label="King Huiwen of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100670" start="3875" end="3895" title="Chinese Text Project" label="Chinese Text Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362070" wikidata="Q248382" url="?curid=362070" title="Ignition system">
<text>Ignition systems are used by heat engines to initiate combustion by igniting the fuel-air mixture. In a spark ignition versions of the internal combustion engine (such as petrol engines), the ignition system creates a spark to ignite the fuel-air mixture just before each &quot;combustion&quot; stroke. Gas turbine engines and rocket engines normally use an ignition system only during start-up.

Diesel engines use &quot;compression ignition&quot; to ignite the fuel-air mixture using the heat of compression and therefore do not use an ignition system. They usually have glowplugs that preheat the combustion chamber to aid starting in cold weather.

Early cars used ignition magneto and trembler coil systems, which were superseded by Distributor-based systems (first used in 1912). Electronic ignition systems (first used in 1968) became common towards the end of the 20th century, with coil-on-plug versions of these systems becoming widespread since the 1990s.

== Magneto and mechanical systems ==
=== Ignition magneto systems===

An &quot;ignition magneto&quot; (also called a &quot;high-tension magneto&quot;) is an older type of ignition system used in spark-ignition engines (such as petrol engines). It uses a magneto and a transformer to make pulses of high voltage for the spark plugs. The older term &quot;high-tension&quot; means &quot;high-voltage&quot;.

Used on many cars in the early 20th century, ignition magnetos were largely replaced by induction coil ignition systems. The use of ignition magnetos is now confined mainly to engines without a battery, for example in lawnmowers and chainsaws. It is also used in modern piston-engined aircraft (even though a battery is present), to avoid the engine relying on an electrical system.

===Induction coil systems===

As batteries became more common in cars (due to the increased usage of electric starter motors), magneto systems were replaced by systems using an induction coil. The 1886 Benz Patent-Motorwagen and the 1908 Ford Model T used a &quot;trembler coil&quot; ignition system, whereby the trembler interrupted the current through the coil and caused a rapid series of sparks during each firing. The trembler coil would be energized at an appropriate point in the engine cycle. In the Model T, the four-cylinder engine had a trembler coil for each cylinder.

=== Distributor-based systems ===
An improved ignition system was invented by Charles Kettering at Delco in the United States and introduced in Cadillac&#x27;s 1912 cars. The Kettering ignition system consisted of a single ignition coil, breaker points, a capacitor (to prevent the points from arcing at break) and a distributor (to direct the electricity from the ignition coil to the correct cylinder). The Kettering system became the primary ignition system for many years in the automotive industry due to its lower cost and relative simplicity.
== Electronic systems ==
The first electronic ignition (a cold cathode type) was tested in 1948 by Delco-Remy,&lt;ref name=&quot;Super Street Cars, 9/81, p.34&quot;&gt;&quot;Super Street Cars&quot;, 9/81, p.34.&lt;/ref&gt; while Lucas introduced a transistorized ignition in 1955, which was used on BRM and Coventry Climax Formula One engines in 1962. The aftermarket began offering EI that year, with both the AutoLite Electric Transistor 201 and Tung-Sol EI-4 (thyratron capacitive discharge) being available.&lt;ref name=&quot;Super Street Cars, 9/81, p.35&quot;&gt;&quot;Super Street Cars&quot;, 9/81, p.35.&lt;/ref&gt; Pontiac became the first automaker to offer an optional EI, the breakerless magnetic pulse-triggered Delcotronic, on some 1963 models; it was also available on some Corvettes. The first commercially available all solid-state (SCR) capacitive discharge ignition was manufactured by Hyland Electronics in Canada also in 1963. Ford fitted a FORD designed breakerless system on the Lotus 25s entered at Indianapolis the next year, ran a fleet test in 1964, and began offering optional EI on some models in 1965. This electronic system was utilized on the GT40s campaigned by Shelby American and Holman and Moody. Robert C. Hogle, Ford Motor Company, presented the, &quot;Mark II-GT Ignition and Electrical System&quot;, Publication #670068, at the SAE Congress, Detroit, Michigan, January 9–13, 1967. Beginning in 1958, Earl W. Meyer at Chrysler worked on EI, continuing until 1961 and resulting in use of EI on the company&#x27;s NASCAR hemis in 1963 and 1964.

Prest-O-Lite&#x27;s CD-65, which relied on capacitance discharge (CD), appeared in 1965, and had &quot;an unprecedented 50,000 mile warranty.&quot; (This differs from the non-CD Prest-O-Lite system introduced on AMC products in 1972, and made standard equipment for the 1975 model year.) A similar CD unit was available from Delco in 1966, which was optional on Oldsmobile, Pontiac, and GMC vehicles in the 1967 model year. Also in 1967, Motorola debuted their breakerless CD system. The most famous aftermarket electronic ignition which debuted in 1965, was the Delta Mark 10 capacitive discharge ignition, which was sold assembled or as a kit.

The Fiat Dino was the first production car to come standard with EI in 1968, followed by the Jaguar XJ Series 1 in 1971, Chrysler (after a 1971 trial) in 1973 and by Ford and GM in 1975.

In 1967, Prest-O-Lite made a &quot;Black Box&quot; ignition amplifier, intended to take the load off the distributor&#x27;s breaker points during high rpm runs, which was used by Dodge and Plymouth on their factory Super Stock Coronet and Belvedere drag racers. This amplifier was installed on the interior side of the cars&#x27; firewall, and had a duct which provided outside air to cool the unit. The rest of the system (distributor and spark plugs) remains as for the mechanical system. The lack of moving parts compared with the mechanical system leads to greater reliability and longer service intervals.

A variation coil-on-plug ignition has each coil handle two plugs, on cylinders which are 360 degrees out of phase (and therefore reach top dead center (TDC) at the same time); in the four-cycle engine this means that one plug will be sparking during the end of the exhaust stroke while the other fires at the usual time, a so-called &quot;wasted spark&quot; arrangement which has no drawbacks apart from faster spark plug erosion; the paired cylinders are 1/4 and 2/3 on four cylinder arrangements, 1/4, 6/3, 2/5 on six cylinder engines and 6/7, 4/1, 8/3 and 2/5 on V8 engines. Other systems do away with the distributor as a timing apparatus and use a magnetic crank angle sensor mounted on the crankshaft to trigger the ignition at the proper time.

=== Engine Control Units ===
Modern automotive engines use an engine control unit (ECU), which is a single device that controls various engine functions including the ignition system and the fuel injection. This contrasts earlier engines, where the fuel injection and ignition were operated as separate systems.

== Gas turbine and rocket engines ==

Gas turbine engines (including jet engines) use capacitor discharge ignition, however the ignition system is only used at startup or when the combustor(s) flame goes out.

The ignition system in a rocket engine is critical to avoiding a hard start or explosion. Rockets often employ pyrotechnic devices that place flames across the face of the injector plate, or, alternatively, hypergolic propellants that ignite spontaneously on contact with each other.

== See also ==

* Electromagnetism
* Faraday&#x27;s law of induction
* History of the internal combustion engine

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248382" start="0" end="16" title="Ignition system" label="Ignition systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q178185" start="29" end="40" title="heat engine" label="heat engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651473" start="104" end="118" title="spark-ignition engine" label="spark ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="135" end="161" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="301" title="Stroke_(engine)#Combustion-power-expansion_stroke" label="&amp;quot;combustion&amp;quot; stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="303" end="314" title="Gas turbine" label="Gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="327" end="340" title="rocket engine" label="rocket engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="397" end="410" title="Diesel engine" label="Diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431653" start="573" end="582" title="Glow plug (diesel engine)" label="glowplugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q909434" start="600" end="618" title="combustion chamber" label="combustion chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773501" start="669" end="685" title="ignition magneto" label="ignition magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838082" start="690" end="703" title="trembler coil" label="trembler coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459069" start="738" end="749" title="Distributor" label="Distributor"/>
<link wikidata="Q248339" start="891" end="903" title="coil-on-plug ignition" label="coil-on-plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651473" start="1163" end="1184" title="spark-ignition engine" label="spark-ignition engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773501" start="1222" end="1229" title="ignition magneto" label="magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="1236" end="1247" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="1790" end="1799" title="Battery (electricity)" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417360" start="1934" end="1948" title="induction coil" label="induction coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q326248" start="1959" end="1981" title="Benz Patent-Motorwagen" label="Benz Patent-Motorwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="1995" end="2007" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q959123" start="2417" end="2434" title="Charles Kettering" label="Charles Kettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="2595" end="2604" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459069" start="2656" end="2667" title="distributor" label="distributor"/>
<link wikidata="Q814902" start="2947" end="2959" title="cold cathode" label="cold cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312262" start="2988" end="2998" title="Remy Electric" label="Delco-Remy"/>
<link wikidata="Q574425" start="3118" end="3123" title="Lucas Industries" label="Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="3137" end="3147" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173012" start="3188" end="3191" title="British Racing Motors" label="BRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q173016" start="3196" end="3211" title="Coventry Climax" label="Coventry Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="3212" end="3223" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q376134" start="3245" end="3256" title="automotive aftermarket" label="aftermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852967" start="3337" end="3345" title="Tung-Sol" label="Tung-Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="3513" end="3520" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135703" start="3678" end="3686" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C2)" label="Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="3837" end="3841" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q583089" start="3891" end="3899" title="Lotus 25" label="Lotus 25"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3912" end="3924" title="Indianapolis 500#European incursions" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="4440" end="4446" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4447" end="4451" title="Chrysler Hemi engine#Hemi design reintroduced" label="hemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="4472" end="4484" title="Prest-O-Lite" label="Prest-O-Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q202708" start="4684" end="4687" title="American Motors" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="4834" end="4844" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28993" start="4859" end="4862" title="GMC (automobile)" label="GMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="4910" end="4918" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q964034" start="5123" end="5132" title="Fiat Dino" label="Fiat Dino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5212" end="5230" title="Jaguar XJ#Series 1 (1968–1973)" label="Jaguar XJ Series 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="5486" end="5491" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="5496" end="5504" title="Plymouth (automobile)" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234173" start="5534" end="5541" title="Dodge Coronet" label="Coronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652882" start="5546" end="5555" title="Plymouth Belvedere" label="Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q46241" start="5556" end="5566" title="drag racing" label="drag racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174773" start="6054" end="6069" title="Dead centre (engineering)" label="top dead center"/>
<link wikidata="Q286751" start="6258" end="6270" title="wasted spark" label="wasted spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182199" start="6581" end="6599" title="Crank Angle Sensor" label="crank angle sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196635" start="6733" end="6752" title="engine control unit" label="engine control unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="6862" end="6876" title="fuel injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="7022" end="7033" title="Gas turbine" label="Gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514947" start="7070" end="7098" title="capacitor discharge ignition" label="capacitor discharge ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809680" start="7164" end="7173" title="combustor" label="combustor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7198" end="7232" title="Rocket engine#Ignition" label="ignition system in a rocket engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="7259" end="7269" title="hard start" label="hard start"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="7273" end="7282" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q474100" start="7305" end="7323" title="pyrotechnic device" label="pyrotechnic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q425705" start="7366" end="7374" title="injector" label="injector"/>
<link wikidata="Q81614" start="7401" end="7411" title="hypergolic" label="hypergolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="7497" end="7513" title="Electromagnetism" label="Electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181465" start="7516" end="7547" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031196" start="7550" end="7591" title="History of the internal combustion engine" label="History of the internal combustion engine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362071" wikidata="Q556234" url="?curid=362071" title="Feizi">
<text>Feizi (; died 858 BC), also known as Qin Ying and Ying Feizi, was the founder of the Qin state.

==Mythical origin of Qin==
According to the founding myths of Qin recorded in the &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; by Han dynasty historian Sima Qian, Feizi descended from the mythical Yellow Emperor and his grandson and successor Zhuanxu. Zhuanxu&#x27;s granddaughter Nüxiu (女脩) gave birth to Daye (大業) after swallowing an egg of a swallow. Daye&#x27;s son Boyi (伯益) was awarded the ancestral name Ying () by the mythical Chinese ruler Shun.

==Ancestry==
During the Shang dynasty, Boyi&#x27;s descendant Zhongjue was in charge of Xichui (西垂, also called Quanqiu, in present-day Li County, Gansu) in the midst of the Rong tribes. Zhongjue&#x27;s son Feilian (蜚廉) and grandson Elai served King Zhou of Shang, and Elai was killed when King Wu of Zhou overthrew Shang and founded the Zhou dynasty. Feizi&#x27;s father Daluo (大骆) was the great-great-grandson of Elai. However, Daluo&#x27;s legal heir was not Feizi, but his other son , because Cheng was born to Daluo&#x27;s main wife, daughter of the Marquess of the state of Shen.

==Founding of Qin==
Feizi lived in Xichui and was a skilled horse breeder. King Xiao of Zhou learned of his reputation and put him in charge of breeding and training horses for the Zhou army. To reward his contributions, King Xiao wanted to make Feizi his father&#x27;s legal heir instead of his half-brother Cheng. However, Marquess of Shen, Cheng&#x27;s grandfather, objected and said that the Rong people would revolt if the king deposed Cheng. The king changed his mind and awarded Feizi the small fief of Qin instead (in present-day Zhangjiachuan County, Gansu), separate from his father&#x27;s fief of Xichui, and gave Feizi the title Qin Ying, a combination of his fief and ancestral name.

This was the beginning of the State of Qin that would over six centuries later conquer all other states and unify China under the rule of Qin Shi Huang, the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty. At this time Qin was only a minor state classified as an &quot;attached state&quot; (附庸, &quot;fuyong&quot;), and Feizi did not receive any nobility rank. Qin would not become a major vassal state until five generations later, when King Ping of Zhou granted Duke Xiang of Qin a formal nobility rank and recognition as a feudal lord for protecting the king during the invasion of the Quanrong nomads.

==After death==
Feizi died in 858 BC and was succeeded by his son, known as the Marquis of Qin. In 842 BC the Rong people rebelled, destroying the clan of Feizi&#x27;s half-brother at Xichui. Twenty years later, Feizi&#x27;s great-grandson Qin Zhong was also killed by the Rong in 822 BC. However, Qin Zhong&#x27;s son and successor Duke Zhuang of Qin defeated the Rong and annexed Xichui, thus reuniting the territories of the two branches of the House of Ying.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q556234" start="0" end="5" title="Feizi" label="Feizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q556234" start="37" end="45" title="Feizi" label="Qin Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q556234" start="50" end="60" title="Feizi" label="Ying Feizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="85" end="94" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="141" end="154" title="founding myth" label="founding myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="185" end="215" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="225" end="236" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="247" end="256" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="292" end="306" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q198180" start="338" end="345" title="Zhuanxu" label="Zhuanxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10933357" start="401" end="405" title="Ye the Great" label="Daye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="465" end="469" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Boyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093580" start="491" end="505" title="Chinese ancestral name" label="ancestral name"/>
<link wikidata="Q313342" start="544" end="548" title="Shun (Chinese leader)" label="Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="575" end="588" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10875843" start="613" end="621" title="Zhongjue" label="Zhongjue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201792" start="687" end="703" title="Li County, Gansu" label="Li County, Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="725" end="736" title="Xirong (people)" label="Rong tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q862901" start="784" end="788" title="Elai" label="Elai"/>
<link wikidata="Q470072" start="796" end="814" title="King Zhou of Shang" label="King Zhou of Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061289" start="841" end="856" title="King Wu of Zhou" label="King Wu of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="889" end="901" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1106" end="1114" title="Marquess of Shen (King Xiao of Zhou era)" label="Marquess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056772" start="1131" end="1135" title="Shen (state)" label="Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209245" start="1213" end="1230" title="King Xiao of Zhou" label="King Xiao of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1463" end="1479" title="Marquess of Shen (King Xiao of Zhou era)" label="Marquess of Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="1534" end="1545" title="Rong people" label="Rong people"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="1640" end="1644" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q197375" start="1676" end="1696" title="Zhangjiachuan County" label="Zhangjiachuan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="1698" end="1703" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="1866" end="1878" title="State of Qin" label="State of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="1974" end="1987" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="2014" end="2025" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836688" start="2211" end="2223" title="Ancient Chinese states" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193546" start="2259" end="2276" title="King Ping of Zhou" label="King Ping of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q549872" start="2285" end="2302" title="Duke Xiang of Qin" label="Duke Xiang of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018710" start="2410" end="2418" title="Quanrong" label="Quanrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q553776" start="2508" end="2522" title="Marquis of Qin" label="Marquis of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="2538" end="2549" title="Rong people" label="Rong people"/>
<link wikidata="Q564135" start="2668" end="2677" title="Qin Zhong" label="Qin Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q564531" start="2761" end="2779" title="Duke Zhuang of Qin" label="Duke Zhuang of Qin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362072" wikidata="Q778082" url="?curid=362072" title="Bochs">
<text>Bochs (pronounced &quot;box&quot;) is a portable IA-32 and x86-64 IBM PC compatible emulator and debugger mostly written in C++ and distributed as free software under the GNU Lesser General Public License. It supports emulation of the processor(s) (including protected mode), memory, disks, display, Ethernet, BIOS and common hardware peripherals of PCs.

Many guest operating systems can be run using the emulator including DOS, several versions of Linux, Xenix, Microsoft Windows, BSDs and Rhapsody OS ( of Mac OS X Public Beta). Bochs runs on many host operating systems, including Android OS, Linux, macOS, PlayStation 2, Windows, and Windows CE along with its derivatives.

Bochs is mostly used for operating system development (when an emulated operating system crashes, it does not crash the host operating system, so the emulated OS can be debugged) and to run other guest operating systems inside already running host operating systems. It can also be used to run older software — such as PC games — which will not run on non-compatible, or too fast computers.

==History==
Bochs started as a program with a commercial license, at the price of US$25, for use as-is. If a user needed to link it to other software, that user would have to negotiate a special license. That changed on 22 March 2000, when Mandrakesoft (later Mandriva) bought Bochs from lead developer Kevin Lawton and released it for Linux under the GNU Lesser General Public License. Support for hosting on Windows XP ended with version 2.6.10.

==Use==
Bochs emulates the hardware needed by PC operating systems, including hard drives, CD drives, and floppy drives. It doesn&#x27;t utilize any host CPU virtualization features, therefore is slower than most virtualization (as opposed to emulation) software. It provides additional security by completely isolating the guest OS from the hardware. Bochs also has extensive debugging features. It is widely used for OS development, as it removes the need for constant system restarts (to test code).

BFE, described as a &quot;Graphical Debugger Interface for the Bochs PC Emulator&quot;, is a graphical interface for the debugger within the Bochs PC emulator that makes it possible to debug software step-by-step at the instruction and register level, much like Borland&#x27;s Turbo Debugger.

==Emulated hardware==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q778082" start="0" end="5" title="Bochs" label="Bochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="49" end="54" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="59" end="65" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="66" end="83" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="84" end="92" title="emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="97" end="105" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="124" end="127" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="147" end="160" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="171" end="204" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="GNU Lesser General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q841064" start="259" end="273" title="protected mode" label="protected mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="300" end="308" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="310" end="314" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="350" end="353" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="367" end="383" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="425" end="428" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="450" end="455" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="457" end="462" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="464" end="481" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="483" end="486" title="BSD" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q264020" start="492" end="503" title="Rhapsody OS" label="Rhapsody OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350156" start="509" end="529" title="Mac OS X Public Beta" label="Mac OS X Public Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="585" end="595" title="Android OS" label="Android OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="597" end="602" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="604" end="609" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="611" end="624" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="626" end="633" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="639" end="649" title="Windows CE" label="Windows CE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="676" title="Windows Embedded Compact#Relationship to Windows Mobile, Pocket PC, and SmartPhone" label="its derivatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q333501" start="768" end="775" title="Crash (computing)" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="848" end="856" title="debugging" label="debugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1153" end="1156" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q869576" start="1331" end="1339" title="Mandriva" label="Mandriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1407" end="1412" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="1423" end="1456" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="GNU Lesser General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="1481" end="1491" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="1678" end="1692" title="Hardware-assisted virtualization" label="virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945739" start="2301" end="2315" title="Borland Turbo Debugger" label="Turbo Debugger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362075" wikidata="Q1356911" url="?curid=362075" title="Nathaniel Bowditch">
<text>Nathaniel Bowditch (March 26, 1773 – March 16, 1838) was an early American mathematician remembered for his work on ocean navigation. He is often credited as the founder of modern maritime navigation; his book &quot;The New American Practical Navigator&quot;, first published in 1802, is still carried on board every commissioned U.S. Naval vessel.


==Life and work==
Nathaniel Bowditch, the fourth of seven children, was born in Salem, Province of Massachusetts Bay, to Habakkuk Bowditch, a cooper who at one point was a sailor as well but stopped after his ship went aground in 1775, and Mary Ingersoll Bowditch. At the age of ten, he was made to leave school to work in his father&#x27;s cooperage, before becoming indentured at twelve for nine years as a bookkeeping apprentice to a ship chandler. Here is where he first learned bookkeeping, an important step in his life.

In 1786, age fourteen, Bowditch began to study algebra and two years later he taught himself calculus. He also taught himself Latin in 1790 and French in 1792 so he was able to read mathematical works such as Isaac Newton&#x27;s &quot;Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica&quot;. He found thousands of errors in John Hamilton Moore&#x27;s &quot;The New Practical Navigator&quot;; at eighteen, he copied all the mathematical papers of the &quot;Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London&quot;. Among his many significant scientific contributions would be a translation of Pierre-Simon de Laplace&#x27;s &quot;Mécanique céleste&quot;, a lengthy work on mathematics and theoretical astronomy. This translation was critical to the development of astronomy in the United States.

Serendipity aided Bowditch&#x27;s self-directed study, in as much as he found himself able to use the eminent Irish chemist Richard Kirwan&#x27;s library: Hugh Hill, a privateer from Salem who captained the &quot;Pilgrim&quot;, had intercepted the ship carrying the library between Ireland and England and brought the library back to Salem in 1781.

In 1795, Bowditch went to sea on the first of four voyages as a ship&#x27;s clerk and captain&#x27;s writer. His fifth voyage was as master and part owner of a ship. Following this voyage, he returned to Salem in 1803 to resume his mathematical studies and enter the insurance business. One of his family homes in Salem, the Nathaniel Bowditch House, still exists and was restored in 2000. This house has been designated a National Historic Landmark.

In 1798 Bowditch married Elizabeth Boardman, who died seven months later. In 1800 Bowditch married his second wife and cousin, Mary &quot;Polly&quot; Ingersoll Bowditch (1781–1834). They had 2 daughters and 6 sons, including Henry Ingersoll Bowditch and William Ingersoll Bowditch. Among his grandchildren were Henry Pickering Bowditch and Charles Pickering Bowditch.

In 1802, his book &quot;The American Practical Navigator&quot; was first published. That same year, Harvard University awarded Bowditch an honorary degree.

In 1804, Bowditch became America&#x27;s first insurance actuary as president of the Essex Fire and Marine Insurance Company in Salem. Under his direction, the company prospered despite difficult political conditions and the War of 1812.

Bowditch&#x27;s mathematical and astronomical work during this time earned him a significant standing, including election to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1799 and the American Philosophical Society in 1809. He was offered the chair of mathematics and physics at Harvard in 1806, but turned it down. In 1804, an article on his observations of the Moon was published and in 1806 he published naval charts of several harbors, including Salem. More scientific publications followed, including a study of a meteor explosion (1807), three papers on the orbits of comets (1815, 1818, 1820) and a study of the Lissajous figures created by the motion of a pendulum suspended from two points (1815).

In 1816, Harvard awarded Nathaniel Bowditch an honorary Doctor of Laws.

As well as Harvard, the United States Military Academy and the University of Virginia offered Bowditch chairs in mathematics. Bowditch again refused these offers, perhaps (in the case of the University of Virginia) because the $2,000 salary offered was two-thirds of the salary he received as president of the insurance company.

Bowditch&#x27;s translation of the first four volumes of Laplace&#x27;s &quot;Traité de mécanique céleste&quot; was completed by 1818. Publication of the work, however, was delayed for many years, most likely due to cost. Nonetheless, he continued to work on it with the assistance of Benjamin Peirce, adding commentaries that doubled its length.

By 1819, Bowditch&#x27;s international reputation had grown to the extent that he was elected as a member of the Royal Societies of Edinburgh and London, and the Royal Irish Academy.

In 1823, Bowditch left the Essex Fire and Marine Insurance Company to become an actuary for the Massachusetts Hospital Life Insurance Company in Boston. There he served as a &quot;money manager&quot; (an investment manager) for wealthy individuals who made their fortunes at sea, directing their wealth toward manufacturing. Towns such as Lowell prospered as a result.

Bowditch&#x27;s move from Salem to Boston involved the transfer of over 2,500 books, 100 maps and charts, and 29 volumes of his own manuscripts.

==Bowditch&#x27;s &quot;American Practical Navigator&quot;==
During his time at sea, Bowditch became intensely interested in the mathematics involved in celestial navigation. He worked initially with John Hamilton Moore&#x27;s London-published &quot;Navigator&quot;, which was known to have errors. To have exact tables to work from, Bowditch recomputed all of Moore&#x27;s tables, and rearranged and expanded the work. He contacted the US publisher of the work, Edmund March Blunt, who asked him to correct and revise the third edition on his fifth voyage. The task was so extensive that Bowditch decided to write his own book, and to &quot;put down in the book nothing I can&#x27;t teach the crew&quot;. On that trip, it is said that every man of the crew of 12, including the ship&#x27;s cook, became competent to take and calculate lunar observations and to plot the correct position of the ship.

In 1802 Blunt published the first edition of Bowditch&#x27;s &quot;American Practical Navigator&quot;, which became the western hemisphere shipping industry standard for the next century and a half. The text included several solutions to the spherical triangle problem that were new, as well as extensive formulae and tables for navigation. In 1866, the United States Hydrographic Office purchased the copyright and since that time the book has been in continuous publication, with regular revisions to keep it current. Bowditch&#x27;s influence on the American Practical Navigator was so profound that to this day mariners refer to it simply as &quot;Bowditch&quot;. Student Naval officers prior to the establishment of the Naval Academy referred to the work as &quot;the immaculate Bowditch&quot;.
Bowditch died in Boston in 1838 from stomach cancer. He is buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery, where a monument to him was erected through public collections.

The statue was the first life-size bronze to be cast in America. It was the creation of renowned sculptor Robert Ball Hughes.

The following eulogy was written by the Salem Marine Society:
In the 1840s and 1850s, Bowditch&#x27;s son, H. I. Bowditch, ran the &quot;Bowditch Library&quot; on Otis Place in Boston&#x27;s Financial District. It was &quot;free to those who reside in Boston, or in the vicinity. ... This is the library of the late Nathaniel Bowditch, and is almost exclusively of a scientific character.&quot; In 1858 the family gave the collection, &quot;which consists mostly of mathematical and astronomical works&quot;, to the Boston Public Library.

==Legacy==

The Oceanographic Survey Ship and the &quot;Nathaniel Bowditch&quot;, a high-speed catamaran passenger ferry serving downtown Boston and Salem, were named for him, as was a lunar crater. Additionally, a William Hand–designed Schooner built in 1922, which is currently part of the Maine Windjammer fleet and sails out of Rockland, Maine, is also named after Nathaniel Bowditch.

In 1955, a book for younger readers, &quot;Carry On, Mr. Bowditch&quot;, was published by Jean Lee Latham, portraying Bowditch&#x27;s life dramatized and fictionalized. A serious modern biography is Robert E. Berry&#x27;s &quot;Yankee Stargazer&quot;, published in 1941.

A grammar school, two middle schools and a dorm in America were also named for him, in Boston, Foster City, California (Bowditch Middle School), Salem, Massachusetts and Salem State College, respectively. The Department of Marine Transportation building on the grounds of the United States Merchant Marine Academy is named in his honor and houses classrooms, laboratories, and the 900-seat Ackerman Auditorium. He also gives his name to a street in Berkeley, California. Actor David Morse was named after him − David Bowditch Morse.

Bowditch Point Park, in Fort Myers Beach, Florida, is named for Bowditch.

Bowditch was inducted into the National Sailing Hall of Fame in 2014.

==See also==
* Bowditch curve
* List of actuaries
* List of amateur mathematicians
* USS Bowditch

==References==
==Further reading==
* Nathaniel Ingersoll Bowditch. Memoir of Nathaniel Bowditch. Boston: C.C. Little and J. Brown, 1840. Internet Archive
* &quot;Carry on, Mr. Bowditch&quot; by Jean Lee Latham, 1955. Newbery Medal Award Winner Carry On, Mr. Bowditch
* &quot;Nathaniel Bowditch and the Power of Numbers: How a Nineteenth-Century Man of Business, Science, and the Sea Changed American Life&quot; by Tamara Plakins Thornton, University of North Carolina Press, 2016

==External links==

* Phillips Library at the Peabody Essex Museum. Bowditch Family Papers, 1726/7-1975
* Boston Public Library. Bowditch, Nathaniel (1773-1838) Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1356911" start="0" end="18" title="Nathaniel Bowditch" label="Nathaniel Bowditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="122" end="132" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759883" start="216" end="252" title="Bowditch&amp;#x27;s American Practical Navigator" label="The New American Practical Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="330" end="340" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="431" end="436" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="438" end="467" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q38883" start="692" end="701" title="Cooper (profession)" label="cooperage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17366057" start="719" end="728" title="indenture" label="indenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="760" end="771" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235104" start="788" end="801" title="ship chandler" label="ship chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="926" end="933" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="972" end="980" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1005" end="1010" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="1088" end="1100" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="1114" end="1158" title="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1364" end="1377" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="1473" end="1496" title="Pierre-Simon de Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon de Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q166039" start="1677" end="1688" title="Serendipity" label="Serendipity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="1711" end="1730" title="Autodidacticism" label="self-directed study"/>
<link wikidata="Q901070" start="1801" end="1815" title="Richard Kirwan" label="Richard Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56725405" start="1832" end="1841" title="Hugh Hill (privateer)" label="Hugh Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="1845" end="1854" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="2160" end="2166" title="captain (nautical)" label="master"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969514" start="2352" end="2376" title="Nathaniel Bowditch House" label="Nathaniel Bowditch House"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="2450" end="2476" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723585" start="2704" end="2728" title="Henry Ingersoll Bowditch" label="Henry Ingersoll Bowditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q86858551" start="2733" end="2759" title="William I. Bowditch" label="William Ingersoll Bowditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607155" start="2790" end="2814" title="Henry Pickering Bowditch" label="Henry Pickering Bowditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15129801" start="2819" end="2845" title="Charles Pickering Bowditch" label="Charles Pickering Bowditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2948" end="2966" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179985" start="3061" end="3068" title="actuary" label="actuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="3229" end="3240" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="3372" end="3409" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3426" end="3456" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3510" end="3517" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="3605" end="3609" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="3761" end="3767" title="meteor" label="meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="3806" end="3811" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="3816" end="3821" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q594135" start="3861" end="3878" title="Lissajous figures" label="Lissajous figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="3906" end="3914" title="pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="4047" end="4077" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="4086" end="4108" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724336" start="4431" end="4458" title="Traité de mécanique céleste" label="Traité de mécanique céleste"/>
<link wikidata="Q467611" start="4638" end="4653" title="Benjamin Peirce" label="Benjamin Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="4830" end="4842" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="4847" end="4853" title="Royal Society of London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q110587" start="4863" end="4882" title="Royal Irish Academy" label="Royal Irish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5030" end="5036" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="5089" end="5107" title="Investment management" label="investment manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="5224" end="5230" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365937" start="5864" end="5882" title="Edmund March Blunt" label="Edmund March Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759883" start="6348" end="6404" title="Bowditch&amp;#x27;s American Practical Navigator" label="Bowditch&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;American Practical Navigator&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q46463" start="6545" end="6571" title="Spherical trigonometry" label="spherical triangle problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890686" start="6657" end="6690" title="United States Hydrographic Office" label="United States Hydrographic Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="7120" end="7126" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950363" start="7172" end="7193" title="Mount Auburn Cemetery" label="Mount Auburn Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341836" start="7366" end="7384" title="Robert Ball Hughes" label="Robert Ball Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="8022" end="8031" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892130" start="8112" end="8124" title="Bowditch (crater)" label="lunar crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010802" start="8142" end="8154" title="William Hand (yacht designer)" label="William Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="8164" end="8172" title="Schooner" label="Schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046783" start="8360" end="8382" title="Carry On, Mr. Bowditch" label="Carry On, Mr. Bowditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171019" start="8407" end="8422" title="Jean Lee Latham" label="Jean Lee Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="8632" end="8636" title="dorm" label="dorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q988691" start="8684" end="8707" title="Foster City, California" label="Foster City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414896" start="8709" end="8731" title="Bowditch Middle School" label="Bowditch Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="8734" end="8754" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695750" start="8759" end="8778" title="Salem State College" label="Salem State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="8865" end="8902" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="9038" end="9058" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q296370" start="9066" end="9077" title="David Morse (actor)" label="David Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978230" start="9229" end="9258" title="National Sailing Hall of Fame" label="National Sailing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q594135" start="9284" end="9298" title="Lissajous curve" label="Bowditch curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605016" start="9301" end="9318" title="List of actuaries" label="List of actuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605648" start="9321" end="9351" title="List of amateur mathematicians" label="List of amateur mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364074" start="9354" end="9366" title="USS Bowditch" label="USS Bowditch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362076" wikidata="Q1146646" url="?curid=362076" title="Duke Mu of Qin">
<text>Duke Mu of Qin (died 621BC), born Ying Renhao, was a duke of the Qin state. Sometimes considered one of the Five Hegemons of the Spring and Autumn period, Duke Mu greatly expanded the territory of Qin during the reign of King Xiang of Zhou. He was also known for his many talented advisors, such as Baili Xi, Jian Shu (蹇叔), Pi Bao (丕豹), and Gong Sun (公孫).

==Names==
Renhao is a Chinese name: Ying is the surname and Renhao is the given name. During his time in power, he would have simply been called Qin or the Duke of Qin (&quot;Qingong&quot;). The title &quot;Qin Mugong&quot;—the &quot;Solemn Duke of Qin&quot;—is a posthumous name bestowed by his successors as part of Chinese ancestral veneration. Despite this being a descriptive title, it is common in English to treat it as though it were a common name. All of these are the modern Mandarin pronunciations of the characters in his names; their reconstructed Old Chinese pronunciations are different.

==Life==
He was the son of Duke De of Qin and the younger brother of Duke Cheng. He married Mu Ji (), the daughter of Duke Xian of Jin, and married his daughter Huai Ying (懷嬴) to two of Duke Xian&#x27;s sons. He helped his son-in-law win the Battle of Chengpu against Chu; these two marriages led to the saying &quot;the Friendship of Qin and Jin&quot; (秦晉之好) to denote political marriages and alliances based on marital bonds. He is also noted as the retainer of Bole, the horse expert.

During the early reign of Duke Mu of Qin, the Jin state was a formidable power under the leadership of Duke Xian of Jin. However, after the death of Duke Xian, Jin plunged into a state of internal conflict as Duke Xian&#x27;s sons fought over the succession. One of them won the contention and became Duke Hui of Jin, but Jin was struck by a famine not long later and Duke Hui requested aid from Qin. Duke Mu of Qin sent relief food supplies and agricultural equipment to Jin. However, Qin was struck by famine later and by then, Jin had recovered and it turned to attack Qin. Qin and Jin engaged in several battles over the next few years.

During the battles with Jin, Duke Mu heard that Duke Hui&#x27;s older brother Ji Chong&#x27;er had gone from his northern and eastern wanderings to the southern court of Chu. After consulting his subjects, Duke Mu sent an emissary to Chu to invite Chong&#x27;er to Qin. Upon Duke Hui&#x27;s death, his son fled from captivity in the Qin court to establish himself as the new duke. Instead of permitting this, Duke Mu sent his army to establish Chong&#x27;er as Duke Hui&#x27;s successor, defeating the Jin army at the Battle of Gaoliang. Chong&#x27;er— his posthumous name is &quot;Duke Wen&quot;—was grateful for Duke Mu&#x27;s assistance and relations between Qin and Jin improved. Qin used the opportunity when its eastern front was stable, to launch military campaigns against the minority tribes in the west.
At this time, Qin and Jin were the most powerful states in China. Duke Wen of Jin expelled the Di barbarians and drove them into the region west of the Yellow River between the Yun and Luo rivers; there they were known as the Red Di and the White Di. Shortly afterwards, Duke Mu of Qin, having obtained the services of You Yu, succeeded in getting the eight barbarian tribes of the west to submit to their authority.

Thus, at this time, there lived in the region west of Long the Mianzhu, the Hunrong, and the Diyuan tribes. North of Mts. Qi and Liang and the Jing and Qi rivers lived the Yiqu, Dali, Wuzhi, and Quyuan tribes. North of Jin were the Forest Barbarians and the Loufan, while north of Yan lived the Eastern Barbarians and Mountain Barbarians. All of them were scattered about in their own little valleys, each with its own chieftain. From time to time they would have gatherings of a hundred or so men, but no one tribe was capable of unifying the others under a single rule.
In 627 BC, Duke Mu of Qin planned a secret attack on the State of Zheng, but the Qin army retreated after being tricked into believing that Zheng was prepared for Qin&#x27;s invasion. Duke Wen had died and his successor, Duke Xiang of Jin, ordered his troops to lay an ambush for the retreating Qin army. The Qin forces were defeated in an ambush by Jin at the Battle of Yao (zh) near present-day Luoning County, Henan Province and suffered heavy casualties. Three years later, Qin attacked Jin for revenge and scored a major victory. Duke Mu refused to advance east further after holding a funeral service for those killed in action at the Battle of Yao, and focused on the traditional policy of expanding Qin&#x27;s borders in the west. Duke Mu&#x27;s achievements in the western campaigns and his handling of foreign relations with Jin earned him a position among the Five Hegemons of the Spring and Autumn period.

==Family==
He had at least two known sons: Ying and Hong. Ying succeeded him as Duke Kang of Qin. He also had several known daughters: Huai Ying (wife of Dukes Huai and Wen of Jin), Wen Ying (wife of Duke Wen of Jin), Qin Ying (wife of King Gong of Chu), Jianbi, and Nongyu (wife of Xiao Shi). There are doubts as to whether Huai Ying and Wen Ying were different names for the same daughter; likewise, some argue for the conflation of Jianbi and Nongyu.

* Great-great-grandfather: Duke Wen of Qin
* Great-grandfather: Duke Jing of Qin (秦靜公)
* Grandfather: Duke Xian of Qin
* Father: Duke De of Qin
** Brothers: Duke Xuan of Qin, Duke Cheng of Qin
* Wife: Lady Mu (~672－637 BC), sister of Shensheng 
** Son: Duke Kang of Qin (d. 609 BC)
**Daughter: Huai Ying (650 BC - 620 BC)
** Daughter: Wenying
** Daughter: Jianbi
** Daughter: Nongyu

==Popular culture==
In the manga and anime series Kingdom as well as a oneshot written by Yasuhisa Hara, he made an alliance with mountain tribes, after seeing his horse devoured by them, even giving the barbarians wine. Later, he fought against Jin, but was rescued by the same barbarians.

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1146646" start="0" end="14" title="Duke Mu of Qin" label="Duke Mu of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146646" start="34" end="45" title="Duke Mu of Qin" label="Ying Renhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994612" start="53" end="57" title="gong (title)" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="65" end="74" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267977" start="108" end="121" title="Five Hegemons" label="Five Hegemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="129" end="153" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184862" start="221" end="239" title="King Xiang of Zhou" label="King Xiang of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q851900" start="299" end="307" title="Baili Xi" label="Baili Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q263917" start="379" end="391" title="Chinese name" label="Chinese name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062583" start="393" end="397" title="Yíng" label="Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093580" start="405" end="412" title="Chinese ancestral name" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q22809413" start="431" end="441" title="Chinese given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="621" end="636" title="posthumous name" label="posthumous name"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="683" end="703" title="ancestral veneration" label="ancestral veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="761" end="768" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="842" end="850" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="873" end="883" title="Chinese characters" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="904" end="917" title="linguistic reconstruction" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="918" end="929" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q552729" start="988" end="1002" title="Duke De of Qin" label="Duke De of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q552744" start="1030" end="1040" title="Duke Cheng of Qin" label="Duke Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1053" end="1058" title="Mu Ji" label="Mu Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136357" start="1079" end="1095" title="Duke Xian of Jin" label="Duke Xian of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8249145" start="1122" end="1131" title="Huai Ying" label="Huai Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313318" start="1203" end="1220" title="Battle of Chengpu" label="Battle of Chengpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="1229" end="1232" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994836" start="1425" end="1429" title="Bole (mythology)" label="Bole"/>
<link wikidata="Q561973" start="2170" end="2186" title="Ji Chong&amp;#x27;er" label="Ji Chong&amp;#x27;er"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="2262" end="2265" title="state of Chu" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2610" end="2628" title="Battle of Gaoliang" label="Battle of Gaoliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207124" start="3001" end="3003" title="Beidi" label="Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="3058" end="3070" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="3378" end="3382" title="Gansu" label="Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q908664" start="3619" end="3637" title="Donghu people" label="Eastern Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q552737" start="4895" end="4911" title="Duke Kang of Qin" label="Duke Kang of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133572" start="4969" end="4979" title="Duke Huai of Jin" label="Dukes Huai"/>
<link wikidata="Q561973" start="4984" end="4987" title="Duke Wen of Jin" label="Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q561973" start="5015" end="5030" title="Duke Wen of Jin" label="Duke Wen of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q795856" start="5051" end="5067" title="King Gong of Chu" label="King Gong of Chu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5098" end="5106" title="Xiao Shi" label="Xiao Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q552740" start="5297" end="5312" title="Duke Wen of Qin" label="Duke Wen of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5352" end="5355" title=":zh:秦靜公" label="秦靜公"/>
<link wikidata="Q567033" start="5372" end="5388" title="Duke Xian of Qin (Duke Ning)" label="Duke Xian of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q552729" start="5399" end="5413" title="Duke De of Qin" label="Duke De of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q552733" start="5427" end="5443" title="Duke Xuan of Qin" label="Duke Xuan of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q552744" start="5445" end="5462" title="Duke Cheng of Qin" label="Duke Cheng of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051377" start="5504" end="5513" title="Shensheng" label="Shensheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q552737" start="5523" end="5539" title="Duke Kang of Qin" label="Duke Kang of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8249145" start="5564" end="5573" title="Huai Ying" label="Huai Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058984" start="5704" end="5711" title="Kingdom (manga)" label="Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9116547" start="5744" end="5757" title="Yasuhisa Hara" label="Yasuhisa Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q912043" start="5900" end="5903" title="Jin (Chinese state)" label="Jin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362082" wikidata="Q5430337" url="?curid=362082" title="Fairfield Porter">
<text>Fairfield Porter (June 10, 1907 – September 18, 1975) was an American painter and art critic. He was the fourth of five children of James Porter, an architect, and Ruth Furness Porter, a poet from a literary family. He was the brother of photographer Eliot Porter and the brother-in-law of federal Reclamation Commissioner Michael W. Straus.

While a student at Harvard, Porter majored in fine arts; he continued his studies at the Art Students&#x27; League when he moved to New York City in 1928. His studies at the Art Students&#x27; League predisposed him to produce socially relevant art and, although the subjects would change, he continued to produce realist work for the rest of his career. He would be criticized and revered for continuing his representational style in the midst of the Abstract Expressionist movement.

His subjects were primarily landscapes, domestic interiors and portraits of family, friends and fellow artists, many of them affiliated with the New York School of writers, including John Ashbery, Frank O&#x27;Hara, and James Schuyler. Many of his paintings were set in or around the family summer house on Great Spruce Head Island, Maine and the family home at 49 South Main Street, Southampton, New York.

His painterly vision, which encompassed a fascination with nature and the ability to reveal extraordinariness in ordinary life, was heavily indebted to the French painters Pierre Bonnard and Édouard Vuillard. John Ashbery wrote of him: &quot;Characteristically, [Porter] tended to prefer the late woolly Vuillards to the early ones everyone likes&quot;.

Porter said once, &quot;When I paint, I think that what would satisfy me is to express what Bonnard said Renoir told him: &#x27;make everything more beautiful.&#x27;&quot;

== Work in public collections ==
Porter bequeathed about 250 of his works to the Parrish Art Museum.
* &quot;Laurence at the Piano&quot; (1953), New Britain Museum of American Art.
* &quot;Katie and Anne&quot; (1955), Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
* &quot;Still Life with Casserole&quot; (1955), Smithsonian American Art Museum
* &quot;Elaine de Kooning&quot; (1957), Metropolitan Museum of Art
* &quot;Frank O&#x27; Hara&quot; (1957), Toledo Museum of Art
* &quot;Maine Coast&quot; (1958), Metropolitan Museum of Art
* &quot;Chrysanthemums&quot; (1958), Wadsworth Atheneum
* &quot;Schwenk,&quot; (1959), Museum of Modern Art
* &quot;Children in a Field&quot; (1960), Whitney Museum of American Art
* &quot;Boathouses&quot; (1961), Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
* &quot;The Garden Road&quot; (1962), Whitney Museum of American Art
* &quot;Jerry at the Piano&quot; (1962), Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
* &quot;Jimmy and Liz&quot; (1963), Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts
* &quot;The Screen Porch&quot; (1964), Whitney Museum of American Art
* &quot;Flowers by the Sea&quot; (1965), Museum of Modern Art
* &quot;Interior in Sunlight&quot; (1965), Brooklyn Museum
* &quot;The Mirror&quot; (1966), Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art
* &quot;Anne in a Striped Dress&quot; (1967), Parrish Art Museum
* &quot;Under the Elms&quot; (1971), Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts
* &quot;Sunrise on South Main Street&quot; (1973), Metropolitan Museum of Art
* &quot;The Dock&quot; (1974–75), Farnsworth Art Museum
* &quot;Near Union Square--Looking up Park Avenue&quot; (1975), Metropolitan Museum of Art
* &quot;October Interior&quot; (1963), Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art
* &quot;Apple Blossoms I&quot; (1974), &quot;The Christmas Tree&quot; (1971), &quot;Street Scene&quot; (1969), Muscarelle Museum of Art
&quot;John MacWhinnie&quot; (1968) (Parrish Art Museum)
&quot;Inez MacWhinnie&quot; (1974)Mother of John MacWhinnie,artist (Parrish Art Museum)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Fairfield Porter Papers Online at the Smithsonian Archives of American Art
* Ken Moffatt, &quot;The Art of Fairfield Porter: An American Painter Celebrated a Sense of Place,&quot; 17 Feb 2010, Artes Magazine
* Alex Carnevale, &quot;In Which Fairfield Porter Looked So Young For His Age,&quot; January 13, 2011
* David Herd, &quot;Waiting for the mailboat (Letters of James Schuyler),&quot; The Guardian, 28 May 2005
* , from Maryland Institute College of Art&#x27;s Decker Library, Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5430337" start="0" end="16" title="Fairfield Porter" label="Fairfield Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143847" start="82" end="92" title="Art criticism" label="art critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q762632" start="251" end="263" title="Eliot Porter" label="Eliot Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010548" start="298" end="309" title="United States Bureau of Reclamation" label="Reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486081" start="323" end="340" title="Michael W. Straus" label="Michael W. Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="362" end="369" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="432" end="457" title="Art Students&amp;#x27; League" label="Art Students&amp;#x27; League"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="795" end="817" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="857" end="867" title="Landscape art" label="landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="892" end="900" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972942" start="974" end="989" title="New York School (art)" label="New York School"/>
<link wikidata="Q29418" start="1012" end="1024" title="John Ashbery" label="John Ashbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q951010" start="1026" end="1043" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406329" start="1049" end="1063" title="James Schuyler" label="James Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600027" start="1136" end="1167" title="Great Spruce Head Island, Maine" label="Great Spruce Head Island, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="1296" end="1302" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q26408" start="1409" end="1423" title="Pierre Bonnard" label="Pierre Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q239394" start="1428" end="1444" title="Édouard Vuillard" label="Édouard Vuillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="1697" end="1703" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q499902" start="1846" end="1864" title="Parrish Art Museum" label="Parrish Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005718" start="1910" end="1944" title="New Britain Museum of American Art" label="New Britain Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620553" start="1983" end="2020" title="Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden" label="Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192305" start="2069" end="2100" title="Smithsonian American Art Museum" label="Smithsonian American Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="2141" end="2167" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743116" start="2209" end="2229" title="Toledo Museum of Art" label="Toledo Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q403080" start="2328" end="2346" title="Wadsworth Atheneum" label="Wadsworth Atheneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="2378" end="2398" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q639791" start="2441" end="2471" title="Whitney Museum of American Art" label="Whitney Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952033" start="2727" end="2764" title="Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts" label="Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="2940" end="2955" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976985" start="2989" end="3016" title="Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art" label="Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436049" start="3269" end="3290" title="Farnsworth Art Museum" label="Farnsworth Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142334" start="3421" end="3459" title="Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art" label="Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940210" start="3571" end="3595" title="Muscarelle Museum of Art" label="Muscarelle Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781349" start="4206" end="4239" title="Maryland Institute College of Art" label="Maryland Institute College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="4263" end="4279" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362084" wikidata="Q6642672" url="?curid=362084" title="Lists of television stations in Atlantic Canada">
<text>The following articles contain lists of television stations in Atlantic Canada:

* List of television stations in New Brunswick
* List of television stations in Prince Edward Island
* List of television stations in Nova Scotia
* List of television stations in Newfoundland and Labrador</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="63" end="78" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642739" start="83" end="127" title="List of television stations in New Brunswick" label="List of television stations in New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642767" start="130" end="181" title="List of television stations in Prince Edward Island" label="List of television stations in Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642755" start="184" end="226" title="List of television stations in Nova Scotia" label="List of television stations in Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642748" start="229" end="285" title="List of television stations in Newfoundland and Labrador" label="List of television stations in Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362086" wikidata="Q325205" url="?curid=362086" title="Rakesh Sharma">
<text>Wing Commander Rakesh Sharma, AC (born 13 January 1949) is an Indian astronaut and a former Indian Air Force officer. He flew aboard Soyuz T-11 on 3 April 1984 as part of the Soviet Interkosmos programme. He is the only Indian citizen to travel in space, although there have been other astronauts of Indian origin who travelled to space, who were not Indian citizens. Another Air Force pilot, Ravish Malhotra, was placed on standby.

==Early life==
Born on 13 January 1949 in Patiala of present-day Punjab, India into a Punjabi family. Sharma attended St. George&#x27;s Grammar School, Hyderabad and graduated from Nizam College, Hyderabad. He joined the National Defence Academy as an air force plebe in July 1966 and was commissioned into the Indian Air Force as a pilot in 1970. He flew 21 combat missions as a MiG-21 pilot during the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War.

==Career==
===IAF career===
An alumnus of the 35thNational Defence Academy, Sharma joined the Indian Air Force as a test pilot in 1970 and progressed through numerous levels where in 1984 he was promoted to the rank of squadron leader. He was selected on 20September 1982 to become a cosmonaut and go into space as part of a joint programme between the Indian Air Force and the Soviet Interkosmos space programme.

===Cosmonaut===

In 1984, Sharma became the first Indian citizen to enter space when he flew aboard the Soviet rocket Soyuz T-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic on 3 April 1984. He said he enjoyed it and it was fun. The Soyuz T-11 spacecraft carrying cosmonauts including Sharma docked and transferred the three member Soviet-Indian international crew, consisting of the ship&#x27;s commander, Yury Malyshev, and flight engineer, Gennadi Strekalov, to the Salyut 7 Orbital Station. Sharma spent 7days, 21hours, and 40minutes aboard the Salyut 7 during which his team conducted scientific and technical studies which included forty-threeexperimental sessions. His work was mainly in the fields of bio-medicine and remote sensing. The crew held a joint television news conference with officials in Moscow and then Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. When Indira Gandhi asked Sharma how India looked from outer space, he replied, &quot;Sare Jahan Se Accha&quot; (better than the whole world). This is the title of a patriotic poem by Iqbal that had been written when India was under British colonial rule, that continues to be popular today. With Sharma&#x27;s voyage aboard Soyuz T-11, India became the 14thnation to send a man to outer space.

===Post-retirement===
Sharma retired as a wing commander and later joined Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) in 1987, serving as the chief test pilot in the HAL Nashik Division until 1992, before moving on to Bangalore to work as HAL&#x27;s chief test pilot. Sharma retired from flying in 2001.

==Military awards and decorations==
Sharma was conferred the honour of the Hero of the Soviet Union upon his return from space. He remains to date the only Indian to have been conferred this honour. India also conferred its highest peacetime gallantry award, the &#x27;Ashoka Chakra&#x27;, on him and the twoSoviet members of his mission, Malyshev and Strekalov.

The citation for the Ashoka Chakra reads as follows:
===Ribbon bar===

==Personal life==
Sharma married Madhu. His son, Kapil, is a film director, while his daughter, Krittika, is a media artist.

==Popular culture==
A biographical Hindi-language film titled, &quot;Saare Jahaan Se Achcha&quot; (formerly &quot;Salute&quot;), is under pre-production since 2018.

==See also==
* Gaganyaan
* Kalpana Chawla
* Sirisha Bandla
* Ravish Malhotra
* P. Radhakrishnan

==References==
==External links==
* Interview with Rakesh Sharma in August 2013 
* Rakesh Sharma: Our First Space Man &quot;India Today&quot;, 9 November 2018</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="0" end="14" title="Wing Commander (rank)" label="Wing Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q325205" start="15" end="28" title="Rakesh Sharma" label="Rakesh Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196605" start="30" end="32" title="Ashoka Chakra (military decoration)" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="69" end="78" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="92" end="108" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="133" end="143" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="175" end="181" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="182" end="193" title="Interkosmos" label="Interkosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q124830269" start="220" end="253" title="List of Indian astronauts" label="Indian citizen to travel in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q124570991" start="286" end="313" title="List of astronauts of Indian origin" label="astronauts of Indian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246221" start="393" end="408" title="Ravish Malhotra" label="Ravish Malhotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q208162" start="476" end="483" title="Patiala" label="Patiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="499" end="505" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q854323" start="520" end="527" title="Punjabis" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588140" start="552" end="584" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s Grammar School (Hyderabad)" label="St. George&amp;#x27;s Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="586" end="595" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764846" start="615" end="628" title="Nizam College" label="Nizam College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="630" end="639" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630909" start="655" end="679" title="National Defence Academy (India)" label="National Defence Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="745" end="761" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="814" end="820" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="838" end="869" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="1971 Bangladesh Liberation War."/>
<link wikidata="Q3630909" start="921" end="945" title="National Defence Academy (India)" label="National Defence Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="965" end="981" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="1090" end="1105" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="1224" end="1240" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="1256" end="1267" title="Interkosmos" label="Interkosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="1404" end="1414" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="1429" end="1448" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q168811" start="1456" end="1488" title="Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q535280" start="1722" end="1735" title="Yury Malyshev (cosmonaut)" label="Yury Malyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q470256" start="1758" end="1775" title="Gennadi Strekalov" label="Gennadi Strekalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="1784" end="1792" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2124" end="2130" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="2162" end="2175" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241743" start="2262" end="2281" title="Sare Jahan se Accha" label="Sare Jahan Se Accha"/>
<link wikidata="Q484141" start="2360" end="2365" title="Allama Iqbal" label="Iqbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2409" end="2430" title="British Raj" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q685316" start="2501" end="2511" title="Soyuz T-11" label="Soyuz T-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="2614" end="2628" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q357095" start="2646" end="2675" title="Hindustan Aeronautics Limited" label="Hindustan Aeronautics Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q200235" start="2734" end="2740" title="Nashik" label="Nashik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="2782" end="2791" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="2944" end="2968" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196605" start="3132" end="3157" title="Ashoka Chakra (military decoration)" label="&amp;#x27;Ashoka Chakra&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196605" start="3254" end="3267" title="Ashoka Chakra (military decoration)" label="Ashoka Chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="3611" end="3620" title="Gaganyaan" label="Gaganyaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237879" start="3623" end="3637" title="Kalpana Chawla" label="Kalpana Chawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q107458746" start="3640" end="3654" title="Sirisha Bandla" label="Sirisha Bandla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246221" start="3657" end="3672" title="Ravish Malhotra" label="Ravish Malhotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922601" start="3675" end="3691" title="P. Radhakrishnan (scientist)" label="P. Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661219" start="3817" end="3828" title="India Today" label="India Today"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362089" wikidata="Q114385" url="?curid=362089" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury">
<text>Matthew Fontaine Maury (January 14, 1806February 1, 1873) was an American oceanographer and naval officer, serving the United States and then joining the Confederacy during the American Civil War.

He was nicknamed &quot;Pathfinder of the Seas&quot; and is considered a founder of modern oceanography. He wrote extensively on the subject, and his book, &quot;The Physical Geography of the Sea&quot; (1855), was the first comprehensive work on oceanography to be published.

In 1825, at 19, Maury obtained, through U.S. Representative Sam Houston, a midshipman&#x27;s warrant in the United States Navy. As a midshipman on board the frigate , he almost immediately began to study the seas and record methods of navigation. When a leg injury left him unfit for sea duty, Maury devoted his time to studying navigation, meteorology, winds, and currents.

He became Superintendent of the Depot of Charts and Instruments, later renamed the United States Naval Observatory, in 1844. There, Maury studied thousands of ships&#x27; logs and charts. He published the &quot;Wind and Current Chart of the North Atlantic&quot;, which showed sailors how to use the ocean&#x27;s currents and winds to their advantage, drastically reducing the length of ocean voyages. Maury&#x27;s uniform system of recording oceanographic data was adopted by navies and merchant marines worldwide and was used to develop charts for all the major trade routes.

With the outbreak of the American Civil War, Maury, a Virginian, resigned his commission as a U.S. Navy commander and joined the Confederacy. He spent the war in the Southern United States, and Great Britain and France as a Confederate envoy. He helped the Confederacy acquire a ship, , while trying to convince several European powers to help stop the war. Following the war, Maury was eventually pardoned; he accepted a teaching position at the Virginia Military Institute in Lexington, Virginia.

He died at the institute in 1873 after he had completed an exhausting state-to-state lecture tour on national and international weather forecasting on land. He had also completed his book, &quot;Geological Survey of Virginia&quot;, and a new series on geography for young people.

==Early life and career==
Maury was a descendant of the Maury family, a prominent Virginia family of Huguenot ancestry that can be traced back to 15th-century France. His grandfather (the Reverend James Maury) was an inspiring teacher to a future U.S. president, Thomas Jefferson. Maury also had Dutch-American ancestry from the Minor family of early Virginia.

He was born in 1806 in Spotsylvania County, Virginia, near Fredericksburg; his parents were Richard Maury and Diane Minor Maury. The family moved to Franklin, Tennessee when he was five. He wanted to emulate the naval career of his older brother, Flag Lieutenant John Minor Maury, an officer in the U.S. Navy, who caught yellow fever after fighting pirates. As a result of John&#x27;s painful death, Matthew&#x27;s father, Richard, forbade him from joining the Navy. Maury strongly considered attending West Point to get a better education than the Navy could offer. Instead, he obtained a naval appointment through the influence of Tennessee Representative Sam Houston, a family friend, in 1825, at the age of 19.

Maury joined the Navy as a midshipman on board the frigate , which was carrying the elderly Marquis de La Fayette home to France following his famous 1824 visit to the United States. Almost immediately, Maury began to study the seas and to record methods of navigation. One of the experiences that piqued this interest was circumnavigating the globe on the , his assigned ship and the first U.S. warship to travel around the world.

==Scientific career==
Maury&#x27;s seagoing days ended abruptly at the age of 33 after he broke his right leg in a stagecoach accident. After that he studied naval meteorology, navigation, and charting the winds and currents. He told his family that his work was inspired by Psalm 8, &quot;Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands... and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.&quot;

As officer-in-charge of the United States Navy office in Washington, DC, called the &quot;Depot of Charts and Instruments,&quot; the young lieutenant became a librarian of the many unorganized log books and records in 1842. On his initiative, he sought to improve seamanship by organizing the information in his office and instituting a reporting system among the nation&#x27;s shipmasters to gather further information on sea conditions and observations. The product of his work was international recognition and the publication in 1847 of &quot;Wind and Current Chart of the North Atlantic&quot;, causing the change of purpose and renaming of the depot to the United States Naval Observatory and Hydrographical Office in 1854. He held that position until his resignation in April 1861. Maury was one of the principal advocates for founding a national observatory and he appealed to a science enthusiast and former U.S. president, Representative John Quincy Adams, for the creation of what would eventually become the Naval Observatory. Maury occasionally hosted Adams, who enjoyed astronomy as an avocation, at the Naval Observatory. Concerned that Maury always had a long trek to and from his home on upper Pennsylvania Avenue, Adams introduced an appropriations bill that funded a Superintendent&#x27;s House on the Observatory grounds. Adams thus felt no constraint in regularly stopping by for a look through the facility&#x27;s telescope.

As a sailor, Maury noted numerous lessons that ship masters had learned about the effects of adverse winds and drift currents on the path of a ship. The captains recorded the lessons faithfully in their logbooks, which were then forgotten. At the Observatory, Maury uncovered an enormous collection of thousands of old ships&#x27; logs and charts in storage in trunks dating back to the start of the U.S. Navy. He pored over the documents, collecting information on winds, calms, and currents for all seas in all seasons. His dream was to put that information in the hands of all captains.

Maury&#x27;s work on ocean currents and investigations of the whaling industry led him to suspect that a warm-water, ice-free northern passage existed between the Atlantic and Pacific. He thought he detected a warm surface current pushing into the Arctic, and logs of old whaling ships indicated that whales killed in the Atlantic bore harpoons from ships in the Pacific (and vice versa). The frequency of these occurrences seemed unlikely if the whales had traveled around Cape Horn.

Lieutenant Maury published his &quot;Wind and Current Chart of the North Atlantic&quot;, which showed sailors how to use the ocean&#x27;s currents and winds to their advantage, drastically reducing the length of voyages. His &quot;Sailing Directions&quot; and &quot;Physical Geography of the Seas and Its Meteorology&quot; remain standard. Maury&#x27;s uniform system of recording synoptic oceanographic data was adopted by navies and merchant marines around the world and was used to develop charts for all the major trade routes.

Maury&#x27;s Naval Observatory team included midshipmen assigned to him: James Melville Gilliss, Lieutenants John Mercer Brooke, William Lewis Herndon, Lardner Gibbon, Isaac Strain, John &quot;Jack&quot; Minor Maury II of the USN , and others. Their duty at the observatory was always temporary, and new men had to be trained repeatedly. Thus Lt. Maury was simultaneously employed with astronomical and nautical work, as well as constantly training new temporary men to assist in these works. As his reputation grew, the competition among young midshipmen to be assigned to work with him intensified. Thus, he always had able assistants.

Maury advocated for naval reform, including a school for the Navy that would rival the Army&#x27;s United States Military Academy. That reform was heavily pushed by Maury&#x27;s &quot;Scraps from the Lucky Bag&quot; and other articles printed in the newspapers, bringing about many changes in the Navy, including his finally fulfilled dream of the creation of the United States Naval Academy.

During its first 1848 meeting, he helped launch the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).

In 1849, Maury spoke out on the need for a transcontinental railroad to join the Eastern United States to California. He recommended a southerly route with Memphis, Tennessee, as the eastern terminus, as it is equidistant from Lake Michigan and the Gulf of Mexico. He argued that a southerly route running through Texas would avoid winter snows and could open up commerce with the northern states of Mexico. Maury also advocated construction of a railroad across the Isthmus of Panama.

For his scientific endeavors, Maury was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1852.

==International meteorological conference==
Maury also called for an international sea and land weather service. Having charted the seas and currents, he worked on charting land weather forecasting. Congress refused to appropriate funds for a land system of weather observations.

Maury became convinced that adequate scientific knowledge of the sea could be obtained only through international cooperation. He proposed that the United States invite the maritime nations of the world to a conference to establish a &quot;universal system&quot; of meteorology, and he was the leading spirit of a pioneer scientific conference when it met in Brussels in 1853. Within a few years, nations owning three-fourths of the shipping of the world were sending their oceanographic observations to Maury at the Naval Observatory, where the information was evaluated and the results were given worldwide distribution.

As its representative at the conference, the United States sent Maury. As a result of the Brussels Conference, many nations, including many traditional enemies, agreed to cooperate in sharing land and sea weather data using uniform standards. It was soon after the Brussels conference that Prussia, Spain, Sardinia, the Free City of Hamburg, the Republic of Bremen, Chile, Austria, Brazil, and others agreed to join the enterprise.

The Pope established honorary flags of distinction for the ships of the Papal States, which could be awarded only to the vessels that filled out and sent to Maury in Washington, DC, the Maury abstract logs.

== Proposed deportation of slaves to Brazil ==
Maury&#x27;s stance on the institution of slavery has been termed &quot;proslavery international&quot;. Maury, along with other politicians, newspaper editors, merchants, and United States government officials, envisioned a future for slavery that linked the United States, the Caribbean Sea, and the Amazon basin in Brazil. He believed the future of United States commerce lay in South America, colonized by white southerners and their enslaved people. There, Maury claimed, was &quot;work to be done by Africans with the American axe in his hand.&quot; In the 1850s, he studied a way to send Virginia&#x27;s slaves to Brazil as a way to phase out slavery in the state gradually. Maury was aware of an 1853 survey of the Amazon region conducted by the Navy Lt. William Lewis Herndon. The 1853 expedition aimed to map the area for trade so that American traders could go &quot;with their goods and chattels [including enslaved people] to settle and to trade goods from South American countries along the river highways of the Amazon valley&quot;. Brazil maintained legal enslavement but had prohibited the importation of newly enslaved people from Africa in 1850 under the pressure of the British. Maury proposed that moving people enslaved in the United States to Brazil would reduce or eliminate slavery over time in as many areas of the southern United States as possible and would end new enslavement for Brazil. Maury&#x27;s primary concern, however, was neither the freedom of enslaved people nor the amelioration of slavery in Brazil, but rather an absolution for slaveholders of Virginia and other southern states. Maury wrote to his cousin, &quot;Therefore I see in the slave territory of the Amazon the SAFETY VALVE of the Southern States.&quot;

Maury wanted to open up the Amazon to free navigation in his plan. However, Emperor Pedro II&#x27;s government firmly rejected the proposals, and Maury&#x27;s proposal received little or no support in the United States, especially in the South, which sought to perpetuate the institution and the riches made off the yoke of slavery. By 1855, the proposal had failed. Brazil authorized free navigation to all nations in the Amazon in 1866, only when it was at war against Paraguay, when free navigation in the area had become necessary.

Maury was not an enslaver, but he did not actively oppose the institution of slavery. An article tying his legacy in oceanography to the slave trade suggested that Maury was ambivalent about slavery, seeing it as wrong but not intent on forcing others to free enslaved people. However, a recent article explaining the removal of his monument from Monument Avenue in Richmond, Virginia, illustrated a proslavery stance through deep ties to the slave trade that accompanied his scientific achievements.

==American Civil War==
Maury staunchly opposed secession, but in 1860, he wrote letters to the governors of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland urging them to stop the momentum toward war. When Virginia declared secession in April 1861, Maury nonetheless resigned his commission in the U.S. Navy, choosing to fight against the North. With the outbreak of the American Civil War, Maury joined the Confederacy.

Upon his resignation from the U.S. Navy, the Virginia governor appointed Maury commander of the Virginia Navy. When this was consolidated into the Confederate Navy, Maury was made a Commander in the Confederate States Navy and appointed as chief of the Naval Bureau of Coast, Harbor, and River Defense. In this role, Maury helped develop the first electrically controlled naval mine, which caused havoc for U.S. shipping. He&#x27;d had experience with transatlantic cable and electricity flowing through wires underwater when working with Cyrus West Field and Samuel Finley Breese Morse. The naval mines, called torpedoes at that time, were similar to present-day contact mines and were said by the Secretary of the Navy in 1865 &quot;to have cost the Union more vessels than all other causes combined.&quot;

In September 1862, Maury, partly because of his international reputation, and partly due to jealousy of superior officers who wanted him placed at some distance, was ordered on special service to England. There, he sought to purchase and fit ships for the Confederacy and persuade European powers to recognize and support the Confederacy. Maury traveled to England, Ireland, and France, acquiring and fitting out ships for the Confederacy and soliciting supplies. Through speeches and newspaper publications, Maury unsuccessfully called for European nations to intercede on behalf of the Confederacy and help end the American Civil War. Maury established relations for the Confederacy with Emperor Napoleon III of France and Archduke Maximilian of Austria, who, on April 10, 1864, was proclaimed Emperor of Mexico.

At an early stage in the war, the Confederate States Congress assigned Maury and Francis H. Smith, a mathematics professor at the University of Virginia, to develop a system of weights and measures.

==Later life==
Maury was in the West Indies on his way back to the Confederacy when he learned of its collapse. The war had brought ruin to many in Fredericksburg, where Maury&#x27;s immediate family lived. On the advice of Robert E. Lee and other friends, he decided not to return to Virginia but sent a letter of surrender to U.S. naval forces in the Gulf of Mexico and headed for Mexico. There Maximilian, whom he had met in Europe, appointed him &quot;Imperial Commissioner of Colonization&quot;. Maury and Maximilian planned to entice former Confederates to emigrate to Mexico, building Carlotta and New Virginia Colony for displaced Confederates and immigrants from other lands. Upon learning of the plan, Lee wrote Maury saying, &quot;The thought of abandoning the country, and all that must be left in it, is abhorrent to my feelings, and I prefer to struggle for its restoration, and share its fate, rather than to give up all as lost.&quot; In the end, the plan did not attract the intended immigrants and Maximilian, facing increasing opposition in Mexico, ended it. Maury then returned to England in 1866 and found work there.

In 1868 he was pardoned by the federal government and returned to the US, accepting a teaching position at the Virginia Military Institute in Lexington, Virginia, holding the chair of physics. While in Lexington, he completed a physical survey of Virginia, which he documented in the book &quot;The Physical Geography of Virginia&quot;. He had once been a gold mining superintendent outside Fredericksburg and had studied geology intensely during that time, so he was well-equipped to write such a book. He aimed to assist war-torn Virginia in rebuilding by discovering and extracting minerals, improving farming, etc. He lectured extensively in the United States and abroad. He advocated for creating a state agricultural college as an adjunct to Virginia Military Institute. This led to the establishment at Blacksburg of the Virginia Agricultural and Mechanical College, later renamed Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, in 1872. Maury was offered the position as its first president but turned it down because of his age.

He had previously been suggested as president of the College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1848 by Benjamin Blake Minor in his publication the &quot;Southern Literary Messenger&quot;. He considered becoming president of St. John&#x27;s College in Annapolis, Maryland, the University of Alabama, and the University of Tennessee. From statements that he made in letters, it appears that he preferred being close to General Robert E. Lee in Lexington, where Lee was president of Washington College. Maury served as a pallbearer for Lee. He also gave talks in Europe about cooperation on a weather bureau for land, just as he had charted the winds and predicted storms at sea many years before. He gave speeches until his last days when he collapsed while giving one. He went home after he recovered and told his wife Ann Hull Herndon-Maury, &quot;I have come home to die.&quot;

==Death and burial==

He died at home in Lexington at 12:40 pm on Saturday, February 1, 1873. He was exhausted from traveling throughout the nation giving speeches promoting land meteorology. His eldest son, Major Richard Launcelot Maury, and son-in-law, Major Spottswood Wellford Corbin, attended him at the time. Maury asked his daughters and wife to leave the room. His last words, recorded verbatim, were &quot;all&#x27;s well,&quot; a nautical expression meaning calm conditions at sea.

His body was placed on display in the Virginia Military Institute library. Maury was initially buried in the Gilham family vault in Lexington&#x27;s cemetery, across from Stonewall Jackson, until, after some delay, his remains were taken through Goshen Pass to Richmond, Virginia the following year He was reburied between Presidents James Monroe and John Tyler in Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia.

==Legacy==

After decades of national and international work, Maury received fame and honors, including being knighted by several nations and given medals with precious gems as well as a collection of all medals struck by Pope Pius IX during his pontificate, a book dedication and more from Father Angelo Secchi, who was a student of Maury from 1848 to 1849 in the United States Naval Observatory. The two remained lifelong friends. Other religious friends of Maury included James Hervey Otey, his former teacher who, before 1857, worked with Bishop Leonidas Polk on the construction of the University of the South in Tennessee. While visiting there, Maury was convinced by his old teacher to give the &quot;cornerstone speech.&quot;

As a U.S. Navy officer, he was required to decline awards from foreign nations. Some were offered to Maury&#x27;s wife, Ann Hull Herndon-Maury, who accepted them for her husband. Some have been placed at Virginia Military Institute or lent to the Smithsonian. He became a commodore (often a title of courtesy) in the Virginia Provisional Navy and a Commander in the Confederacy.

 Buildings on several college campuses are named in his honor. Maury Hall was the home of the Naval Science Department at the University of Virginia and headquarters of the university&#x27;s Navy ROTC battalion until being renamed in 2022. The original building of the College of William &amp; Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science was named Maury Hall as well, but renamed York River Hall in 2020. Another Maury Hall housed the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department and the Robotics and Control Engineering Department at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland. On February 17, 2023, the academy announced that it had renamed this building in honor of Jimmy Carter, the only Naval Academy graduate to become President of the United States. The change had been recommended by a naming commission created by federal law to reexamine Confederate-related names and symbols on military installations. James Madison University also has a Maury Hall, the university&#x27;s first academic and administrative building. In the wake of the 2020 George Floyd protests, JMU student organizations called for renaming the building. On Monday, June 22, 2020, hearing the calls of students and alums, the university president announced it would recommend to the JMU board of visitors to rename Maury Hall, along with Ashby Hall and Jackson Hall.

Ships have been named in his honor, including various vessels named ; USS &quot;Commodore Maury&quot; (SP-656), a patrol vessel and minesweeper of World War I; and a World War II Liberty Ship. Additionally, Tidewater Community College, based in Norfolk, Virginia, owns the R/V &quot;Matthew F. Maury&quot;. The ship is used for oceanography research and student cruises. In March 2013, the U.S. Navy launched the oceanographic survey ship USNS &quot;Maury&quot; (T-AGS-66), in 2023 the ship was renamed USNS &quot;Marie Tharp&quot;.
The Mariners&#x27; Lake, in Newport News, Virginia, had been named after Maury but had its name changed during the George Floyd protests. The lake is located on the Mariners&#x27; Museum property and is encircled by a walking trail.

The Maury River, entirely in Rockbridge County, Virginia, near Virginia Military Institute (where Maury taught), also honors the scientist, as does Maury crater, on the Moon.

Matthew Fontaine Maury High School in Norfolk, Virginia, is named after him. Matthew Maury Elementary School in Alexandria, Virginia, was built in 1929. Nearby Arlington, Va., renamed its 1910 Clarendon Elementary to honor Maury in 1944; Since 1976, the building has been home to the Arlington Arts Center (rebranded in 2022 as the Museum of Contemporary Art Arlington). There is a county historical marker outside the former school. Matthew Fontaine Maury School in Fredericksburg was built in 1919-1920 and closed in 1980. The building was converted into condominiums and is on the National Register of Historic Places. Adjoining it is Maury Stadium, built in 1935 and still used for local high school sports events.

Numerous historical markers commemorate Maury throughout the South, including those in Richmond, Virginia, Fletcher, North Carolina, Franklin, Tennessee, and several in Chancellorsville, Virginia.

The Matthew Fontaine Maury Papers collection at the Library of Congress contains over 14,000 items. It documents Maury&#x27;s extensive career and scientific endeavors, including correspondence, notebooks, lectures, and written speeches.

On July 2, 2020, the mayor of Richmond, Levar Stoney ordered the removal of a statue of Maury erected in 1929 on Richmond&#x27;s Monument Avenue. The mayor used his emergency powers to bypass a state-mandated review process, calling the statue a &quot;severe, immediate and growing threat to public safety.&quot;

==Publications==

*&quot;On the Navigation of Cape Horn&quot;
*Whaling Charts
*Wind and Current Charts
*Explanations and Sailing Directions to Accompany the Wind and Current Charts, 1851, 1854, 1855
*Lieut. Maury&#x27;s Investigations of the Winds and Currents of the Sea, 1851
*On the Probable Relation between Magnetism and the Circulation of the Atmosphere, 1851
*&quot;Maury&#x27;s Wind and Current Charts: Gales in the Atlantic&quot;, 1857
*Observations to Determine the Solar Parallax, 1856
*&quot;Amazon, and the Atlantic Slopes of South America&quot;, 1853
*Commander M. F. Maury on American Affairs, 1861
*&quot;The Physical Geography of the Sea and Its Meteorology&quot;, 1861
*&quot;Maury&#x27;s New Elements of Geography for Primary and Intermediate Classes&quot;
*Geography: &quot;First Lessons&quot;
*&quot;Elementary Geography: Designed for Primary and Intermediate Classes&quot;
*Geography: &quot;The World We Live In&quot;
*Published Address of Com. M. F. Maury, before the Fair of the Agricultural &amp; Mechanical Society
*Geology: A Physical Survey of Virginia; Her Geographical Position, Its Commercial Advantages and National Importance, Virginia Military Institute, 1869

==See also==

*Bathymetric chart
*Flying Cloud
*National Institute for the Promotion of Science
*Notable global oceanographers
*Prophet Without Honor

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*

==External links==

*. 1996 website retrieved via the Wayback Search Engine
*CBNnews VIDEO on Commander Matthew Fontaine Maury &quot;The Father of Modern Oceanography&quot;
*Naval Oceanographic Office—Matthew Fontaine Maury Oceanographic Library  — The World&#x27;s Largest Oceanographic Library.
*United States Naval Sea Cadet Corps — Matthew Fontaine Maury — Pathfinders Division.
*The Maury Project; A comprehensive national program of teacher enhancement based on studies of the physical foundations of oceanography.
*The Mariner&#x27;s Museum: Matthew Fontaine Maury Society.
*Letter to President John Quincy Adams from Commander Matthew Fontaine Maury (1847) on the &quot;National&quot; United States Naval Observatory regarding a written description of the observatory, in detail, with other information relating thereto, including an explanation of the objects and uses of the various instruments.
*The National (Naval) Observatory and The Virginia Historical Society (May 1849)
*Biography of Matthew Fontaine Maury at U.S. Navy Historical Center.
*The Diary of Betty Herndon Maury, daughter of Matthew Fontaine Maury, 1861–1863.
*Matthew Fontaine Maury School in Richmond, Virginia, USA, 1950s. Photographer: Nina Leen. Approximately 200 TIME-LIFE photographs
*Astronomical Observations from the Naval Observatory 1845.
*Obituary in: 
*Sample charts by Maury held the American Geographical Society Library, UW Milwaukee in the digital map collection.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q114385" start="0" end="22" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury" label="Matthew Fontaine Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="74" end="87" title="oceanographer" label="oceanographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="154" end="165" title="Confederate States Navy" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="534" end="545" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="549" end="574" title="Midshipman#United States Navy .281794.E2.80.931845.29" label="midshipman&amp;#x27;s warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700" start="933" end="964" title="United States Naval Observatory" label="United States Naval Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1453" end="1471" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1482" end="1490" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1557" end="1568" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1594" end="1616" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="1875" end="1902" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="1906" end="1925" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2310" end="2318" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2368" end="2374" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139107" start="2393" end="2417" title="James Maury" label="the Reverend James Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2472" end="2488" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="2505" end="2519" title="Dutch American" label="Dutch-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q506202" start="2594" end="2623" title="Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="Spotsylvania County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="2630" end="2644" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q984264" start="2720" end="2739" title="Franklin, Tennessee" label="Franklin, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248950" start="2834" end="2850" title="John Minor Maury" label="John Minor Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="2892" end="2904" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="2920" end="2926" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="3074" end="3084" title="West Point" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="3229" end="3240" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="3314" end="3324" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="3338" end="3345" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="3379" end="3400" title="Gilbert du Motier, marquis de La Fayette" label="Marquis de La Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936291" start="3442" end="3468" title="visit of the Marquis de Lafayette to the United States" label="visit to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="3545" end="3555" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="3835" end="3845" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4192" end="4206" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700" start="4797" end="4828" title="United States Naval Observatory" label="United States Naval Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="5082" end="5099" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="6194" end="6208" title="ocean currents" label="ocean currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="6647" end="6656" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142111" start="7040" end="7067" title="Joint Typhoon Warning Center" label="synoptic oceanographic data"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="7094" end="7109" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q877687" start="7265" end="7287" title="James Melville Gilliss" label="James Melville Gilliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701065" start="7301" end="7319" title="John Mercer Brooke" label="John Mercer Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014559" start="7321" end="7342" title="William Lewis Herndon" label="William Lewis Herndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421333" start="7344" end="7358" title="Lardner Gibbon" label="Lardner Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077176" start="7360" end="7372" title="Isaac Strain" label="Isaac Strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="7930" end="7960" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="8195" end="8222" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="8277" end="8328" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="8419" end="8440" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="8444" end="8454" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="8494" end="8512" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="8565" end="8578" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="8587" end="8601" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="8652" end="8657" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="8738" end="8744" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="8805" end="8822" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="8880" end="8910" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356059" start="9514" end="9545" title="International Meteorological Organization" label="a pioneer scientific conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="9561" end="9569" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q156774" start="12355" end="12363" title="Pedro II of Brazil" label="Pedro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13682" end="13700" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148998" start="14272" end="14288" title="Cyrus West Field" label="Cyrus West Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="14293" end="14319" title="Samuel Finley Breese Morse" label="Samuel Finley Breese Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="15241" end="15253" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="15277" end="15298" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="15393" end="15420" title="Confederate States Congress" label="Confederate States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="15956" end="15966" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790881" start="16164" end="16183" title="New Virginia Colony" label="New Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="16810" end="16837" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="16998" end="17016" title="Physical Geography" label="Physical Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="17527" end="17571" title="Virginia Agricultural and Mechanical College" label="Virginia Agricultural and Mechanical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="17796" end="17825" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="17829" end="17851" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888293" start="17864" end="17884" title="Benjamin Blake Minor" label="Benjamin Blake Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129973" start="17914" end="17941" title="Southern Literary Messenger" label="Southern Literary Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q663625" start="17985" end="18008" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College (Annapolis/Santa Fe)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="18037" end="18058" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="18068" end="18091" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="18178" end="18199" title="General Robert E. Lee" label="General Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="19305" end="19322" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587275" start="19380" end="19391" title="Goshen Pass" label="Goshen Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="19395" end="19413" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="19468" end="19480" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="19485" end="19495" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882648" start="19499" end="19517" title="Hollywood Cemetery (Richmond, Virginia)" label="Hollywood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="19764" end="19776" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="19840" end="19853" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700" start="19907" end="19938" title="United States Naval Observatory" label="United States Naval Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135979" start="20017" end="20034" title="James Hervey Otey" label="James Hervey Otey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368292" start="20092" end="20105" title="Leonidas Polk" label="Leonidas Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458159" start="20133" end="20156" title="University of the South" label="University of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="20524" end="20535" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="20549" end="20558" title="commodore (rank)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q13108106" start="20568" end="20585" title="title of courtesy" label="title of courtesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="20783" end="20805" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="20853" end="20857" title="ROTC" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="20858" end="20867" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="20926" end="20955" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934330" start="20956" end="20992" title="Virginia Institute of Marine Science" label="Virginia Institute of Marine Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="21196" end="21223" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="21227" end="21246" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="21338" end="21350" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q258943" start="21582" end="21606" title="James Madison University" label="James Madison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="21720" end="21741" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="22195" end="22207" title="Liberty Ship" label="Liberty Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="22261" end="22278" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866611" start="22519" end="22547" title="USNS Marie Tharp" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marie Tharp&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476843" start="22549" end="22572" title="The Mariners&amp;#x27; Lake" label="The Mariners&amp;#x27; Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="22577" end="22599" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355782" start="22640" end="22685" title="List of name changes due to the George Floyd protests" label="name changed during the George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598142" start="22714" end="22735" title="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum" label="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061518" start="22787" end="22798" title="Maury River" label="Maury River"/>
<link wikidata="Q513805" start="22812" end="22839" title="Rockbridge County, Virginia" label="Rockbridge County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911715" start="22931" end="22943" title="Maury (crater)" label="Maury crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790513" start="22959" end="22993" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury High School" label="Matthew Fontaine Maury High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="23071" end="23091" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790515" start="23393" end="23422" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury School" label="Matthew Fontaine Maury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q653837" start="23786" end="23810" title="Fletcher, North Carolina" label="Fletcher, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q984264" start="23812" end="23831" title="Franklin, Tennessee" label="Franklin, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477875" start="23848" end="23874" title="Chancellorsville, Virginia" label="Chancellorsville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="25502" end="25510" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="25590" end="25617" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915844" start="25640" end="25657" title="Bathymetric chart" label="Bathymetric chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022155" start="25659" end="25671" title="Flying Cloud (clipper)" label="Flying Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973598" start="25673" end="25720" title="National Institute for the Promotion of Science" label="National Institute for the Promotion of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25722" end="25751" title="Oceanography#Notable oceanographers" label="Notable global oceanographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750333" start="25753" end="25774" title="Prophet Without Honor" label="Prophet Without Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="25872" end="25879" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700" start="26511" end="26542" title="United States Naval Observatory" label="United States Naval Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250126" start="26845" end="26872" title="Naval Historical Center" label="U.S. Navy Historical Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362093" wikidata="Q943047" url="?curid=362093" title="Grant Morrison">
<text>Grant Morrison (born 31 January 1960) is a Scottish comic book writer, screenwriter, and producer. Their work is known for its nonlinear narratives, humanist philosophy and countercultural leanings. Morrison has written extensively for the American comic book publisher DC Comics, penning lengthy runs on &quot;Animal Man&quot;, &quot;Doom Patrol&quot;, &quot;JLA&quot;, &quot;Action Comics&quot;, and &quot;Green Lantern&quot; as well as the graphic novels &quot;Arkham Asylum&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Wonder Woman: Earth One&quot;, the meta-series &quot;Seven Soldiers&quot; and &quot;The Multiversity&quot;, the mini-series &quot;DC One Million&quot; and &quot;Final Crisis&quot;, both of which served as centrepieces for the eponymous company-wide crossover storylines, and the maxi-series &quot;All-Star Superman&quot;. Morrison&#x27;s best known DC work is the seven-year Batman storyline which started in the &quot;Batman&quot; ongoing series and continued through &quot;Final Crisis&quot;, &quot;Batman and Robin&quot;, &quot;&quot; and two volumes of &quot;Batman Incorporated&quot;. They also co-created the DC character Damian Wayne.

Morrison&#x27;s creator-owned work, the bulk of which was published through DC Comics&#x27; Vertigo imprint, includes &quot;Flex Mentallo&quot; and &quot;We3&quot; with Scottish artist Frank Quitely, &quot;Seaguy&quot; with artist Cameron Stewart, &quot;The Filth&quot; with Chris Weston, and the three-volume series &quot;The Invisibles&quot;. At Marvel, Morrison wrote a three-year run on &quot;New X-Men&quot; and created &quot;Marvel Boy&quot; for the publisher&#x27;s Marvel Knights imprint.

Between 2016 and 2018, Morrison served as the Editor-in-Chief of the &quot;Heavy Metal&quot; magazine.

Morrison&#x27;s work has drawn critical acclaim. They have won numerous awards, including Eisner, Harvey, and Inkpot awards. In 2012, Morrison was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for services to film and literature.

==Early life==
Grant Morrison was born in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1960. They were educated at Allan Glen&#x27;s School where their first portfolio of art was rejected by their careers guidance teacher, who encouraged them to work in a bank. Their first published works were &quot;Gideon Stargrave&quot; strips for &quot;Near Myths&quot; in 1978 (when they were about 17), one of the first British alternative comics. Their work appeared in four of the five issues of &quot;Near Myths&quot; and they were suitably encouraged to find more comic work. This included a weekly comic strip, &quot;Captain Clyde&quot;, an unemployed superhero based in Glasgow, for &quot;The Govan Press&quot;, a local newspaper, plus various issues of DC Thomson&#x27;s &quot;Starblazer&quot;, the science fiction counterpart to that company&#x27;s &quot;Commando&quot; title.

==Career==
===1980s===
Morrison spent much of the early 1980s touring and recording with their band The Mixers, occasionally writing &quot;Starblazer&quot; for D.C. Thomson and contributing to various UK indie titles. In 1982, Morrison submitted a proposal involving the Justice League of America and Jack Kirby&#x27;s New Gods entitled &quot;Second Coming&quot; to DC Comics, but it was not commissioned. After writing &quot;The Liberators&quot; for Dez Skinn&#x27;s &quot;Warrior&quot; in 1985, Morrison started work for Marvel UK the following year. There they wrote comic strips for &quot;Doctor Who Magazine&quot;, the final one a collaboration with a then-teenage Bryan Hitch, as well as a run on the Zoids strip in &quot;Spider-Man and Zoids&quot;. 1986 also saw publication of Morrison&#x27;s first of several two- or three-page &quot;Future Shocks&quot; for &quot;2000 AD&quot;.

Morrison&#x27;s first continuing serial began in &quot;2000 AD&quot; in 1987, when they and Steve Yeowell created &quot;Zenith&quot;.

Morrison&#x27;s work on &quot;Zenith&quot; brought them to the attention of DC Comics, who asked Morrison to work for them. They accepted Morrison&#x27;s proposals for &quot;Animal Man&quot;, a little-known character from DC&#x27;s past whose most notable recent appearance was a cameo in the &quot;Crisis on Infinite Earths&quot; limited series, and for a 48-page Batman one-shot that would eventually become &quot;Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth&quot;.

&quot;Animal Man&quot; put Morrison in line with the &quot;British Invasion&quot; of American comics, along with such writers as Neil Gaiman, Peter Milligan, Jamie Delano, and Alan Moore, who had launched the &quot;invasion&quot; with his work on &quot;Swamp Thing&quot;.

After impressing with &quot;Animal Man&quot;, Morrison was asked to take over &quot;Doom Patrol&quot;, starting their surreal take on the superhero genre with issue No. 19 in 1989. Morrison&#x27;s &quot;Doom Patrol&quot; introduced concepts such as dadaism and the writings of Jorge Luis Borges into the first several issues. DC published &quot;Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth&quot; in 1989 as a 128-page graphic novel painted by Dave McKean. Comics historian Les Daniels observed in 1995 that &quot;&quot;Arkham Asylum&quot; was an unprecedented success, selling 182,166 copies in hardcover and another 85,047 in paperback.&quot;

While working for DC Comics in America, Morrison kept contributing to British indie titles, writing &quot;St. Swithin&#x27;s Day&quot; for Trident Comics. &quot;St. Swithin&#x27;s Day&quot;″s anti-Margaret Thatcher themes proved controversial, provoking a small tabloid press reaction and a complaint from Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) Teddy Taylor. The controversy continued with the publication of &quot;The New Adventures of Hitler&quot; in Scottish music and lifestyle magazine &quot;Cut&quot; in 1989, due to its use of Adolf Hitler as its lead character. The strip, unfinished when &quot;Cut&quot; folded, was reprinted and completed in Fleetway&#x27;s &quot;2000 AD&quot; spin-off title &quot;Crisis&quot;.

Two plays staged by Oxygen House at the Edinburgh Fringe had scripts by Morrison. &quot;Red King Rising&quot; (1989) concerned an imagined relationship between Lewis Carroll and Alice Liddell. The other, &quot;Depravity&quot; (1990) concerned the British occultist Aleister Crowley. The plays won between them a Fringe First Award, the Independent Theatre Award for 1989 and the Evening Standard Award for New Drama.

===1990s===
Morrison returned to Batman with the &quot;&quot; story arc in issues 6–10 of the Batman title &quot;&quot;. The early 1990s saw Morrison revamping Kid Eternity for DC with artist Duncan Fegredo, and Dan Dare, with artist Rian Hughes. Morrison coloured Dare&#x27;s bright future with Thatcherism in Fleetway&#x27;s &quot;Revolver&quot;.

In 1991 Morrison wrote &quot;Bible John-A Forensic Meditation&quot; for Fleetway&#x27;s &quot;Crisis&quot;, based on an analysis of possible motivations for the crimes of the serial killer Bible John. Covering similar themes to Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell&#x27;s &quot;From Hell&quot;, the work utilised cut-up techniques, a Ouija board and collage rather than conventional panels to tell the story.

In 1993 Morrison, fellow Glaswegian comic writer Mark Millar and John Smith were asked to reinvigorate &quot;2000 AD&quot; for an eight-week run called &quot;The Summer Offensive&quot;. Morrison wrote Judge Dredd and Really and Truly, and co-wrote the controversial &quot;Big Dave&quot; with Millar.

DC Comics launched its Vertigo imprint in 1993, publishing several of Morrison&#x27;s creator-owned projects, such as the steampunk mini-series &quot;Sebastian O&quot; and the graphic novel &quot;The Mystery Play&quot;. 1995 saw the release of &quot;Kill Your Boyfriend&quot;, with artist Philip Bond, originally published as a &quot;Vertigo Voices&quot; one-shot. In 1996 Morrison wrote &quot;Flex Mentallo&quot;, a &quot;Doom Patrol&quot; spin-off with art by Frank Quitely, and returned briefly to DC Universe superheroics with the short-lived &quot;Aztek&quot;, co-written with Mark Millar.

In 1996, Morrison was given the &quot;Justice League of America&quot; to revamp as &quot;JLA&quot;, a comic book that gathered the &quot;Big Seven&quot; superheroes of the DC universe into one team. This run was hugely popular and returned the title to best-selling status. Morrison wrote several issues of &quot;The Flash&quot; with Mark Millar, as well as DC&#x27;s crossover event of 1998, the four-issue mini-series &quot;DC One Million&quot;, in addition to plotting many of the multiple crossovers.

With the three volumes of the creator-owned &quot;The Invisibles&quot;, Morrison started their largest and possibly most important work. &quot;The Invisibles&quot; combined political, pop- and sub-cultural references. Tapping into pre-millennial tension, the work was influenced by the writings of Robert Anton Wilson, Aleister Crowley and William Burroughs, and Morrison&#x27;s practice of chaos magic in Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth. In 1998 Morrison published the prose piece &quot;I&#x27;m A Policeman&quot; in Sarah Champion&#x27;s millennial short story collection &quot;Disco 2000&quot;; though no explicit connection to &quot;The Invisibles&quot; is made, there are strong thematic links between the two works. At DisinfoCon in 1999, Morrison said that much of the content in &quot;The Invisibles&quot; was information given to them by aliens that abducted them in Kathmandu, who told them to spread this information to the world via a comic book. They later clarified that the experience they labelled as the &quot;Alien Abduction Experience in Kathmandu&quot; had nothing to do with aliens or abduction, but that there was an experience that they had in Kathmandu that &quot;The Invisibles&quot; is an attempt to explain. The title was not a huge commercial hit to start with. (Morrison actually asked their readers to participate in a &quot;wankathon&quot; while concentrating on a magical symbol, or sigil, in an effort to boost sales). When the title was relaunched with volume two, the characters relocated to America. Volume three appeared with issue numbers counting down, signalling an intention to conclude the series with the turn of the new millennium in 2000. Due to the title shipping late, its final issue did not ship until April 2000.

The 1999 film &quot;The Matrix&quot; has numerous elements which have been attributed by critics to the influence of Morrison&#x27;s &quot;The Invisibles&quot;. Morrison was immediately struck by the similarities to their own work upon first seeing the film.

===2000s===
In 2000, Morrison&#x27;s graphic novel &quot;&quot; was released with art by Frank Quitely. It was Morrison&#x27;s last mainstream work for DC for a while, as they moved to Marvel Comics. While at Marvel, Morrison wrote the six-part &quot;Marvel Boy&quot; series, and &quot;Fantastic Four: 1234&quot;, their take on another major superhero team. In July 2001, they began writing the main X-Men title, renamed &quot;New X-Men&quot; for their run, with Quitely providing much of the art. Again, Morrison&#x27;s revamping of a major superhero team proved to be a commercial success, with the title jumping to the No. 1 sales spot and established Morrison as the kind of creator whose name on a title would guarantee sales. Their penultimate arc &quot;Planet X&quot; depicted the villain Magneto infiltrating and defeating the X-Men in the guise of new character Xorn and developing an addiction to the power-enhancing drug &quot;Kick&quot;.
In 2002, Morrison launched their next creator-owned project at Vertigo: &quot;The Filth&quot;, drawn by Chris Weston and Gary Erskine, a 13-part mini-series. That same year, Morrison sold the screenplay &quot;Sleepless Knights&quot; to DreamWorks with Guillermo del Toro attached to direct. Around the same time, Morrison was working on the script for the sequel to the &quot;Marvel Boy&quot; mini-series, but the project ultimately failed to materialize. In 2004, Vertigo published three Morrison mini-series. &quot;Seaguy&quot;, &quot;We3&quot;, and &quot;Vimanarama&quot;. Morrison returned to the JLA with the first story in a new anthology series, &quot;JLA Classified&quot;.

In 2005 Morrison wrote &quot;Seven Soldiers&quot;, which featured the Manhattan Guardian, Mister Miracle, Klarion the Witch Boy, Bulleteer, Frankenstein, Zatanna and Shining Knight. The series consists of seven interlinked four-issue mini-series with two &quot;bookend&quot; volumes – 30 issues in all. Dan DiDio, the editorial vice president of DC Comics, was impressed with Morrison&#x27;s ideas for revitalising many of DC&#x27;s redundant characters. Giving them the unofficial title of &quot;revamp guy&quot;, DiDio asked them to assist in sorting out the DC Universe in the wake of the &quot;Infinite Crisis&quot;. Morrison was one of the writers on &quot;52&quot;, a year-long weekly comic book series that started in May 2006 and concluded in May 2007.

Starting in November 2005, DC published &quot;All-Star Superman&quot;, a twelve-issue story arc by Morrison and Frank Quitely. Not so much a revamp or reboot of Superman, the series presents an out-of-continuity &quot;iconic&quot; Superman for new readers. &quot;All-Star Superman&quot; won the Eisner Award for Best New Series in 2006, the Best Continuing Series Eisner Award in 2007 and several Eagle Awards in the UK. It won three Harvey Awards in 2008 and the Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series in 2009. In the same year, Morrison and Quitely worked on pop star Robbie Williams&#x27; album &quot;Intensive Care&quot;, providing intricate Tarot card designs for the packaging and cover of the CD.

Morrison provided outline story and script work for two video games, &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot; (2003) and &quot;&quot; (2005), both by Vivendi Universal. In 2006, New Line Cinema optioned &quot;We3&quot; as a film project with Morrison attached as screenwriter. The following year, Morrison wrote the adaptation of the video game &quot;Area 51&quot; home console game for Paramount in development with CFP Productions producing.

In 2006 Morrison was voted as the No. 2 favourite comic book writer of all time by Comic Book Resources. That same year, Morrison began writing &quot;Batman&quot; for DC with issue No. 655, reintroducing the character of Damian Wayne and signalling the beginning of a seven-year-long run on the character across multiple titles. They wrote relaunches of &quot;The Authority&quot; and &quot;Wildcats&quot;, with the art of Gene Ha and Jim Lee respectively, for DC&#x27;s Wildstorm imprint. &quot;WildC.A.T.S.&quot; went on hiatus after one issue, &quot;The Authority&quot; was discontinued after two. The scheduling of &quot;The Authority&quot; conflicted with &quot;52&quot; and Morrison was unhappy with the reviews: &quot;And then I saw the reviews on issue one and I just thought &#x27;fuck this&#x27;.&quot;. It eventually concluded without Morrison&#x27;s involvement in Keith Giffen&#x27;s &quot;The Authority: The Lost Year&quot;.

At the 2007 San Diego Comic-Con, DC Comics announced that Morrison would write &quot;Final Crisis&quot;, a seven-issue mini-series slated to appear in 2008 with J. G. Jones handling the art. Morrison announced that 2008 would see publication of the follow-up to 2004&#x27;s &quot;Seaguy&quot; called &quot;Seaguy 2: The Slaves of Mickey Eye&quot;, the second part of a planned three part series.

At the 2008 New York Comic Con, Morrison announced they would be working with Virgin Comics to produce &quot;webisodes&quot; (short animated stories) based on the Mahābhārata; it would not be a direct translation but, &quot;Like the Beatles took Indian music and tried to make psychedelic sounds... I&#x27;m trying to convert Indian storytelling to a western style for people raised on movies, comics, and video games.&quot; In August 2009, Morrison and Frank Quitely launched the &quot;Batman and Robin&quot; series.

===2010s===

&quot;Batman&quot; No. 700 (Aug. 2010) saw the return of Morrison to the title and a collaboration with an art team that consisted of Tony Daniel, Frank Quitely, Andy Kubert, and David Finch. The separate stories tied together to illustrate that the legacy of Batman is unending, and will survive into the future. At San Diego Comic-Con in 2010 it was announced that Grant Morrison would be leaving &quot;Batman and Robin&quot; with No. 16 and launching a new series entitled &quot;Batman Incorporated&quot; with revolving artists starting with Yanick Paquette. A more team-oriented Batman book inspired by the &quot;&quot; animated series, &quot;Batman Incorporated&quot; builds on Morrison&#x27;s work dating back to &quot;Batman and Son&quot; and &quot;Final Crisis&quot;, with Bruce Wayne creating an international Batman franchise all over the world. The series suffered from slow scheduling and was ended after eight issues while the DC Universe was rebooted in 2011; to bridge the gap a prestige book was released that featured two issues together along with a synopsis that recapped the story so far. In mid-2012, a second volume of the comic was launched with Chris Burnham on artwork, scheduled for 12 issues. Morrison left the Batman titles in 2013. They killed the Damian Wayne character in &quot;Batman Incorporated&quot; No. 8 (April 2013) and their final issue was No. 13 (Sept. 2013).

Morrison returned to creator-owned work in 2010 with the eight issue Vertigo series &quot;Joe the Barbarian&quot;, launched in January with artist Sean Murphy. Originally a six issue series, Morrison felt that the story would benefit from an extra two issues. The titular Joe is a diabetic young boy who begins to hallucinate a fantasy world populated with his toys and other fantasy characters when he stops taking his medication.

Following the closure of Virgin Comics, Dynamite Entertainment and Liquid Comics announced a partnership to publish a hardcover of illustrated scripts of Grant Morrison&#x27;s Mahābhārata-based, animated project &quot;18 Days&quot; with illustrations by artist Mukesh Singh, that was released in August 2010. They are the subject of a feature-length documentary titled &quot;Grant Morrison: Talking with Gods&quot;. The documentary features extensive interviews with Morrison as well as a number of comic artists, editors and professionals they have worked closely with. &quot;Talking with Gods&quot; was produced by Sequart Organization and was released in 2010 at San Diego Comic-Con.

Another 2010 project was &quot;Bonnyroad&quot;, a science fiction television series pitched by Morrison to the BBC Morrison pitched with director Paul McGuigan and Stephen Fry.
In June 2011, as part of DC Comics&#x27; massive revamp of its entire superhero line, Morrison was announced as the writer on the new &quot;Action Comics&quot; No. 1, teaming with artist Rags Morales, marking Morrison&#x27;s return to the Superman character after the end of &quot;All Star Superman&quot;.

In July 2011, Morrison&#x27;s analysis of superheroes, &quot;Supergods: Our World in the Age of the Superhero&quot;, was published by Random House Spiegel &amp; Grau in the United States and Jonathan Cape in the UK.

Morrison has written a screenplay for a film entitled &quot;Sinatoro&quot;. In 2011 they worked on the screenplay &quot;Dinosaurs vs Aliens &quot; for Sam Worthington&#x27;s production company, Full Clip Production, and said they planned to work with them again on a screenplay based on the &quot;2000 AD&quot; story &quot;Rogue Trooper&quot;.

Morrison was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2012 Birthday Honours for services to film and literature.

In September 2012, Morrison published their first ever Image Comics creator-owned work: Happy! with Darick Robertson. In the same month, MorrisonCon was held at the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Las Vegas). This small-scale convention, curated by Morrison, featured a number of comics industry guests, including Robert Kirkman, Darick Robertson, Jason Aaron, Jim Lee, Gerard Way, Jonathan Hickman, Frank Quitely, J. H. Williams III, and Chris Burnham.

In September 2014, as part of Legendary Comics&#x27; big foray into the industry, Morrison launched another key creator-owned book: &quot;Annihilator&quot; with Frazer Iving. A six-issue mini-series, Annihilator was informed by the writings of Thomas Ligotti, and other nihilistic philosophers, and played with the idea of the satanic archetype. A work of cosmic horror, it stars a monstrous Hollywood screenwriter named Ray Spass in his attempts to finish the script for the next tentpole blockbuster, while coming into contact with the character he&#x27;s writing about: the diabolical Max Nomax, The Devil himself.

In February 2015, Morrison&#x27;s second Image project ever launched in the creator-owned title &quot;Nameless&quot;, with frequent collaborator Chris Burnham. A tale of apocalyptic cosmic horror, Nameless sought to approach the genre from a new lens, with different influences, rather than lean to its iconic founder H.P Lovecraft, drawing on everything from the Tarot to The Qlippoth.

In November 2015, Morrison began their biggest creator-owned project of the decade, collaborating with BOOM! Studios for the very first time to do &quot;Klaus&quot; with Dan Mora and Ed Dukeshire.

Morrison&#x27;s &quot;The Multiversity&quot; project for DC was published in 2014 and 2015. A metaseries of nine one-shots set in some of the 52 worlds in the DC Multiverse, it included the main &quot;Multiversity&quot; title which involves the return of President Calvin Ellis, the black Superman from Earth 23 originally seen in &quot;Action Comics&quot; vol. 2 No. 9, which was the framing for the whole series. Other issues include &quot;The Society of Super-Heroes&quot; a pulp version of the DC characters; &quot;The Just&quot; – set on a world of celebrity youngsters; &quot;Pax Americana&quot;, drawn by Frank Quitely, &quot;Thunder World&quot; – a Captain Marvel book; the &quot;Multiversity Guidebook&quot;; &quot;Mastermen&quot; – which includes a fascist version of the Justice League. and &quot;Ultra Comics&quot;.

In 2016, Morrison became editor-in-chief of the comics anthology &quot;Heavy Metal&quot;. Their involvement lasted until 2018. During the period, they penned such strips as &quot;Industria&quot;, &quot;The Rise and Fall of Empires&quot;, both with frequent collaborator and old friend Rian Hughes. Other strips included &quot;The Smile of the Absent Cat&quot; with artist Gerhard, as well as &quot;Mythopia&quot;, &quot;Beachhead&quot;, &quot;Option 3&quot;, &quot;Nihilophilia&quot;, &quot;Ten Sounds That Represent a Kind of Person: A Historical Parody, The House of Heart&#x27;s Desire, and Beyond the Word and the Fool,&quot; with many others. Morrison also penned several editorials for the magazine during this period, whilst writing occasional prose stories for Ahoy Comics backup features.

In 2017, Morrison co-created the Syfy TV series &quot;Happy!&quot;, which starred Christopher Meloni and Patton Oswalt. It commenced its second season in 2019.

In November 2018, Morrison and artist Liam Sharp launched a new Green Lantern comic entitled &quot;The Green Lantern&quot; for DC Comics. Following the success of the first season of &quot;The Green Lantern&quot;, a second season was announced, to be published in 2020 but beforehand there was a Blackstars mini-series dealing with the ending of &quot;Season One&quot;, launched in November 2019.

===2020s===
&quot;Season Two&quot; of Morrison&#x27;s &quot;Green Lantern&quot; series with Liam Sharp began in 2020 and completed in March 2021 alongside the release of their third and final volume of the &quot;Wonder Woman: Earth One&quot; series.

Morrison co-created and worked as a writer and producer on the 2020 TV series &quot;Brave New World&quot; for the Peacock Streaming Service, having developed it for adaptation.

In early 2021, it was announced that a new comic called &quot;Proctor Valley Road&quot; would be released, developed by Morrison in partnership with NBCUniversal. NBCUniversal&#x27;s UCP, a division of Universal Studio Group, will also adapt the series for television. The first issue was published by Boom! Studios in March 2021.

In March 2021 it was announced that Morrison would write a four issue series entitled &quot;Superman and The Authority&quot;, illustrated by Mikel Janin, to be published by DC in late 2021.

In a 2022 newsletter, Morrison revealed they had pitched ideas for Series 8 of &quot;Doctor Who&quot; to series showrunner Steven Moffat. These included a story featuring a child version of the Doctor, as well as a new potential villain. None were commissioned, though the BBC offered to buy the rights to Morrison&#x27;s villains. (The latter declined). Later that year, Morrison published &quot;Luda&quot;, their debut prose novel&quot;.&quot;

==Personal life==
In a 2011 interview, Morrison stated that they and their wife Kristan had no children. When asked if they regretted this, Morrison replied, &quot;Slightly but I don&#x27;t know. Every time I think of it I think of the reality of it. I really like kids and I get on with them and it&#x27;s that aspect of it but I see people with actual kids. The trauma and the trouble. And if I&#x27;m worried that my cat is sick it&#x27;s the thought of everyday worrying about a kid would be even more hellish.&quot;

Morrison uses singular they pronouns. In a 2020 interview with &quot;Mondo2000&quot;, Morrison mentioned that they &quot;had been non-binary, cross-dressing, &#x27;gender queer&#x27;&quot;, from the age of 10 years old but didn&#x27;t have the vocabulary to describe how they felt at the time. Speaking later of the article, Morrison said that they hated being perceived as only recently coming out: &quot;I&#x27;m 62 years old—I had my sexuality shit figured out a long time ago!&quot; Morrison later said they rejected labels and that &quot;I can&#x27;t live in a box. I&#x27;m going to let down anyone who sticks a label on me. It will drop off quite naturally.&quot; They later wrote that though they do not use the label non-binary, they acknowledge that, depending on the definition, &quot;perhaps the shoe fits after all&quot;.

They also wrote that while they never requested they/them pronouns, they have come to prefer them. However, they do not mind being referred to with he/him pronouns.

==Appearances as a comics character==
Grant Morrison first appeared as a comics character in cameos in &quot;Animal Man&quot; Nos. 11 and 14. They made a full appearance at the end of issue No. 25 in 1990, and spent most of issue No. 26 in a lengthy conversation with the comic&#x27;s title character. The character appeared the next year in &quot;Suicide Squad&quot; No. 58, written by John Ostrander, as a character named Writer who was one of several minor characters killed in one of the series&#x27; trademark suicide missions.

They were depicted in an issue of &quot;Simpsons Comics&quot;, fighting with fellow X-Men writer Mark Millar.

In Morrison&#x27;s 2005–2006 &quot;Seven Soldiers&quot; miniseries and its tie-ins, Morrison appears as the renegade member of eight &quot;reality engineers&quot; and transforms into Silver Age character Zor, then back into a character resembling Morrison in a magician&#x27;s costume, though with dark hair and a beard. After the renegade&#x27;s defeat, Morrison, wearing a DC Comics-logo tie clip, becomes the narrator for the final chapter.

The miniseries &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot; features Morrison along with their &quot;52&quot; co-writers Geoff Johns, Greg Rucka and Mark Waid.

In Darwyn Cooke&#x27;s &quot;&quot;, Morrison was the physical model for Captain Cold.

==Acting==
Morrison also appeared as themself in the ninth episode of the fourth season of &quot;Titans&quot;, entitled “Dude, Where’s My Gar?”

==Adaptations of Morrison&#x27;s work==
==Awards==
* Inkpot Award
* Order of the British Empire (MBE)

==Bibliography==
==References==
==Further reading==

* &quot;Disinformation: The Complete Series&quot; Disc 2: DisinfoCon. (1999) Speech by Grant Morrison. Distr. Ryko Distribution.
* Morrison, Grant (2003) &quot;Pop magic!&quot; in &quot;Book of Lies&quot;, pp. 16–25 
* Callahan, Timothy (2007) &quot;Grant Morrison: The Early Years&quot;. Masters of the Medium. Sequart Research &amp; Literacy Organization. 
* Meaney, Patrick (2009) &quot;Our Sentence is Up: Seeing the Invisibles&quot;. Sequart.com. 
* Meaney, Patrick (2010) &quot;Grant Morrison: Talking with Gods&quot;. Documentary film.
* Singer, Marc (2012) &quot;Grant Morrison: Combining the Worlds of Contemporary Comics&quot; . University Press of Mississippi. 
* Greene, Darragh; Roddy, Kate (eds.) (2015) &quot;Grant Morrison and the Superhero Renaissance: Critical Essays&quot;. McFarland &amp; Co. 
* Greene, Darragh (2020) &quot;&#x27;Who Is That Knocking on Your Door?&#x27;: Authorship, Print, and the Multimodal Comics of Grant Morrison in the Digital Age&quot;, in The Birth and Death of the Author, ed. by Andrew J. Power (London: Routledge), pp. 156–172 

==External links==
*Grant Morrison at Barney
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="0" end="14" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q452961" start="52" end="69" title="comic book writer" label="comic book writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="71" end="83" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894685" start="127" end="146" title="nonlinear narrative" label="nonlinear narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="149" end="157" title="Humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="173" end="188" title="counterculture" label="countercultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="270" end="279" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764848" start="311" end="321" title="Animal Man (comic book)" label="Animal Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q664261" start="335" end="346" title="Doom Patrol" label="Doom Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880664" start="360" end="363" title="JLA (comic book)" label="JLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="377" end="390" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696459" start="408" end="421" title="Green Lantern (comic book)" label="Green Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="" start="464" end="477" title="Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth" label="Arkham Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="509" end="532" title="Wonder Woman: Earth One" label="Wonder Woman: Earth One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457446" start="562" end="576" title="Seven Soldiers" label="Seven Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409116" start="593" end="609" title="The Multiversity" label="The Multiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882519" start="639" end="653" title="DC One Million" label="DC One Million"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270869" start="670" end="682" title="Final Crisis" label="Final Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q282494" start="806" end="823" title="All-Star Superman" label="All-Star Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="884" end="890" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="928" end="934" title="Batman (comic book)#One Year Later" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869415" start="1010" end="1026" title="Batman and Robin (comic book)" label="Batman and Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869404" start="1072" end="1091" title="Batman Incorporated" label="Batman Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q660695" start="1137" end="1149" title="Damian Wayne" label="Damian Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="1244" end="1251" title="Vertigo (DC Comics)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746593" start="1276" end="1289" title="Flex Mentallo" label="Flex Mentallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q449084" start="1306" end="1309" title="We3" label="We3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407862" start="1337" end="1350" title="Frank Quitely" label="Frank Quitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440470" start="1358" end="1364" title="Seaguy" label="Seaguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026387" start="1383" end="1398" title="Cameron Stewart" label="Cameron Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733869" start="1406" end="1415" title="The Filth (comics)" label="The Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108451" start="1427" end="1439" title="Chris Weston" label="Chris Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q92802" start="1475" end="1489" title="The Invisibles" label="The Invisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="1500" end="1506" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012694" start="1549" end="1558" title="New X-Men (2001 series)" label="New X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877735" start="1583" end="1593" title="Noh-Varr" label="Marvel Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928358" start="1625" end="1639" title="Marvel Knights" label="Marvel Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q654659" start="1725" end="1736" title="Heavy Metal (magazine)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="1844" end="1850" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q512814" start="1852" end="1858" title="Harvey Awards" label="Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="1864" end="1870" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1925" end="1952" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="2039" end="2046" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2048" end="2056" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730631" start="2089" end="2113" title="Allan Glen&amp;#x27;s School" label="Allan Glen&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559664" start="2275" end="2291" title="Gideon Stargrave" label="Gideon Stargrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984373" start="2315" end="2325" title="Near Myths" label="Near Myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="2724" end="2734" title="D. C. Thomson &amp;amp; Co. Ltd" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601475" start="2748" end="2758" title="Starblazer" label="Starblazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152236" start="2827" end="2835" title="Commando Comics" label="Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="3121" end="3146" title="Justice League of America" label="Justice League of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="3151" end="3161" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784409" start="3169" end="3177" title="New Gods" label="New Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="3216" end="3225" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747058" start="3276" end="3290" title="The Liberators (comic book)" label="The Liberators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268570" start="3301" end="3310" title="Dez Skinn" label="Dez Skinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970757" start="3324" end="3331" title="Warrior (comics)" label="Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296050" start="3373" end="3382" title="Marvel UK" label="Marvel UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758364" start="3443" end="3462" title="Doctor Who Magazine" label="Doctor Who Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927162" start="3520" end="3531" title="Bryan Hitch" label="Bryan Hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539476" start="3557" end="3562" title="Zoids" label="Zoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="3578" end="3588" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710763" start="3693" end="3706" title="Future Shocks" label="Future Shocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="3723" end="3730" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614379" start="3831" end="3844" title="Steve Yeowell" label="Steve Yeowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069103" start="3859" end="3865" title="Zenith (comics)" label="Zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764848" start="4048" end="4058" title="Animal Man (comic book)" label="Animal Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="4154" end="4159" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q522623" start="4173" end="4198" title="Crisis on Infinite Earths" label="Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297186" start="4205" end="4219" title="Limited series (comics)" label="limited series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="4239" end="4245" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4290" end="4337" title="Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth" label="Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970161" start="4405" end="4421" title="British Invasion (comics)" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="4475" end="4486" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q358764" start="4488" end="4502" title="Peter Milligan" label="Peter Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806796" start="4504" end="4516" title="Jamie Delano" label="Jamie Delano"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="4522" end="4532" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427625" start="4599" end="4610" title="Swamp Thing" label="Swamp Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="4737" end="4744" title="Surrealism" label="surreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="4868" end="4875" title="dadaism" label="dadaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="4896" end="4913" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q721300" start="5065" end="5076" title="Dave McKean" label="Dave McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231912" start="5095" end="5106" title="Les Daniels" label="Les Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591805" start="5373" end="5395" title="St. Swithin&amp;#x27;s Day (comics)" label="St. Swithin&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841382" start="5406" end="5420" title="Trident Comics" label="Trident Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="5464" end="5481" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="5529" end="5542" title="tabloid press" label="tabloid press"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="5573" end="5585" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="5586" end="5606" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899736" start="5612" end="5624" title="Teddy Taylor" label="Teddy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q138926" start="5682" end="5710" title="The New Adventures of Hitler" label="The New Adventures of Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5801" end="5813" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992227" start="5919" end="5927" title="Fleetway" label="Fleetway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185940" start="5976" end="5982" title="Crisis (comic)" label="Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="6031" end="6047" title="Edinburgh Fringe" label="Edinburgh Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="6151" end="6164" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q234185" start="6169" end="6182" title="Alice Liddell" label="Alice Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="6246" end="6252" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="6256" end="6272" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815090" start="6569" end="6581" title="Kid Eternity" label="Kid Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041222" start="6601" end="6615" title="Duncan Fegredo" label="Duncan Fegredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q92440" start="6621" end="6629" title="Dan Dare" label="Dan Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322157" start="6643" end="6654" title="Rian Hughes" label="Rian Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="6705" end="6716" title="Thatcherism" label="Thatcherism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318947" start="6742" end="6750" title="Revolver Comic (UK)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903096" start="6788" end="6820" title="Bible John-A Forensic Meditation" label="Bible John-A Forensic Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="6934" end="6947" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182943" start="6948" end="6958" title="Bible John" label="Bible John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282723" start="7002" end="7016" title="Eddie Campbell" label="Eddie Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q513101" start="7030" end="7039" title="From Hell" label="From Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q672107" start="7086" end="7097" title="Ouija board" label="Ouija board"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="7102" end="7109" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543" start="7211" end="7222" title="Mark Millar" label="Mark Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258312" start="7227" end="7237" title="John Smith (comics writer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065786" start="7363" end="7374" title="Judge Dredd" label="Judge Dredd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301296" start="7379" end="7395" title="Really and Truly" label="Really and Truly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905549" start="7434" end="7442" title="Big Dave (comics)" label="Big Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="7486" end="7493" title="Vertigo (DC Comics)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="7585" end="7594" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511960" start="7613" end="7624" title="Sebastian O" label="Sebastian O"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752869" start="7659" end="7675" title="The Mystery Play" label="The Mystery Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196614" start="7713" end="7732" title="Kill Your Boyfriend" label="Kill Your Boyfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183242" start="7752" end="7763" title="Philip Bond" label="Philip Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746593" start="7857" end="7870" title="Flex Mentallo" label="Flex Mentallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407862" start="7925" end="7938" title="Frank Quitely" label="Frank Quitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q648062" start="8016" end="8021" title="Aztek (comics)" label="Aztek"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="8097" end="8122" title="Justice League of America" label="Justice League of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152150" start="8231" end="8242" title="DC universe" label="DC universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987087" start="8372" end="8381" title="The Flash (comic book)" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882519" start="8485" end="8499" title="DC One Million" label="DC One Million"/>
<link wikidata="Q92802" start="8615" end="8629" title="The Invisibles" label="The Invisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q314215" start="8863" end="8882" title="Robert Anton Wilson" label="Robert Anton Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="8884" end="8900" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="8905" end="8922" title="William Burroughs" label="William Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062585" start="8956" end="8967" title="chaos magic" label="chaos magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990180" start="8971" end="9000" title="Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth" label="Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422175" start="9081" end="9102" title="Sarah Champion (journalist)" label="Sarah Champion&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281512" start="9143" end="9153" title="Disco 2000 (anthology)" label="Disco 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282242" start="9288" end="9298" title="DisinfoCon" label="DisinfoCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="9439" end="9448" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="9918" end="9927" title="masturbation" label="wankathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758446" start="9978" end="9983" title="sigil (magic)" label="sigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="10227" end="10237" title="millennium" label="millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="10347" end="10357" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q92802" start="10466" end="10480" title="The Invisibles" label="The Invisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407862" start="10676" end="10689" title="Frank Quitely" label="Frank Quitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="10772" end="10785" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877735" start="10838" end="10848" title="Noh-Varr" label="Marvel Boy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10873" end="10893" title="Fantastic Four: 1234" label="Fantastic Four: 1234"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="10987" end="10992" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012694" start="11014" end="11023" title="New X-Men (2001 series)" label="New X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q582927" start="11347" end="11355" title="Planet X (comics)" label="Planet X"/>
<link wikidata="Q840291" start="11383" end="11390" title="Magneto (Marvel Comics)" label="Magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297125" start="11458" end="11462" title="Xorn" label="Xorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733869" start="11615" end="11624" title="The Filth (comics)" label="The Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108451" start="11641" end="11653" title="Chris Weston" label="Chris Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525028" start="11658" end="11670" title="Gary Erskine" label="Gary Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="11773" end="11783" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219124" start="11789" end="11807" title="Guillermo del Toro" label="Guillermo del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440470" start="12054" end="12060" title="Seaguy" label="Seaguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q449084" start="12074" end="12077" title="We3" label="We3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931273" start="12095" end="12105" title="Vimanarama" label="Vimanarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="12196" end="12210" title="JLA Classified" label="JLA Classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457446" start="12248" end="12262" title="Seven Soldiers" label="Seven Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844589" start="12285" end="12307" title="the Manhattan Guardian" label="the Manhattan Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365204" start="12309" end="12323" title="Mister Miracle" label="Mister Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545915" start="12325" end="12346" title="Klarion the Witch Boy" label="Klarion the Witch Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545058" start="12348" end="12357" title="Bulleteer" label="Bulleteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751973" start="12359" end="12371" title="Frankenstein (DC Comics)" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q860922" start="12373" end="12380" title="Zatanna" label="Zatanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781856" start="12385" end="12399" title="Shining Knight" label="Shining Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297186" start="12453" end="12464" title="Limited series (comics)" label="mini-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159050" start="12522" end="12531" title="Dan DiDio" label="Dan DiDio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414145" start="12817" end="12832" title="Infinite Crisis" label="Infinite Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634704" start="12881" end="12883" title="52 (comics)" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q282494" start="13027" end="13044" title="All-Star Superman" label="All-Star Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="13132" end="13138" title="reboot (continuity)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="13552" end="13567" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q605106" start="13586" end="13600" title="Intensive Care (album)" label="Intensive Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="13628" end="13633" title="Tarot" label="Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q54604702" start="13762" end="13782" title="Battlestar Galactica (2003 video game)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="13829" end="13846" title="Vivendi Universal" label="Vivendi Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="13857" end="13872" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212243" start="14030" end="14037" title="Area 51 (first-person shooter)" label="Area 51"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14096" end="14111" title="CFP Productions" label="CFP Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="14207" end="14227" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14274" end="14280" title="Batman (comic book)#One Year Later" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869383" start="14299" end="14312" title="Batman and Son" label="issue No. 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q660695" start="14345" end="14357" title="Damian Wayne" label="Damian Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481368" start="14484" end="14497" title="The Authority (comics)" label="The Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095356" start="14514" end="14522" title="Wildcats (comics)" label="Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q730656" start="14546" end="14553" title="Gene Ha" label="Gene Ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q357776" start="14558" end="14565" title="Jim Lee" label="Jim Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076724" start="14594" end="14603" title="Wildstorm" label="Wildstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q727703" start="15000" end="15012" title="Keith Giffen" label="Keith Giffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481368" start="15026" end="15054" title="The Authority (comics)" label="The Authority: The Lost Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="15075" end="15094" title="San Diego Comic-Con International" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270869" start="15148" end="15160" title="Final Crisis" label="Final Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105794" start="15224" end="15235" title="J. G. Jones" label="J. G. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723696" start="15472" end="15490" title="New York Comic Con" label="New York Comic Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557348" start="15538" end="15551" title="Virgin Comics" label="Virgin Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="15623" end="15634" title="Mahābhārata" label="Mahābhārata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869415" start="15947" end="15963" title="Batman and Robin (comic book)" label="Batman and Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q518029" start="16126" end="16137" title="Tony Daniel" label="Tony Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q526461" start="16154" end="16165" title="Andy Kubert" label="Andy Kubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331216" start="16171" end="16182" title="David Finch (comics)" label="David Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="16309" end="16328" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869404" start="16474" end="16493" title="Batman Incorporated" label="Batman Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048692" start="16537" end="16552" title="Yanick Paquette" label="Yanick Paquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869383" start="16717" end="16731" title="Batman and Son" label="Batman and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270869" start="16748" end="16760" title="Final Crisis" label="Final Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106034" start="17161" end="17174" title="Chris Burnham" label="Chris Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q660695" start="17269" end="17281" title="Damian Wayne" label="Damian Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100914" start="17484" end="17501" title="Joe the Barbarian" label="Joe the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476767" start="17541" end="17552" title="Sean Murphy (artist)" label="Sean Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q965905" start="17867" end="17889" title="Dynamite Entertainment" label="Dynamite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557348" start="17894" end="17907" title="Liquid Comics" label="Liquid Comics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18202" end="18235" title="Grant Morrison: Talking with Gods" label="Grant Morrison: Talking with Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867470" start="18444" end="18464" title="Sequart Organization" label="Sequart Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18626" end="18629" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377534" start="18661" end="18674" title="Paul McGuigan (filmmaker)" label="Paul McGuigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="18679" end="18690" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="18832" end="18845" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283229" start="18879" end="18891" title="Rags Morales" label="Rags Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q282494" start="18973" end="18990" title="All Star Superman" label="All Star Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="19133" end="19145" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950928" start="19146" end="19164" title="Spiegel &amp;amp; Grau" label="Spiegel &amp;amp; Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277534" start="19190" end="19203" title="Jonathan Cape" label="Jonathan Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q82085" start="19367" end="19382" title="Sam Worthington" label="Sam Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048401" start="19539" end="19552" title="Rogue Trooper" label="Rogue Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="19584" end="19625" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q913301" start="19754" end="19766" title="Image Comics" label="Image Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585008" start="19864" end="19902" title="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Las Vegas)" label="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Las Vegas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311891" start="20009" end="20023" title="Robert Kirkman" label="Robert Kirkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016105" start="20025" end="20041" title="Darick Robertson" label="Darick Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220782" start="20043" end="20054" title="Jason Aaron" label="Jason Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q357776" start="20056" end="20063" title="Jim Lee" label="Jim Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q204132" start="20065" end="20075" title="Gerard Way" label="Gerard Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809926" start="20077" end="20093" title="Jonathan Hickman" label="Jonathan Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407862" start="20095" end="20108" title="Frank Quitely" label="Frank Quitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676330" start="20110" end="20128" title="J. H. Williams III" label="J. H. Williams III"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189431" start="20180" end="20196" title="Legendary Comics" label="Legendary Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415759" start="20311" end="20323" title="Frazer Irving" label="Frazer Iving"/>
<link wikidata="Q913301" start="20810" end="20815" title="Image Comics" label="Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106034" start="20914" end="20927" title="Chris Burnham" label="Chris Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="21087" end="21100" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H.P Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943376" start="21260" end="21273" title="Boom! Studios" label="BOOM! Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q30607056" start="21310" end="21315" title="Klaus (comics)" label="Klaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17409116" start="21377" end="21393" title="The Multiversity" label="The Multiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="21449" end="21459" title="metaseries" label="metaseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407862" start="21967" end="21980" title="Frank Quitely" label="Frank Quitely"/>
<link wikidata="Q534153" start="22012" end="22026" title="Captain Marvel (DC Comics)" label="Captain Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="22137" end="22151" title="Justice League" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q654659" start="22255" end="22266" title="Heavy Metal (magazine)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550615" start="22556" end="22563" title="Gerhard (cartoonist)" label="Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050262" start="22953" end="22964" title="Ahoy Comics" label="Ahoy Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="23016" end="23020" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071657" start="23037" end="23043" title="Happy! (TV series)" label="Happy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q380095" start="23065" end="23083" title="Christopher Meloni" label="Christopher Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="23088" end="23101" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237650" start="23182" end="23192" title="Liam Sharp" label="Liam Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696459" start="23208" end="23221" title="Green Lantern (comic book)" label="Green Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237650" start="23634" end="23644" title="Liam Sharp" label="Liam Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q65037315" start="23871" end="23898" title="Brave New World (2020 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Brave New World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="23907" end="23932" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock Streaming Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943376" start="24273" end="24286" title="Boom! Studios" label="Boom! Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303361" start="24561" end="24569" title="Doctor Who (series 8)" label="Series 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="24579" end="24589" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="24606" end="24616" title="showrunner" label="showrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q461003" start="24617" end="24630" title="Steven Moffat" label="Steven Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34358" start="24684" end="24694" title="the Doctor (Doctor Who)" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437264" start="25477" end="25490" title="singular they" label="singular they"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898741" start="25526" end="25547" title="MONDO 2000" label="&amp;quot;Mondo2000&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="25593" end="25603" title="Non-binary gender" label="non-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="25605" end="25619" title="cross-dressing" label="cross-dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="25627" end="25639" title="genderqueer" label="gender queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="25851" end="25861" title="coming out" label="coming out"/>
<link wikidata="Q725420" start="26852" end="26866" title="John Ostrander" label="John Ostrander"/>
<link wikidata="Q360632" start="26980" end="26995" title="suicide mission" label="suicide mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217478" start="27039" end="27054" title="Simpsons Comics" label="Simpsons Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457446" start="27145" end="27159" title="Seven Soldiers" label="Seven Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q430544" start="27293" end="27303" title="Silver Age of Comic Books" label="Silver Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q394268" start="27500" end="27508" title="tie clip" label="tie clip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27576" end="27599" title="Tales of the Unexpected (comics)#2006 limited series" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376074" start="27667" end="27678" title="Geoff Johns" label="Geoff Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759151" start="27680" end="27690" title="Greg Rucka" label="Greg Rucka"/>
<link wikidata="Q594438" start="27695" end="27704" title="Mark Waid" label="Mark Waid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166960" start="27710" end="27722" title="Darwyn Cooke" label="Darwyn Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517864" start="27869" end="27882" title="Titans (season 4)" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q38542856" start="27892" end="27898" title="Titans (2018 TV series)" label="Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="27993" end="28005" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="28008" end="28035" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282242" start="28154" end="28164" title="DisinfoCon" label="DisinfoCon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362094" wikidata="Q1881597" url="?curid=362094" title="MLA">
<text>MLA may refer to:

== Arts and entertainment ==
* &quot;M.L.A.&quot; (1957 film), an Indian Telugu-language film by K. B. Tilak
* &quot;MLA&quot; (2018 Kannada film), an Indian film by Mourya Manjunath
* &quot;MLA&quot; (2018 Telugu film), an Indian film by Upendra Madhav
* Muv-Luv Alternative

== Business ==
* Mandated Lead Arranger, a bank in charge of organizing a syndicated loan
* McKenna Long &amp; Aldridge, a United States–based international law and public policy firm
* Mitsubishi Logisnext Americas, a material handling equipment manufacturer based in Houston, Texas

==Government and politics==
* Member of the Legislative Assembly, a politician serving in a legislature, in many countries
** Member of the Legislative Assembly (India)
** Member of the Legislative Assembly (Northern Ireland)

== Organizations ==
* Massachusetts Lobstermen&#x27;s Association
* Master Locksmiths Association, United Kingdom
* Meat and Livestock Australia, Australian not-for-profit organisation of red meat producers
* Modern Language Association, United States of America
** &quot;MLA Handbook&quot;, published by the association, replacing &quot;MLA Style Manual&quot;

=== Library organizations ===
* Maine Library Association, professional association for librarians in Maine
* Maryland Library Association, professional association for librarians in Maryland
* Massachusetts Library Association, professional association for librarians in Massachusetts
* Medical Library Association, United States
* Michigan Library Association, professional association for librarians in Michigan
* Minnesota Library Association, professional association for librarians in Minnesota
* Mississippi Library Association, professional association for librarians in Mississippi
* Montana Library Association, professional association for librarians in Montana
* Museums, Libraries and Archives Council, United Kingdom
* Music Library Association, United States

== Professions and degrees ==
* Master of Landscape Architecture, a professional qualification 
* Master of Liberal Arts, a master&#x27;s degree 
* Medical Laboratory Assistant, an assistant to a biomedical scientist

== Other ==
* Malaysia, ITU country code
* Malta International Airport, IATA airport code
* Mercury Laser Altimeter, an instrument on MESSENGER space probe
* Methyllycaconitine, a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist
* Mobile Location Analytics, a type of customer intelligence
* Montessori Lyceum Amsterdam, a school in Amsterdam, Netherlands
* Mutual legal assistance treaty, an agreement between two countries for the purpose of gathering and exchanging information in an effort to enforce public laws or criminal laws
* Tamambo language, ISO 639 language code
* Micro lens array, see as well Holographic optical element, Light field camera</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1881597" start="0" end="3" title="MLA" label="MLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712217" start="50" end="80" title="M.L.A. (1957 film)" label="&amp;quot;M.L.A.&amp;quot; (1957 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60737610" start="130" end="165" title="MLA (2018 Kannada film)" label="&amp;quot;MLA&amp;quot; (2018 Kannada film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072196" start="204" end="238" title="MLA (2018 Telugu film)" label="&amp;quot;MLA&amp;quot; (2018 Telugu film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759489" start="275" end="294" title="Muv-Luv Alternative" label="Muv-Luv Alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747884" start="313" end="335" title="Mandated Lead Arranger" label="Mandated Lead Arranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801802" start="388" end="415" title="McKenna Long &amp;amp; Aldridge" label="McKenna Long &amp;amp; Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q109570506" start="482" end="511" title="Mitsubishi Logisnext Americas" label="Mitsubishi Logisnext Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230427" start="611" end="645" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="Member of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526627" start="707" end="749" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly (India)" label="Member of the Legislative Assembly (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272410" start="753" end="806" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly (Northern Ireland)" label="Member of the Legislative Assembly (Northern Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534659" start="830" end="873" title="Massachusetts Lobstermen&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Massachusetts Lobstermen&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785050" start="876" end="905" title="Master Locksmiths Association" label="Master Locksmiths Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804254" start="924" end="952" title="Meat and Livestock Australia" label="Meat and Livestock Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506059" start="1017" end="1044" title="Modern Language Association" label="Modern Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749253" start="1080" end="1092" title="MLA Handbook" label="MLA Handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749253" start="1146" end="1162" title="MLA Style Manual" label="MLA Style Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q30258143" start="1202" end="1227" title="Maine Library Association" label="Maine Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784110" start="1280" end="1308" title="Maryland Library Association" label="Maryland Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q12872458" start="1364" end="1397" title="Massachusetts Library Association" label="Massachusetts Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806377" start="1458" end="1485" title="Medical Library Association" label="Medical Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837599" start="1503" end="1531" title="Michigan Library Association" label="Michigan Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090546" start="1587" end="1616" title="Minnesota Library Association" label="Minnesota Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q57399092" start="1673" end="1704" title="Mississippi Library Association" label="Mississippi Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q38651855" start="1763" end="1790" title="Montana Library Association" label="Montana Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941133" start="1845" end="1884" title="Museums, Libraries and Archives Council" label="Museums, Libraries and Archives Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q13651280" start="1903" end="1928" title="Music Library Association" label="Music Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="1977" end="2009" title="Master of Landscape Architecture" label="Master of Landscape Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785155" start="2043" end="2065" title="Master of Liberal Arts" label="Master of Liberal Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806368" start="2093" end="2121" title="Medical Laboratory Assistant" label="Medical Laboratory Assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2177" end="2185" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672289" start="2206" end="2233" title="Malta International Airport" label="Malta International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="2255" end="2278" title="Mercury Laser Altimeter" label="Mercury Laser Altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333710" start="2321" end="2339" title="Methyllycaconitine" label="Methyllycaconitine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346256" start="2389" end="2414" title="Mobile Location Analytics" label="Mobile Location Analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960588" start="2450" end="2477" title="Montessori Lyceum Amsterdam" label="Montessori Lyceum Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758832" start="2516" end="2546" title="Mutual legal assistance treaty" label="Mutual legal assistance treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153276" start="2694" end="2710" title="Tamambo language" label="Tamambo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q500199" start="2736" end="2752" title="Micro lens array" label="Micro lens array"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884117" start="2766" end="2793" title="Holographic optical element" label="Holographic optical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974283" start="2795" end="2813" title="Light field camera" label="Light field camera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362100" wikidata="Q5370747" url="?curid=362100" title="Emergency ward (disambiguation)">
<text>Emergency ward normally refers to the emergency department of a hospital.

It may also refer to:
* &quot;Emergency Ward&quot; (album), an album
* &quot;Emergency Ward&quot; (film), a film
* &quot;Emergency – Ward 10&quot;, a British TV series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="38" end="58" title="emergency department" label="emergency department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370665" start="99" end="133" title="Emergency Ward (album)" label="&amp;quot;Emergency Ward&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072762" start="146" end="179" title="Emergency Ward (film)" label="&amp;quot;Emergency Ward&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370751" start="196" end="215" title="Emergency – Ward 10" label="Emergency – Ward 10"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362102" wikidata="Q5188683" url="?curid=362102" title="Crossing the floor">
<text>In some parliamentary systems (e.g., in Canada and the United Kingdom), politicians are said to cross the floor if they formally change their political affiliation to a political party different from the one they were initially elected under. In Australia though, this term simply refers to Members of Parliament (MPs) who dissent from the party line and vote against the express instructions of the party whip while retaining membership in their political party (at least for the time being).

Voting against party lines may lead to consequences such as losing a position (e.g., as minister or a portfolio critic) or being ejected from the party caucus. While these practices are legally permissible in most countries, crossing the floor can lead to controversy and media attention. Some countries like Malaysia, Pakistan, India, Indonesia, the Maldives and Bangladesh have laws that remove a member from parliament due to floor-crossing.

==Etymology==
The term originates from the British House of Commons, which is configured with the Government and Opposition facing each other on rows of benches. In consequence, MPs who switch from the governing party to one in opposition (or vice versa) also change which side of the chamber on which they sit. A notable example of this is Winston Churchill, who crossed the floor from the Conservatives to the Liberals in 1904, later crossing back in 1924. The term has passed into general use in other Westminster parliamentary democracies even if many of these countries have semicircular or horseshoe-shaped debating chambers.

The Australia meaning on the other hand arises from the way divisions—roll call votes—are conducted. In Australian chambers, members move to the government benches (on the presiding officer&#x27;s right) to vote in favor of a motion, and the opposition benches (on the presiding officer&#x27;s left) to vote against a motion. Therefore, an MP who crosses the floor is on the opposite side of the chamber from the rest of their party, and on government motions frequently on the opposite side of the chamber than they normally sit.

In Nigeria, the term &quot;crossing the carpet&quot; or &quot;carpet crossing&quot; is used. In India, a similar expression is &quot;Aaya Ram Gaya Ram&quot;, referring to political floor-crossing.

== Changing parties ==
In the United Kingdom and Canada, crossing the floor means leaving one&#x27;s party entirely and joining another caucus. For example, leaving an opposition party to support the government (or vice versa), leaving or being expelled from the party one ran with at election and sitting as a clear independent, or even leaving one opposition party to join another. In both countries, the term carries only this meaning, not simply voting against the party line on a bill.

In April 2006, then-premier of Manitoba Gary Doer of the New Democratic Party of Manitoba proposed banning crossing the floor in the Manitoba legislature in response to &quot;the concern some voters have expressed over the high-profile defections of three federal MPs from their parties in just over two years&quot;. The resulting legislation, which amended the provincial &quot;Legislative Assembly Act&quot;, mandated that members of the legislature who quit (or are expelled from) their political party had to serve out the remainder of their term as independents. However, in 2018, the Progressive Conservative government of Brian Pallister repealed the bill.

An extraordinary example occurred in Alberta, Canada, in December 2014 by Danielle Smith, the Leader of the Official Opposition. She and eight of her MLAs, all of the Wildrose Party, crossed the floor together to join the governing Progressive Conservative Association of Alberta. In 2019, eleven British MPs defected from the Conservative and Labour parties to form the Change UK party. In September 2019, the governing Conservative party lost its working majority when Phillip Lee MP defected to the Liberal Democrats during the first speech of new prime minister Boris Johnson. On 19 January 2022, Christian Wakeford, Conservative MP for Bury South, crossed the floor to the Labour benches.

==Voting against party lines==
In some countries, the phrase &quot;crossing the floor&quot; describes members of a government party or parties who defect by voting with the opposition against some piece of government-sponsored legislation. Political parties commonly allow their members a free vote on some matters of personal conscience. In Australia, one of the major parties, the Australian Labor Party requires its members to pledge their support for the collective decisions of the caucus, which theoretically prohibits them from &quot;crossing the floor&quot; in this sense; however, in practice, some Labor members disregard this pledge, despite the disciplinary action which may result. Among other parties, crossing the floor is rare, although then Senator Barnaby Joyce of the National Party of Australia crossed the floor 28 times. Tasmanian Senator Sir Reg Wright voted against his own party, the Liberal Party of Australia, on 150 occasions, which has been claimed as a record for this form of crossing the floor in the Australian Parliament.

==See also==
*&quot;Aaya Ram Gaya Ram&quot;, a term used in India for party-switching politicians
*Anti-defection law (India)
*Aisle (political term)
*Conscience vote
*Crossover voting
*Floor crossing (South Africa)
*Katak (Malaysia)
*List of British politicians who have crossed the floor
*List of Canadian politicians who have crossed the floor
*List of United States representatives who switched parties
*List of United States senators who switched parties
*Party switching for a similar concept
*Trasformismo for a similar concept in Italy
*Waka-jumping
*Whip (politics), in UK politics voting against the party line is known as &quot;defying the whip&quot;
*Party discipline

== Notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="8" end="28" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="40" end="46" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="55" end="69" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="96" end="111" title="Crossing the floor" label="cross the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127267" start="120" end="163" title="Party switching" label="formally change their political affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="246" end="255" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054291" start="340" end="350" title="Party line (politics)" label="party line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="400" end="410" title="Whip (politics)" label="party whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="804" end="812" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="814" end="822" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="824" end="829" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="831" end="840" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="846" end="854" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="859" end="869" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="984" end="1008" title="British House of Commons" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="1054" end="1064" title="Parliamentary Opposition" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="1119" end="1122" title="Member of Parliament" label="MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1282" end="1299" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1332" end="1345" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="1353" end="1361" title="Liberal party (UK)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="1446" end="1457" title="Westminster System" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="2109" end="2116" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057896" start="2239" end="2256" title="Aaya Ram Gaya Ram" label="Aaya Ram Gaya Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q365213" start="2836" end="2845" title="Gary Doer" label="Gary Doer"/>
<link wikidata="Q774542" start="2853" end="2885" title="New Democratic Party of Manitoba" label="New Democratic Party of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366633" start="3386" end="3410" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924976" start="3425" end="3440" title="Brian Pallister" label="Brian Pallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219439" start="3535" end="3549" title="Danielle Smith" label="Danielle Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366170" start="3628" end="3642" title="Wildrose Party" label="Wildrose Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518057" start="3693" end="3740" title="Progressive Conservative Association of Alberta" label="Progressive Conservative Association of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="3758" end="3769" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="British MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3788" end="3800" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="3805" end="3811" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q61751194" start="3832" end="3841" title="Change UK" label="Change UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q750061" start="3932" end="3946" title="Phillip Lee (politician)" label="Phillip Lee MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="3963" end="3980" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="4027" end="4040" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76363097" start="4062" end="4080" title="Christian Wakeford" label="Christian Wakeford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4082" end="4094" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="4095" end="4097" title="Member of Parliament (UK)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238774" start="4102" end="4112" title="Bury South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bury South"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4139" end="4145" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="4539" end="4561" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861362" start="4922" end="4935" title="Barnaby Joyce" label="Barnaby Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="4943" end="4970" title="National Party of Australia" label="National Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307886" start="5017" end="5031" title="Reg Wright" label="Sir Reg Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="5065" end="5091" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057896" start="5233" end="5250" title="Aaya Ram Gaya Ram" label="Aaya Ram Gaya Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372207" start="5312" end="5338" title="Anti-defection law (India)" label="Anti-defection law (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699193" start="5340" end="5362" title="Aisle (political term)" label="Aisle (political term)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162729" start="5364" end="5379" title="Conscience vote" label="Conscience vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188770" start="5381" end="5397" title="Crossover voting" label="Crossover voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429184" start="5399" end="5428" title="Floor crossing (South Africa)" label="Floor crossing (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117751568" start="5430" end="5446" title="Frog (Malaysian politics)" label="Katak (Malaysia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565026" start="5448" end="5502" title="List of British politicians who have crossed the floor" label="List of British politicians who have crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565978" start="5504" end="5559" title="List of Canadian politicians who have crossed the floor" label="List of Canadian politicians who have crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601942" start="5561" end="5619" title="List of United States representatives who switched parties" label="List of United States representatives who switched parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602054" start="5621" end="5672" title="List of United States senators who switched parties" label="List of United States senators who switched parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127267" start="5674" end="5689" title="Party switching" label="Party switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q738272" start="5713" end="5725" title="Trasformismo" label="Trasformismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067690" start="5758" end="5770" title="Waka-jumping" label="Waka-jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="5772" end="5787" title="Whip (politics)" label="Whip (politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440597" start="5876" end="5892" title="Party discipline" label="Party discipline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362107" wikidata="Q1398604" url="?curid=362107" title="The Gun Club">
<text>The Gun Club were an American post-punk band from Los Angeles that existed from 1979 to 1996. Created and led by singer-songwriter and guitarist Jeffrey Lee Pierce, they were notable as one of the first bands in the punk rock subculture to incorporate influences from blues, rockabilly, and country music. The Gun Club has been called a &quot;tribal psychobilly blues&quot; band, as well as initiators of the punk blues sound cowpunk – &quot;He (Pierce) took Robert Johnson and pre-war acoustic blues and &#x27;punkified&#x27; it. Up until then bands were drawing on Iggy &amp; the Stooges and the New York Dolls but he took it back so much further for inspiration.&quot;

== History ==
=== Early days (1979–1980) ===
The Gun Club were formed by Jeffrey Lee Pierce (guitar and vocals) with friend, chief of the Ramones fan club and fellow music enthusiast Brian Tristan, also known as Kid Congo Powers. Pierce was the former head of the Blondie fan club in Los Angeles and previously a member of the Red Lights, the E-Types, the Individuals, Phast Phreddie &amp; Thee Precisions, and the Cyclones.

The Gun Club&#x27;s precursor band, the Creeping Ritual, formed in late 1979. Along with Pierce (lead vocals and guitar), the first lineup consisted of Brian Tristan (lead guitar); Don Snowden (bass), who was at the time a music critic for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;; and Brad Dunning (drums), now a prominent designer and writer. In April 1980, they changed their name to &quot;The Gun Club&quot; on a suggestion by Pierce&#x27;s roommate, Circle Jerks singer Keith Morris. Kid Congo commented that the early Gun Club incarnation were &quot;too arty for rock people, far too rock for arty people, too cuckoo for the blues crowd and too American for punk&quot;. Snowden and Dunning departed in June 1980, replaced by two ex-members of the Bags, Rob Ritter and Terry Graham, respectively. Ritter was temporarily replaced on bass by Anna Statman for two months in the fall of 1980. Kid Congo Powers then left, on amicable terms, to join the Cramps in November 1980 and was replaced by lead and slide guitarist Ward Dotson (ex-Der Stab) who had initially hoped to join the Cramps. During this period, the Gun Club often opened for X, the Bags, Circle Jerks and the Blasters.

=== &quot;Fire of Love&quot; and &quot;Miami&quot; (1981–1982) ===
Securing a record deal with Ruby Records, a division of Slash, the group released their debut album, &quot;Fire of Love&quot;, on August 31, 1981. The album was produced by Tito Larriva (of the Plugz) and Chris D. (frontman of the Flesh Eaters). Critic Stevo Olende wrote that the &quot;album&#x27;s lyrical imagery is plundered from voodoo, &#x27;50s EC Comics and the blues&quot;, while Thom Jurek of AllMusic noted that &quot;nobody has heard music like this before or since&quot;. &quot;Fire of Love&quot; sold well and received strong reviews upon release. Billy Persons of the Weirdos temporarily replaced Ritter for several shows in late 1981.

In April 1982, the Gun Club signed to Blondie guitarist Chris Stein&#x27;s Animal Records, a subsidiary of Chrysalis Records. The band temporarily relocated to New York City to record their follow-up album, 1982&#x27;s &quot;Miami&quot;. This album featured not only Stein as producer, but Blondie&#x27;s Debbie Harry singing backup vocals on several tracks. Ritter left in June 1982 to concentrate on his other band, 45 Grave, and changed his name to Rob Graves. Before leaving, Ritter taught the bass parts to his former Bags bandmate Patricia Morrison (also ex-Legal Weapon) and trained her as his replacement. For their West Coast shows in August 1982, Annie Ungar was added as a second guitarist. Upon the release of &quot;Miami&quot; on September 20, 1982, the album received good reviews but has been criticized for Stein&#x27;s thin production. Due to increasingly frequent arguments, Pierce dismissed Graham and Dotson in December 1982.

=== &quot;The Las Vegas Story&quot; and first breakup (1983–1985) ===
In January 1983, Graham and Dotson were replaced by guitarist Jim Duckworth (formerly of Tav Falco&#x27;s Panther Burns) and drummer Dee Pop (formerly of the New York band Bush Tetras). A spare recording session, originally booked for another band, led to the impromptu recording of the &quot;Death Party&quot; EP with bassist Jimmy Joe Uliana quickly filling in for Morrison and Linda &quot;Texacala&quot; Jones on backing vocals. Released April 13, 1983, by Animal, it was the only recording of the short-lived lineup featuring Duckworth and Pop. During this time Pierce refrained from playing guitar, focusing solely on singing. After eight months Graham returned, replacing Pop, and on the eve of the October 1983 Australian tour, both Duckworth and Graham quit, refusing to board the plane. Arriving minus half the band, Pierce recruited drummer Billy Pommer Jr. and guitarist Spencer P. Jones from support act the Johnnys to fill in on the tour, while former member Powers also flew over to play guitar. When they returned to the US in November, Graham resumed his place on drums.

Pierce returned to guitar playing during this lineup, and both he and Powers are credited with guitar on their third album, &quot;The Las Vegas Story&quot; (the Blasters&#x27; Dave Alvin also played lead guitar on a handful of tracks). Released on June 25, 1984, this album marked a significant change for the band; it represented a shift away from the punk rock of &quot;Fire of Love&quot; and &quot;Miami&quot; and a step towards a more polished alternative rock sound. After US gigs supporting Siouxsie and the Banshees, in September the band embarked on a European tour in support of the album, but after five weeks Graham again departed after a gig in Paris. The band carried on and he was replaced with former roadie Peter Kablean, known as Desi Desperate, despite having no rehearsal. The Gun Club broke up in January 1985, Pierce remaining in London with then-girlfriend Romi Mori, who he had met during the final December 10–11 shows at Dingwalls, London.

After the breakup, Powers, Morrison and Desperate formed a band called Fur Bible (Morrison later joined the Sisters of Mercy and the Damned), while Pierce embarked on a solo career. Pierce assembled a band, the Jeffrey Lee Pierce Quartet, consisting of former members of the Cure and Roxy Music, and released &quot;Wildweed&quot; in 1985. He organized a new band to tour in support of the album, including Mori on guitar and Nick Sanderson of Clock DVA on drums.

=== Reformation (1986–1994) ===
After a short stint doing spoken word performances, Pierce decided to reform a new version of the band in October 1986. Powers, who had also been recruited into Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds at this time, resumed his place at guitar, with Mori switching to bass and Sanderson retaining his spot on drums. This lineup of the Gun Club recorded a handful of albums, including &quot;Mother Juno&quot;, released October 19, 1987, on Red Rhino Records. This album, produced by Robin Guthrie of the Cocteau Twins, was a successful comeback, garnering a positive critical reception. After the release of Nick Cave&#x27;s album &quot;The Good Son&quot;, Powers departed from the Bad Seeds in May 1990 to focus more on the Gun Club.

The band&#x27;s fifth studio effort, &quot;Pastoral Hide and Seek&quot;, which Pierce produced himself, was released October 1, 1990, on the Fire label. Sanderson departed in December 1990 to focus on his other project, World of Twist. Desperate rejoined to record the &quot;Divinity&quot; album, released in August 1991 on New Rose Records, but the band were inactive during the remainder of that year as Pierce was hospitalized during his travels in India and Vietnam. Pierce also recorded with Cypress Grove.

Simon Fish, who had previously played with Pierce on one of his solo albums, joined the band in March 1992. At the conclusion of a European tour in May 1992, Powers left the band to focus on his other project, Congo Norvell. In February 1993, the band reconvened as a trio of Pierce, Mori and the returning Sanderson, to record the &quot;Lucky Jim&quot; album. For their spring 1993 European tour, they were joined by guitarist Rainer Lingk of Die Haut. &quot;Lucky Jim&quot; was released September 20, 1993, by Triple X Records, and Robert Marche (formerly of Subway Sect and JoBoxers) joined on guitar in October.

In May 1994, Mori and Pierce split up, and she and Sanderson left the Gun Club (Mori and Sanderson formed Freeheat in 1999 with Jim Reid and Ben Lurie of the Jesus and Mary Chain). Sanderson and Marche formed Earl Brutus. In the fall of 1994, Pierce put together a new lineup featuring Marche, bassist Efe and the returning Fish, lasting until November.

=== Final days (1995–1996) ===
An increasingly ill Pierce put together a penultimate Gun Club lineup for two shows in Los Angeles in August and September 1995, including guitarists Powers and Mike Martt (ex-Tex &amp; the Horseheads), and the Wayne Kramer rhythm section of bassist Randy Bradbury and drummer Brock Avery. The final lineup of the Gun Club, with bassist Elizabeth Montague replacing Bradbury (who was touring with Pennywise), played only one show, the band&#x27;s last, at The Palace in Hollywood on December 18, 1995.

On March 25, 1996, Pierce was found unconscious at his father&#x27;s home in Salt Lake City, Utah. He was hospitalized and remained in a coma until his death from a brain hemorrhage on March 31, effectively ending the Gun Club.

== Influence ==
The White Stripes played &quot;For the Love of Ivy&quot; and &quot;Jack on Fire&quot; (both from &quot;Fire of Love&quot;) at live shows. That band&#x27;s vocalist and guitarist, Jack White, said, &quot;&#x27;Sex Beat&#x27;, &#x27;She&#x27;s Like Heroin to Me&#x27;, and &#x27;For the Love of Ivy&#x27;...why are these songs not taught in schools?&quot;

Swedish punk and rock singer-songwriter Joakim Thåström has referenced the Gun Club and Pierce in several songs, including &quot; Jeffrey Lee Pierce&quot;, &quot; and &quot;.

Singer Mark Lanegan included &quot;Miami&quot; among his favorite recordings, and covered Pierce&#x27;s &quot;Carry Home&quot; on his 1999 album of cover songs, &quot;I&#x27;ll Take Care of You&quot;.

Canadian rock band Japandroids included &quot;For The Love of Ivy&quot; on their sophomore album Celebration Rock. Brian King (vocalist/guitarist) said &quot;the magnitude of discovering The Gun Club cannot be understated.&quot;

== Members ==
=== Former members ===
* Jeffrey Lee Pierce – vocals, guitar (1979–January 1985, October 1986 – March 25, 1996); &quot;died 1996&quot;
* Kid Congo Powers – guitar (1979 – November 1980, October 1983 – January 1985, October 1986 – May 1990, August – September 1995)
* Don Snowden – bass guitar (1979 – June 1980)
* Brad Dunning – drums (1979 – June 1980)
* Terry Graham – drums (June 1980 – December 1982, August – October, November 1983 – October 1984)
* Rob Ritter – bass guitar (June 1980 – June 1982); &quot;died 1990&quot;
* Anna Statman – bass guitar (fall 1980)
* Ward Dotson – guitar (November 1980 – December 1982)
* Billy Persons – drums (late 1981)
* Annie Ungar – guitar (August 1982 – January 1985)
* Patricia Morrison – bass guitar (August 1982 – January 1985)
* Jim Duckworth – guitar (January – October 1983)
* Dee Pop – drums (January – August 1983)
* Jimmy Joe Uliana – bass guitar (January – February 1983)
* Billy Pommer Jr. – drums (October – November 1983)
* Spencer P. Jones – guitar (October – November 1983)
* Desi Desperate – drums (October 1984 – January 1985)
* Romi Mori – bass guitar (October 1986 – May 1994)
* Nick Sanderson – drums (October 1986 – March 1992, February 1993 – May 1994); &quot;died 2008&quot;
* Simon Fish – drums (March 1992 – February 1993, May 1994 – March 25, 1996)
* Rainer Lingk – guitar (April 1993 – March 25, 1996)
* Robert Marche – guitar (May 1994– March 25, 1996)
* Efe – bass guitar (May 1994– March 25, 1996)
* Mike Martt – guitar (August–September 1995); &quot;died 2023&quot;
* Randy Bradbury – bass guitar (August–September 1995)
* Brock Avery – drums (August–September 1995)
* Elizabeth Montague – bass guitar (September–December 1995)

=== Timeline ===

== Discography ==
=== Studio albums ===
* &quot;Fire of Love&quot; (1981, Ruby Records/Slash Records)
* &quot;Miami&quot; (1982, Animal Records)
* &quot;The Las Vegas Story&quot; (1984, Animal Records/Chrysalis Records)
* &quot;Mother Juno&quot; (1987, Red Rhino Records)
* &quot;Pastoral Hide and Seek&quot; (1990, Fire Records (UK), The Orchard Music (on behalf of Blixa Sounds); BMI – Broadcast Music Inc.)
* &quot;Divinity&quot; (1991, New Rose Records)
* &quot;Lucky Jim&quot; (1993, Triple X Records)

=== Singles and EPs ===
* &quot;Ghost on the Highway&quot;/&quot;Sex Beat&quot; 7&quot; single (1982, Beggars Banquet Records)
* &quot;Fire of Love&quot; 7&quot; single (1982, Animal Records)
* &quot;Death Party&quot; 12&quot; EP (1983, Animal Records)
* &quot;Sex Beat 81&quot; 7&quot; single (1986, Lolita)
* &quot;Breaking Hands&quot; 7&quot;/12&quot; single (1988, Red Rhino Records)
* &quot;Sex Beat&quot; CD single (1989, New Rose Records)
* &quot;The Great Divide&quot; 7&quot;/12&quot; single (1990, New Rose Records)
* &quot;Pastoral, Hide &amp; Seek (The Lost Song)&quot; 7&quot;/CD single (1991, New Rose Records)
* &quot;Cry to Me&quot; 7&quot; single (1993, Sympathy for the Record Industry)
* &quot;Walkin&#x27; With the Beast&quot; 7&quot; single (2004, Sympathy for the Record Industry)

=== Live albums ===
* &quot;The Birth the Death the Ghost&quot; (1983, ABC Records; recorded 1980)
* &quot;Sex Beat 81&quot; (1984, Lolita; recorded 1981)
* &quot;Love Supreme&quot; (1985, Offense Records; recorded 1982)
* &quot;Danse Kalinda Boom – Live in Pandora&#x27;s Box &quot; (1985, Megadisc; recorded 1984)
* &quot;Death Party&quot; (1987, Revenge Records; recorded 1981–1982)
* &quot;Ahmed&#x27;s Wild Dream&quot; (1992, Solid Records; recorded 1992)
* &quot;Live in Europe&quot; (1993, Triple X Records; recorded 1992)
* &quot;Larger Than Live!&quot; (2008, Last Call Records; recorded 1990)
* &quot;Destroy the Country&quot; (2014, Cleopatra Records; recorded 1983)
* &quot;Moonlight Motel &quot; (2014, Cleopatra Records; recorded 1983–1984)

=== Compilation albums ===
* &quot;Two Sides of the Beast&quot; (1985, Dojo Records)
* &quot;In Exile&quot; (1992, Triple X Records)
* &quot;Early Warning&quot; (1997, Sympathy for the Record Industry)
* &quot;Pastoral Hide &amp; Seek/Divinity&quot; (1997, 2.13.61 Records)
* &quot;Da Blood Done Signed My Name&quot; (2007, Castle Communications)
* &quot;The Life and Times of Jeffrey Lee Pierce and the Gun Club&quot; box set (2008, Retro Deluxe)
* &quot;Mother Berlin&quot; (2014, Bang! Records)
* &quot;In My Room&quot; (2017, Bang! Records)

=== Compilation appearances ===
* &quot;Devil in the Woods&quot; on &quot;Keats Rides a Harley&quot; (1981, Happy Squid Records)
* &quot;Jack on Fire&quot; on &quot;Rockabilly Psychosis and the Garage Disease&quot; (1984, Big Beat Records)
* &quot;Sex Beat&quot; on &quot;Slash: The Early Sessions&quot; (1984, Slash Records)

=== Live videos ===
* &quot;Live at the Hacienda&quot; VHS (1994, Visionary Communications/Jettisoundz; recorded 1983)
* &quot;Preaching the Blues&quot; VHS (1995, Visionary Communications/Jettisoundz; recorded 1984)
* &quot;Live at the Hacienda 1983/84 &quot; DVD (2006, Cherry Red Films; recorded 1983–1984)
* &quot;Fire of Love&quot; DVD (2007, Cherry Red Films; recorded 1983/1985)

== References ==
== External links ==
*The Gun Club archives
*Discography – no recent updates, but still very detailed
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1398604" start="0" end="12" title="The Gun Club" label="The Gun Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="30" end="39" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686463" start="145" end="163" title="Jeffrey Lee Pierce" label="Jeffrey Lee Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="216" end="225" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="268" end="273" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="275" end="285" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="291" end="304" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627677" start="350" end="361" title="psychobilly" label="psychobilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551540" start="409" end="419" title="punk blues" label="punk blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268922" start="426" end="433" title="cowpunk" label="cowpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="459" end="473" title="Robert Johnson" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q830586" start="598" end="612" title="New York Dolls" label="New York Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686463" start="746" end="764" title="Jeffrey Lee Pierce" label="Jeffrey Lee Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196368" start="885" end="901" title="Kid Congo Powers" label="Kid Congo Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="937" end="944" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741904" start="1025" end="1040" title="The Individuals (New Jersey band)" label="the Individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="1349" end="1366" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q522463" start="1547" end="1559" title="Circle Jerks" label="Circle Jerks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277509" start="1567" end="1579" title="Keith Morris" label="Keith Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519861" start="1845" end="1849" title="Bags (Los Angeles band)" label="Bags"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014953" start="1851" end="1861" title="Rob Graves (guitarist)" label="Rob Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196368" start="1986" end="2002" title="Kid Congo Powers" label="Kid Congo Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942184" start="2374" end="2386" title="Ruby Records" label="Ruby Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606741" start="2402" end="2407" title="Slash Records" label="Slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q631504" start="2453" end="2465" title="Fire of Love (album)" label="Fire of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q331461" start="2519" end="2531" title="Tito Larriva" label="Tito Larriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906767" start="2536" end="2545" title="the Plugz" label="the Plugz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126096" start="2551" end="2559" title="Chris D." label="Chris D."/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="2680" end="2686" title="Haitian Vodou" label="voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274252" start="2698" end="2707" title="EC Comics" label="EC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="2716" end="2721" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2749" end="2757" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523343" start="2925" end="2936" title="the Weirdos" label="the Weirdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q861227" start="3054" end="3065" title="Chris Stein" label="Chris Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088453" start="3105" end="3122" title="Chrysalis Records" label="Chrysalis Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605994" start="3223" end="3228" title="Miami (Gun Club album)" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="3303" end="3315" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262336" start="3416" end="3424" title="45 Grave" label="45 Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q446477" start="3535" end="3552" title="Patricia Morrison" label="Patricia Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517439" start="3562" end="3574" title="Legal Weapon" label="Legal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194731" start="4077" end="4090" title="Jim Duckworth (musician)" label="Jim Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688981" start="4104" end="4134" title="Tav Falco&amp;#x27;s Panther Burns" label="Tav Falco&amp;#x27;s Panther Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928714" start="4187" end="4198" title="Bush Tetras" label="Bush Tetras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020726" start="4308" end="4319" title="Death Party" label="Death Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576146" start="4897" end="4913" title="Spencer P. Jones" label="Spencer P. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743405" start="4931" end="4942" title="the Johnnys" label="the Johnnys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944675" start="5233" end="5252" title="The Las Vegas Story (album)" label="The Las Vegas Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173086" start="5279" end="5289" title="Dave Alvin" label="Dave Alvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="5551" end="5567" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="5600" end="5625" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q751814" start="6173" end="6193" title="the Sisters of Mercy" label="the Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="6198" end="6208" title="The Damned (band)" label="the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="6340" end="6348" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q334648" start="6353" end="6363" title="Roxy Music" label="Roxy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027871" start="6494" end="6508" title="Nick Sanderson (musician)" label="Nick Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102092" start="6512" end="6521" title="Clock DVA" label="Clock DVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051182" start="6726" end="6753" title="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds" label="Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944656" start="6942" end="6953" title="Mother Juno" label="Mother Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304788" start="6991" end="7008" title="Red Rhino Records" label="Red Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939268" start="7034" end="7047" title="Robin Guthrie" label="Robin Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q588820" start="7051" end="7068" title="the Cocteau Twins" label="the Cocteau Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q570675" start="7188" end="7200" title="The Good Son (album)" label="The Good Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="7428" end="7432" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729468" start="7784" end="7797" title="Cypress Grove (musician)" label="Cypress Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160508" start="8010" end="8023" title="Congo Norvell" label="Congo Norvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q611886" start="8138" end="8147" title="Lucky Jim (album)" label="Lucky Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q324929" start="8244" end="8252" title="Die Haut" label="Die Haut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998977" start="8312" end="8328" title="Triple X Records" label="Triple X Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517359" start="8361" end="8372" title="Subway Sect" label="Subway Sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q14158638" start="8377" end="8385" title="JoBoxers" label="JoBoxers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500899" start="8523" end="8531" title="Freeheat" label="Freeheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066866" start="8545" end="8553" title="Jim Reid" label="Jim Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886085" start="8558" end="8567" title="Ben Lurie" label="Ben Lurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126301" start="8571" end="8595" title="the Jesus and Mary Chain" label="the Jesus and Mary Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q130265409" start="8964" end="8974" title="Mike Martt" label="Mike Martt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707232" start="8979" end="9003" title="Tex &amp;amp; the Horseheads" label="Tex &amp;amp; the Horseheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339675" start="9014" end="9026" title="Wayne Kramer" label="Wayne Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q754051" start="9200" end="9209" title="Pennywise (band)" label="Pennywise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827577" start="9259" end="9269" title="Avalon Hollywood" label="The Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="9383" end="9397" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="9471" end="9487" title="brain hemorrhage" label="brain hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="9551" end="9568" title="The White Stripes" label="The White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272031" start="9730" end="9740" title="Jack White (musician)" label="Jack White"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141598" start="9946" end="9961" title="Joakim Thåström" label="Joakim Thåström"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="10089" end="10101" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945006" start="10249" end="10275" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Take Care of You (Mark Lanegan album)" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Take Care of You"/>
<link wikidata="Q720884" start="10303" end="10314" title="Japandroids" label="Japandroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q756219" start="10381" end="10397" title="Celebration Rock" label="Celebration Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686463" start="10553" end="10571" title="Jeffrey Lee Pierce" label="Jeffrey Lee Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196368" start="10665" end="10681" title="Kid Congo Powers" label="Kid Congo Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014953" start="10983" end="10993" title="Rob Graves (guitarist)" label="Rob Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q446477" start="11241" end="11258" title="Patricia Morrison" label="Patricia Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194731" start="11304" end="11317" title="Jim Duckworth (musician)" label="Jim Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928714" start="11354" end="11361" title="Bush Tetras" label="Dee Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576146" start="11508" end="11524" title="Spencer P. Jones" label="Spencer P. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027871" start="11669" end="11683" title="Nick Sanderson (musician)" label="Nick Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q631504" start="12297" end="12309" title="Fire of Love (album)" label="Fire of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942184" start="12323" end="12335" title="Ruby Records" label="Ruby Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606741" start="12336" end="12349" title="Slash Records" label="Slash Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605994" start="12359" end="12364" title="Miami (The Gun Club album)" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944675" start="12402" end="12421" title="The Las Vegas Story (album)" label="The Las Vegas Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944656" start="12477" end="12488" title="Mother Juno" label="Mother Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304788" start="12502" end="12519" title="Red Rhino Records" label="Red Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451422" start="12565" end="12582" title="Fire Records (UK)" label="Fire Records (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q611886" start="12715" end="12724" title="Lucky Jim (album)" label="Lucky Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998977" start="12738" end="12754" title="Triple X Records" label="Triple X Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q126039" start="12859" end="12882" title="Beggars Banquet Records" label="Beggars Banquet Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020726" start="12957" end="12968" title="Death Party" label="Death Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737528" start="13428" end="13460" title="Sympathy for the Record Industry" label="Sympathy for the Record Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="14205" end="14222" title="Cleopatra Records" label="Cleopatra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q97445430" start="14574" end="14589" title="2.13.61 Records" label="2.13.61 Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q603117" start="14641" end="14662" title="Castle Communications" label="Castle Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382351" start="14937" end="14957" title="Keats Rides a Harley" label="Keats Rides a Harley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905064" start="15085" end="15101" title="Big Beat Records (British record label)" label="Big Beat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494570" start="15462" end="15478" title="Cherry Red Records" label="Cherry Red Films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362109" wikidata="Q51511" url="?curid=362109" title="George A. Romero">
<text>George Andrew Romero Jr. (; February 4, 1940 – July 16, 2017) was an American-Canadian film director, writer, editor and actor. Widely regarded as an influential pioneer of the horror film genre and in particular zombie films, he has been called an &quot;icon&quot; and the &quot;Father of the Zombie Film&quot;. The first half of his &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; series, &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; (1968), &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot; (1978), and &quot;Day of the Dead&quot; (1985), are considered three of the best and most influencial horror films ever made, and were major contributors to the image of the zombie in modern culture.

Noted for his frequent social commentary, Romero also had a prolific career outside of zombie films, albeit mostly still within horror: &quot;The Crazies&quot; (1973), &quot;The Amusement Park&quot; (1975), &quot;Martin&quot; (1977), &quot;Creepshow&quot; (1982) and &quot;Monkey Shines&quot; (1988) are all regarded as minor cult works, as is his anthology television series &quot;Tales from the Darkside&quot; (1983-1988). His ventures outside horror include the feminist drama &quot;Season of the Witch&quot; (1972) and the action film &quot;Knightriders&quot; (1981), while his final three films, &quot;Land of the Dead&quot; (2005), &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot; (2007) and &quot;Survival of the Dead&quot; (2009), form the second half of his &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; hexalogy.

==Early life==
Romero was born on February 4, 1940, in the New York City borough of the Bronx, the son of Anne Romero (Dvorsky) and George M. Romero, a commercial artist. His mother was Lithuanian, and his father was from Spain but had emigrated to Cuba as a child. His father has been reported as being born in A Coruña, with his family coming from the Galician town of Neda, although Romero once described his father as of Castilian descent.

Raised in the Parkchester section of the Bronx, he would frequently ride the subway into Manhattan to rent film reels to view at his house. He was one of only two people who repeatedly rented the opera-based film &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot;, the other was future director Martin Scorsese. Romero attended Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.

==Career==
===1960s===

After graduating from college in 1960, Romero began his career shooting short films and TV commercials. One of his early commercial films was a segment for &quot;Mister Rogers&#x27; Neighborhood&quot; in which Fred Rogers underwent a tonsillectomy. With nine friends, including screenwriter John A. Russo, Romero formed &quot;Image Ten Productions&quot; in the late 1960s. This is the production company that produced &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; (1968). Directed by Romero and co-written with John A. Russo, the movie became a cult classic and a defining moment for modern horror cinema.

Among the inspiration for Romero&#x27;s filmmaking, as told to Robert K. Elder in an interview for &quot;The Film That Changed My Life&quot;, was the British film, &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot; (1951), from the Powell and Pressburger team.

===1970s and 1980s===

The three films that Romero created that followed &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;: &quot;There&#x27;s Always Vanilla&quot; (1971), &quot;Jack&#x27;s Wife / Season of the Witch&quot; (1972) and &quot;The Crazies&quot; (1973) were not as well received as &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; or some of his later work. &quot;The Crazies&quot;, dealing with a bio spill that induces an epidemic of homicidal madness, and the critically acclaimed arthouse success &quot;Martin&quot; (1978), a film that deals with the vampire myth, were the two well-known films from this period.

Romero returned to the zombie genre in 1978 with &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot;. Shot on a budget of $1.5 million, the film earned over $55 million internationally and was later named one of the top cult films by &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; in 2003. He made the third entry in his &quot;Dead Series&quot; with &quot;Day of the Dead&quot; in 1985.

Between these two films, Romero shot &quot;Knightriders&quot; (1981), another festival favorite about a group of modern-day jousters who reenact tournaments on motorcycles, and &quot;Creepshow&quot; (1982), written by Stephen King, an anthology of tongue-in-cheek tales modeled after 1950s horror comics. The cult-classic success of &quot;Creepshow&quot; led to the creation of Romero&#x27;s &quot;Tales from the Darkside&quot;, a horror anthology television series that aired from 1983 to 1988. As the decade drew to a close, Romero directed &quot;Monkey Shines&quot; (1988), about a service animal.

===1990s===
Romero updated his original screenplay and executive-produced the 1990 remake of &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; directed by Tom Savini for Columbia/TriStar. Savini is also responsible for the makeup and special effects in many of Romero&#x27;s films including &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot;, &quot;Day of the Dead&quot;, &quot;Creepshow&quot;, and &quot;Monkey Shines&quot;.

The early nineties also featured directorial efforts &quot;Two Evil Eyes&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Due occhi Diabolici&quot;, 1990), an Edgar Allan Poe adaptation in collaboration with Dario Argento and &quot;The Dark Half&quot; (1993) from a novel written by Stephen King. In 1991, he made a cameo appearance in Jonathan Demme&#x27;s Academy Award-winning &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; (1991) as one of Hannibal Lecter&#x27;s jailers

In 1994, Romero shot a short film, &quot;Jacaranda Joe&quot;, about people running into a community of Bigfoot. Filmed at Valencia College in Florida, it was the first film that Romero shot entirely outside of Pittsburgh.

In 1998, Romero produced and directed an unaired pilot about Professional wrestling entitled &quot;Iron City Asskickers&quot;. It was eventually released on DVD and VHS in 2021.

In 1998, he directed a live-action commercial promoting the video game &quot;Resident Evil 2&quot; in Los Angeles. The 30-second advertisement featured the game&#x27;s two main characters, Leon S. Kennedy (portrayed by actor Brad Renfro) and Claire Redfield (Adrienne Frantz), fighting a horde of zombies while in Raccoon City&#x27;s police station. The project was obvious territory for Romero, the &quot;Resident Evil&quot; series has been heavily influenced by the &quot;Dead Series.&quot; The commercial was popular and was shown in the weeks before the game&#x27;s actual release, although a contract dispute prevented it from being shown outside Japan. Capcom was so impressed with Romero&#x27;s work, it was strongly indicated that Romero would direct the first &quot;Resident Evil&quot; film. He declined at first — &quot;I don&#x27;t wanna make another film with zombies in it, and I couldn&#x27;t make a movie based on something that ain&#x27;t mine&quot; — although in later years, he reconsidered and wrote a script for the first movie. It was eventually rejected in favor of Paul W. S. Anderson&#x27;s version.

In the mid 1990s, he wrote a script for a film adaptation of the first original &quot;Goosebumps&quot; book &quot;Welcome to Dead House&quot;. It was eventually rejected altogether, although Romero&#x27;s screenplay is kept archived by The University of Pittsburgh.

===2000s===

2000 saw the release of &quot;Bruiser&quot;, about a man whose face becomes a blank mask. Universal Studios produced and released a 2004 remake of &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot;, with which Romero was not involved. Later that year, Romero kicked off the DC Comics title &quot;Toe Tags&quot; with a six-issue miniseries titled &quot;The Death of Death&quot;. Based on an unused script that Romero had written for his &quot;Dead Series&quot;, the comic miniseries concerns Damien, an intelligent zombie who remembers his former life, struggling to find his identity as he battles armies of both the living and the dead. Typical of a Romero zombie tale, the miniseries includes ample supply of both gore and social commentary (dealing particularly here with corporate greed and terrorism — ideas he would also explore in his next film in the series, &quot;Land of the Dead&quot;). Romero has stated that the miniseries is set in the same kind of world as his &quot;Dead&quot; films, but featured other locales besides Pittsburgh, where the majority of his films take place.

In 2000, Romero directed a Misfits music video, the only one he&#x27;s ever directed, for the song Scream! The Misfits also appeared in Bruiser, performing the songs &quot;Bruiser&quot; and &quot;Fiend Without a Face.&quot;

Romero, who lived in Toronto, directed a fourth &quot;Dead&quot; movie in that city, &quot;Land of the Dead&quot;, released in 2005. The movie&#x27;s working title was &quot;Dead Reckoning.&quot; Actors Simon Baker, Dennis Hopper, Asia Argento, and John Leguizamo starred and the film was released by Universal Pictures (who released the &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot; remake the year before). The film received generally positive reviews.

Romero collaborated with the game company Hip Interactive to create a game called &quot;City of the Dead&quot;, but the project was canceled midway due to the company&#x27;s financial problems.

In June 2006, Romero began his next project, called &quot;Zombisodes&quot;. Broadcast on the Internet, it is a combination of a series of &quot;Making of&quot; shorts and story expansion detailing the work behind the 2007 film &quot;George A. Romero&#x27;s Diary of the Dead&quot;. Shooting began in Toronto in July 2006.

In August 2006, &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; announced that Romero signed on to write and direct &quot;George A. Romero&#x27;s Diary of the Dead&quot;, which follows a group of college students filming a horror movie who proceed to film the events that follow when the dead rise.

After a limited theatrical release, &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot; was released on DVD by Dimension Extreme on May 20, 2008, and later to Blu-ray on October 21, 2008.
Shooting began in Toronto in September 2008 on Romero&#x27;s &quot;Survival of the Dead&quot; (2009). The film was initially reported to be a direct sequel to &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot;, but the film features only Alan van Sprang, who appeared briefly as a rogue National Guard officer, reprising his role from the previous film, and did not retain the first-person camerawork of &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot;. The film centers on two feuding families taking very different approaches in dealing with the living dead on a small coastal island. The film premiered at the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival. Prior to the May 28, 2010, theatrical release in the United States, &quot;Survival of the Dead&quot; was made available to video on demand and was aired as a special one-night showing on May 26, 2010, on HDNet.

Some critics have seen social commentary in much of Romero&#x27;s work. They view &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; as a film made in reaction to the turbulent 1960s, &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot; as a satire on consumerism, &quot;Day of the Dead&quot; as a study of the conflict between science and the military, &quot;Land of the Dead&quot; as an examination of class conflict, &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot; as a film made in reaction to the &quot;emerging media&quot; and &quot;Survival of the Dead&quot; as a study on war and conflict.

===2010s===

In 2010, Romero stated that he had plans for two more &quot;Dead&quot; movies which would be connected to &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot; and they would be made depending on how successful &quot;Survival of the Dead&quot; was. Romero, however, said that his next project would not involve zombies and he was going for the scare factor, but offered no further details.

Romero made an appearance in the second downloadable map pack called &quot;Escalation&quot; for the video game &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops&quot;. He appears as himself in the zombies map &quot;Call of the Dead&quot; as a non-playable enemy character. Romero is featured alongside actors Sarah Michelle Gellar, Danny Trejo, Michael Rooker, and Robert Englund, all of the four being playable characters. He is portrayed as a powerful &quot;boss&quot; zombie armed with a movie studio light.

In 2012, Romero returned to video games recording his voice for &quot;Zombie Squash&quot; as the lead villain, Dr. B. E. Vil. &quot;Zombie Squash HD Free&quot; game was released by ACW Games for the iPad in November 2012.

In 2014, Marvel Comics began releasing &quot;Empire of the Dead&quot;, a 15-issue miniseries written by Romero. The series is broken up into three acts, five issues each, and features not only zombies but also vampires.

A prequel comic book series based on Romero&#x27;s unproduced zombie film idea &quot;Road of the Dead&quot; was announced by IDW in July 2018. The 3-part mini-series was released in December 2018.

In April 2021, it was announced that Romero&#x27;s unproduced film treatment for &quot;Twilight of the Dead&quot; was put back into development under the supervision of Suzanne Romero, with co-writer Paolo Zelati finishing the script. Suzanne told &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;, &quot;This is the film he wanted to make. And while someone else will carry the torch as the director, it is very much a George A. Romero film.&quot; In August 2023, the film was announced to start production in fall 2023 once the current SAG-AFTRA strike comes to an end. A month later, it was announced that the film would be directed by Brad Anderson.

==Personal life==
Romero was married three times. He married his first wife, Nancy, in 1971. They divorced in 1978. They had one child together, Cameron, who later became a filmmaker. and also worked in collaboration with Sergey Titov to produce the game &quot;Romero&#x27;s Aftermath&quot;, a spinoff of &quot;&quot; and was released by Free Reign Entertainment for PC on September 25, 2015.

Romero met his second wife, actress Christine Forrest, on the set of &quot;Season of the Witch&quot; (1972), and they married in 1981. She had bit parts in most of his films. They had two children together, Andrew and Tina Romero. The couple divorced in 2010 after three decades of marriage.

Romero met Suzanne Desrocher while filming &quot;Land of the Dead&quot; (2005), and they married in September 2011 at Martha&#x27;s Vineyard and lived in Toronto. He acquired Canadian citizenship in 2009, becoming a dual Canada-U.S. citizen.

==Death==
On July 16, 2017, Romero died following a &quot;brief but aggressive battle with lung cancer&quot;, according to a statement by his longtime producing partner, Peter Grunwald. Romero died while listening to the score of one of his favorite films, &quot;The Quiet Man&quot; (1952), with his wife, Suzanne Desrocher Romero, and daughter from his second marriage, Tina Romero, at his side. He was buried at Toronto Necropolis.

==Influences==
Romero ranked his top ten films of all time for the 2002 &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; Greatest Films Poll. They are &quot;The Brothers Karamazov&quot;, &quot;Casablanca&quot;, &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;, &quot;High Noon&quot;, &quot;King Solomon&#x27;s Mines&quot;, &quot;North by Northwest&quot; (a film on which a teenaged Romero worked as a gofer), &quot;The Quiet Man&quot;, &quot;Repulsion&quot;, &quot;Touch of Evil&quot; and &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot;. Romero listed the films in alphabetical order, with special placement given to Michael Powell&#x27;s &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot;, which he cites as &quot;my favorite film of all time, the movie that made me want to make movies.&quot;

==Awards and nominations==
On October 27, 2009, Romero was honored with the Mastermind Award at Spike TV&#x27;s Scream 2009. The tribute was presented by longtime Romero fan Quentin Tarantino, who stated in his speech that the &quot;A&quot; in George A. Romero stood for &quot;A Fucking Genius.&quot;

In 2016, he was honored with the Ted M. Larson Award at the Fargo Film Festival for his contribution to cinema.

==Legacy==
Regarded as the &quot;Godfather of the Dead&quot;, as well as the &quot;Father of the Modern Movie Zombie&quot;, critic Owen Gleiberman said of Romero that he was &quot;a maestro of zombie terror who created the ultimate horror-movie metaphor&quot; and remarked that &quot;the real metaphor isn&#x27;t only about Vietnam, or capitalism, or even disease, or anything else that you can stuff into a fortune cookie. It&#x27;s about something more basic but ethereal, something that you can sense without putting it into words: the hidden aggression we all feel deep down, as the price of too much civilization.&quot;

In 2010, writer and actor Mark Gatiss interviewed Romero for his BBC documentary series &quot;A History of Horror&quot;, in which he appears in the third episode. &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;. Romero&#x27;s influence, and that of &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;, is widely seen among numerous filmmakers and artists, in particular those who have worked in the zombie subgenre, including comics writer Robert Kirkman, novelist Seth Grahame-Smith, and filmmakers John Carpenter, Edgar Wright and Jack Thomas Smith.

The season eight premiere episode &quot;Mercy&quot; of the zombie-based show &quot;The Walking Dead&quot;, the first to air after Romero&#x27;s death, dedicated the episode to Romero; showrunner Scott M. Gimple said that the show &quot;owes a great debt&quot; to Romero for his impact on popular culture.

In October 2017, the video game &quot;Dying Light&quot; included a mural of George A. Romero near one of the many in-game safehouses.

In May 2019, the University of Pittsburgh announced it had acquired George Romero&#x27;s archives and that a multimedia exhibit be created and open to the public in the university&#x27;s Hillman Library.

In September 2019, the &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops 4&quot; Zombies map &quot;Tag der Toten&quot; pays homage to Romero by including his pair of glasses that the player can interact with, each character giving remorse for his passing. The map is a re-imagining of the &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops&quot; Zombies map &quot;Call of the Dead&quot;, which Romero made an appearance on. The name of the map is German for Day of the Dead, which is a reference to Romero&#x27;s movie of the same name.

===The George A. Romero Foundation===
The George A. Romero Foundation is a nonprofit organization dedicated to preserving and promoting Romero&#x27;s legacy. Founded in 2018 by Romero&#x27;s wife Suzanne Desrocher-Romero, the Foundation&#x27;s mission is to advance the causes for which George Romero was a champion – creativity within the horror genre and independent filmmaking in general – as well as preserving and documenting the history of the genre in all forms and contributing to its future by encouraging new generations of filmmakers, artists, and creators.

==Bibliography==
# &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot; (with Susanna Sparrow; movie tie-in), 1979.
# &quot;Martin&quot; (with Susanna Sparrow; movie tie-in), 1984.
# &quot;Toe Tags&quot; #1-6 (&quot;The Death of Death&quot;; DC Comics), 2004–2005.
# &quot;Empire of the Dead&quot; (Marvel Comics), 2014–2015.
# &quot;Nights of the Living Dead&quot; co-edited by Jonathan Maberry and George Romero (St. Martin&#x27;s Griffin), 2017.
# &quot;The Living Dead&quot; (with Daniel Kraus), 2020.
# &quot;Pay the Piper&quot; (with Daniel Kraus), 2024.

===Forewords written by Romero===
# &quot;Bizarro!&quot; by Tom Savini (foreword), 1984. 
# &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; edited by John Skipp and Craig Spector (foreword), 1989.
# &quot;ZOMBIES! An Illustrated History of the Undead&quot; Foreword by George A. Romero.
# &quot;The Extraordinary Adventures of Dog Mendonça and Pizzaboy II – Apocalipse&quot; by Filipe Melo and Juan Cavia (foreword), 2011.

==Filmography==
==See also==
* George A. Romero&#x27;s unrealized projects

==References==
==Further reading==
* Ork, William Terry and Abagnalo, George, &quot;Night of the Living Dead--Interview with George A. Romero,&quot; &quot;Interview Magazine&quot; 1(4) (1969), 21-22.
* Dupuis, Joachim Daniel (2014), George A. Romero and the zombies, Autopsy of a living-dead. Paris: L&#x27;Harmattan (in French).
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* George A. Romero Archival Collection
* &quot;New York Times&quot; short bio 
* Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database
* George Romero @ THE DEUCE: Grindhouse Cinema Database
* 

Interviews
* Simon Pegg interviews George A. Romero
* &quot;Speaking of the Dead&quot; – An interview with George A Romero (July 2009)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="0" end="24" title="George A. Romero" label="George Andrew Romero Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="177" end="188" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072049" start="213" end="224" title="zombie film" label="zombie film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652860" start="335" end="378" title="Night of the Living Dead (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Night of the Living Dead&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q623051" start="386" end="410" title="Night of the Living Dead" label="Night of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219155" start="431" end="447" title="Dawn of the Dead (1978 film)" label="Dawn of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219170" start="472" end="487" title="Day of the Dead (1985 film)" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="628" end="634" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697780" start="678" end="695" title="social commentary" label="social commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q627060" start="797" end="808" title="The Crazies (1973 film)" label="The Crazies"/>
<link wikidata="Q106310944" start="829" end="847" title="The Amusement Park" label="The Amusement Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903317" start="868" end="874" title="Martin (1978 film)" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q744102" start="895" end="904" title="Creepshow" label="Creepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q198557" start="928" end="941" title="Monkey Shines (film)" label="Monkey Shines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="981" end="991" title="cult film" label="cult works"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="1003" end="1012" title="Anthology series" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759140" start="1037" end="1060" title="Tales from the Darkside" label="Tales from the Darkside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="1120" end="1128" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="1129" end="1134" title="Drama film" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520777" start="1141" end="1160" title="Season of the Witch (1972 film)" label="Season of the Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="1182" end="1193" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673630" start="1200" end="1212" title="Knightriders" label="Knightriders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="1262" end="1278" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209189" start="1299" end="1316" title="Diary of the Dead" label="Diary of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277329" start="1340" end="1360" title="Survival of the Dead" label="Survival of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1535" end="1544" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497126" start="1603" end="1617" title="commercial art" label="commercial art"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="1637" end="1646" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1673" end="1678" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1700" end="1704" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="1763" end="1771" title="A Coruña" label="A Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="1805" end="1813" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635664" start="1822" end="1826" title="Neda, Galicia" label="Neda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573855" start="1876" end="1885" title="Castilian people" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138200" start="1910" end="1921" title="Parkchester" label="Parkchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="1933" end="1942" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1985" end="1994" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420806" start="2003" end="2012" title="film reel" label="film reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249349" start="2115" end="2136" title="The Tales of Hoffmann (film)" label="The Tales of Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="2174" end="2189" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="2207" end="2233" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="2237" end="2247" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234484" start="2436" end="2468" title="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood" label="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275768" start="2484" end="2495" title="Fred Rogers" label="Fred Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170381" start="2508" end="2521" title="tonsillectomy" label="tonsillectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460466" start="2565" end="2578" title="John A. Russo" label="John A. Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623051" start="2698" end="2722" title="Night of the Living Dead" label="Night of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="2810" end="2822" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346220" start="2935" end="2950" title="Robert K. Elder" label="Robert K. Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733861" start="2977" end="3006" title="The Film That Changed My Life" label="The Film That Changed My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249349" start="3036" end="3069" title="The Tales of Hoffmann (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400831" start="3087" end="3109" title="Powell and Pressburger" label="Powell and Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700297" start="3234" end="3261" title="There&amp;#x27;s Always Vanilla" label="There&amp;#x27;s Always Vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520777" start="3282" end="3320" title="Season of the Witch (1972 film)" label="Jack&amp;#x27;s Wife / Season of the Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q627060" start="3344" end="3355" title="The Crazies (1973 film)" label="The Crazies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="3588" end="3596" title="arthouse" label="arthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903317" start="3611" end="3617" title="Martin (1978 film)" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="3659" end="3666" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="3745" end="3751" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q219155" start="3777" end="3793" title="Dawn of the Dead (1978 film)" label="Dawn of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="3919" end="3928" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="3939" end="3959" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q219170" start="4041" end="4056" title="Day of the Dead (1985 film)" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673630" start="4116" end="4128" title="Knightriders" label="Knightriders"/>
<link wikidata="Q744102" start="4256" end="4265" title="Creepshow" label="Creepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="4291" end="4303" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759140" start="4471" end="4494" title="Tales from the Darkside" label="Tales from the Darkside"/>
<link wikidata="Q198557" start="4622" end="4635" title="Monkey Shines (film)" label="Monkey Shines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827808" start="4658" end="4672" title="service animal" label="service animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q545417" start="4774" end="4798" title="Night of the Living Dead (1990 film)" label="Night of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q152309" start="4817" end="4827" title="Tom Savini" label="Tom Savini"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="4832" end="4840" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q651454" start="4841" end="4848" title="TriStar Pictures" label="TriStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118787" start="5126" end="5139" title="Two Evil Eyes" label="Two Evil Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="5197" end="5212" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q53011" start="5246" end="5259" title="Dario Argento" label="Dario Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q940066" start="5270" end="5283" title="The Dark Half (film)" label="The Dark Half"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="5321" end="5333" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="5354" end="5370" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987" start="5374" end="5388" title="Jonathan Demme" label="Jonathan Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q133654" start="5424" end="5448" title="The Silence of the Lambs (film)" label="The Silence of the Lambs"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="5472" end="5487" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107304553" start="5545" end="5558" title="Jacaranda Joe" label="Jacaranda Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="5607" end="5614" title="Bigfoot" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910651" start="5626" end="5642" title="Valencia College" label="Valencia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="5788" end="5810" title="Professional wrestling" label="Professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148839" start="5826" end="5846" title="Iron City Asskickers" label="Iron City Asskickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="5929" end="5940" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q733992" start="5983" end="5998" title="Resident Evil 2" label="Resident Evil 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138965" start="6095" end="6110" title="Leon S. Kennedy" label="Leon S. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152767" start="6131" end="6142" title="Brad Renfro" label="Brad Renfro"/>
<link wikidata="Q615565" start="6148" end="6163" title="Claire Redfield" label="Claire Redfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q253334" start="6165" end="6180" title="Adrienne Frantz" label="Adrienne Frantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q220260" start="6220" end="6232" title="Resident Evil" label="Raccoon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q220260" start="6312" end="6325" title="Resident Evil" label="Resident Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="6565" end="6571" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q153484" start="6681" end="6694" title="Resident Evil (film)" label="Resident Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q380608" start="6994" end="7013" title="Paul W. S. Anderson" label="Paul W. S. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15532572" start="7102" end="7133" title="Goosebumps (original series)" label="original &amp;quot;Goosebumps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210399" start="7145" end="7166" title="Welcome to Dead House" label="Welcome to Dead House"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="7267" end="7295" title="The University of Pittsburgh" label="The University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723328" start="7341" end="7348" title="Bruiser (2000 film)" label="Bruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="7401" end="7418" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q749011" start="7464" end="7480" title="Dawn of the Dead (2004 film)" label="Dawn of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="7563" end="7572" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597163" start="8005" end="8009" title="Graphic violence" label="gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697780" start="8014" end="8031" title="social commentary" label="social commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728574" start="8064" end="8079" title="corporate greed" label="corporate greed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="8162" end="8178" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q311785" start="8408" end="8415" title="Misfits (band)" label="Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027341" start="8480" end="8487" title="Scream! (Misfits song)" label="Scream!"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="8627" end="8634" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="8697" end="8713" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q192021" start="8809" end="8820" title="Simon Baker" label="Simon Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711" start="8822" end="8835" title="Dennis Hopper" label="Dennis Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q232052" start="8837" end="8849" title="Asia Argento" label="Asia Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q295233" start="8855" end="8869" title="John Leguizamo" label="John Leguizamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="8907" end="8925" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124007" start="9133" end="9149" title="City of the Dead (video game)" label="City of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209189" start="9473" end="9514" title="Diary of the Dead" label="George A. Romero&amp;#x27;s Diary of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="9585" end="9607" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="9932" end="9935" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="9987" end="9994" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277329" start="10083" end="10103" title="Survival of the Dead" label="Survival of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q948310" start="10233" end="10248" title="Alan van Sprang" label="Alan van Sprang"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="10594" end="10629" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="10754" end="10769" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655211" start="10835" end="10840" title="AXS TV" label="HDNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="11047" end="11053" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="11057" end="11068" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="11209" end="11223" title="class conflict" label="class conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="11295" end="11309" title="New media" label="emerging media"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="11367" end="11370" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q180684" start="11375" end="11383" title="Conflict (process)" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11883" end="11906" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q180665" start="12055" end="12076" title="Sarah Michelle Gellar" label="Sarah Michelle Gellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q223830" start="12078" end="12089" title="Danny Trejo" label="Danny Trejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q525065" start="12091" end="12105" title="Michael Rooker" label="Michael Rooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q310389" start="12111" end="12125" title="Robert Englund" label="Robert Englund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="12457" end="12461" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="12490" end="12503" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149656" start="12526" end="12544" title="Empire of the Dead" label="Empire of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="12691" end="12698" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146596" start="12827" end="12830" title="IDW Publishing" label="IDW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652860" start="12987" end="13007" title="Twilight of the Dead (film)" label="Twilight of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q120637995" start="13423" end="13432" title="2023 SAG-AFTRA strike" label="SAG-AFTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q598238" start="13524" end="13537" title="Brad Anderson (director)" label="Brad Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107138639" start="13970" end="13987" title="Christine Forrest" label="Christine Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520777" start="14009" end="14028" title="Season of the Witch (1972 film)" label="Season of the Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14786283" start="14077" end="14085" title="bit part" label="bit part"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="14276" end="14292" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q49148" start="14345" end="14367" title="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard" label="Martha&amp;#x27;s Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="14381" end="14388" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="14561" end="14572" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q470560" start="14733" end="14746" title="The Quiet Man" label="The Quiet Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826451" start="14884" end="14902" title="Toronto Necropolis" label="Toronto Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="14983" end="15000" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q369028" start="15043" end="15065" title="The Brothers Karamazov (1958 film)" label="The Brothers Karamazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="15079" end="15089" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="15103" end="15118" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q245208" start="15132" end="15141" title="High Noon" label="High Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471671" start="15155" end="15180" title="King Solomon&amp;#x27;s Mines (1950 film)" label="King Solomon&amp;#x27;s Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q223139" start="15194" end="15212" title="North by Northwest" label="North by Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9284559" start="15266" end="15271" title="gofer" label="gofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q470560" start="15280" end="15293" title="The Quiet Man" label="The Quiet Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q954816" start="15307" end="15316" title="Repulsion (film)" label="Repulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q778161" start="15330" end="15343" title="Touch of Evil" label="Touch of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249349" start="15360" end="15381" title="The Tales of Hoffmann (1951 film)" label="The Tales of Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="15468" end="15482" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065767" start="15742" end="15753" title="Scream Awards" label="Scream 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="15804" end="15821" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435124" start="15992" end="16011" title="Fargo Film Festival" label="Fargo Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="16176" end="16191" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q560286" start="16697" end="16708" title="Mark Gatiss" label="Mark Gatiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657328" start="16765" end="16784" title="A History of Horror" label="A History of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="16840" end="16857" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q311891" start="17078" end="17092" title="Robert Kirkman" label="Robert Kirkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q311591" start="17103" end="17121" title="Seth Grahame-Smith" label="Seth Grahame-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="17138" end="17152" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q522057" start="17154" end="17166" title="Edgar Wright" label="Edgar Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q23418923" start="17171" end="17188" title="Jack Thomas Smith" label="Jack Thomas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q30939441" start="17195" end="17207" title="The Walking Dead season 8" label="season eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740334" start="17231" end="17236" title="Mercy (The Walking Dead)" label="Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q232737" start="17274" end="17290" title="The Walking Dead (TV series)" label="The Walking Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260865" start="17386" end="17401" title="Scott M. Gimple" label="Scott M. Gimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415292" start="17535" end="17546" title="Dying Light" label="Dying Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="17649" end="17673" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763359" start="17819" end="17834" title="Hillman Library" label="Hillman Library"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17866" end="17891" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18112" end="18135" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="18409" end="18431" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="19122" end="19131" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149656" start="19153" end="19171" title="Empire of the Dead" label="Empire of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="19179" end="19192" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183416" start="19259" end="19275" title="Jonathan Maberry" label="Jonathan Maberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="19295" end="19320" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Griffin" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649536" start="19337" end="19352" title="The Living Dead (novel)" label="The Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062522" start="19365" end="19377" title="Daniel Kraus (author)" label="Daniel Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152309" start="19502" end="19512" title="Tom Savini" label="Tom Savini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794445" start="19540" end="19556" title="Book of the Dead (anthology)" label="Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258107" start="19573" end="19583" title="John Skipp" label="John Skipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16216547" start="19801" end="19812" title="Filipe Melo (writer)" label="Filipe Melo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202486" start="19817" end="19827" title="Juan Cavia" label="Juan Cavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825087" start="19878" end="19921" title="George A. Romero&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects" label="George A. Romero&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362110" wikidata="Q595758" url="?curid=362110" title="MinGW">
<text>MinGW (&quot;Minimalist GNU for Windows&quot;), formerly mingw32, is a free and open source software development environment to create Microsoft Windows applications.

MinGW includes a port of the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC), GNU Binutils for Windows (assembler, linker, archive manager), a set of freely distributable Windows specific header files and static import libraries which enable the use of the Windows API, a Windows native build of the GNU Project&#x27;s GNU Debugger, and miscellaneous utilities.

MinGW does not rely on third-party C runtime dynamic-link library (DLL) files, and because the runtime libraries are not distributed using the GNU General Public License (GPL), it is not necessary to distribute the source code with the programs produced, unless a GPL library is used elsewhere in the program.

MinGW can be run either on the native Microsoft Windows platform, cross-hosted on Linux (or other Unix), or &quot;cross-native&quot; on Cygwin. Although programs produced under MinGW are 32-bit executables, they can be used both in 32 and 64-bit versions of Windows.

The development of the MinGW project has been forked with the creation in 2005–2008 of an alternative project called Mingw-w64.

==History==
MinGW was originally called mingw32 (&quot;Minimalist GNU for W32&quot;), following the GNU convention whereby Windows is shortened as &quot;W32&quot;. The numbers were dropped in order to avoid the implication that it would be limited to producing 32-bit binaries. Colin Peters authored the initial release in 1998, consisting only of a Cygwin port of GCC. Jan-Jaap van der Heijden created a Windows-native port of GCC and added binutils and make. Mumit Khan later took over development, adding more Windows-specific features to the package, including the Windows system headers by Anders Norlander. In 2000, the project was moved to SourceForge in order to solicit more assistance from the community and centralize its development.

MinGW was selected as Project of the Month at SourceForge for September 2005.

MSYS (a contraction of &quot;Minimal System&quot;) was introduced as a Bourne shell command line interpreter system with the aim of better interoperability with native Windows software.

In 2018, following a disagreement with SourceForge about the administration of its mailing lists, MinGW migrated to OSDN.

=== Fork ===

In 2007, a fork of the original MinGW called Mingw-w64 appeared in order to provide support for 64 bits and new APIs. It has since then gained widespread use and distribution. MSYS2 (&quot;minimal system 2&quot;) is a software distribution and a development platform for Microsoft Windows, based on Mingw-w64 and Cygwin, that helps to deploy code from the Unix world on Windows.

==Programming language support==
Most languages supported by GCC are supported on the MinGW port as well. These include C, C++, Objective-C, Objective-C++, Fortran, and Ada. The GCC runtime libraries are used (libstdc++ for C++, libgfortran for Fortran, etc.).

MinGW links by default to the Windows OS component library MSVCRT, which is the C library that Visual C++ version 6.0 linked to (the initial target was CRTDLL), which was released in 1998 and therefore does not include support for C99 features, or even all of C89. While targeting MSVCRT yields programs that require no additional runtime redistributables to be installed, the lack of support for C99 has caused porting problems, particularly where printf-style conversion specifiers are concerned. These issues have been partially mitigated by the implementation of a C99 compatibility library, &quot;libmingwex&quot;, but the extensive work required is far from complete and may never be fully realized. Mingw-w64 has resolved these issues, and provides fully POSIX compliant printf functionality.

==Link compatibility==
Binaries (executables or DLLs) generated with different C++ compilers (like MinGW and Visual Studio) are in general not link compatible. However, compiled C code is link compatible.

==Components==
The MinGW project maintains and distributes a number of different core components and supplementary packages, including various ports of the GNU toolchain, such as GCC and binutils, translated into equivalent packages. These utilities can be used from the Windows command line or integrated into an IDE. Packages may be installed using the command line via mingw-get.

MinGW supports dynamic libraries named according to the codice_1 and codice_2 conventions, as well as static libraries following the codice_3 naming convention common on Unix and Unix-like systems.

In addition, a component of MinGW known as &quot;MSYS&quot; (&quot;minimal system&quot;) provides Windows ports of a lightweight Unix-like shell environment including rxvt and a selection of POSIX tools sufficient to enable autoconf scripts to run, but it does not provide a C compiler or a case-sensitive file system.

&quot;mingwPORTs&quot; are user contributed additions to the MinGW software collection. Rather than providing these &quot;add-ons&quot; as precompiled binary packages, they are supplied in the form of interactive Bourne shell scripts, which guide the end user through the process of automatically downloading and patching original source code, then building and installing it. Users who wish to build any application from a mingwPORT must first install both MinGW and MSYS.

The implementation of Windows system headers and static import libraries are released under a permissive license, while the GNU ports are provided under the GNU General Public License. Binary downloads of both the complete MSYS package and individual MinGW GNU utilities are available from the MinGW site.

==Comparison with Cygwin==
Although both Cygwin and MinGW can be used to port Unix software to Windows, they have different approaches: Cygwin aims to provide a complete POSIX layer comprising a full implementation of all major Unix system calls and libraries. Compatibility is considered a higher priority than performance. On the other hand, MinGW&#x27;s priorities are simplicity and performance. As such, it does not provide certain POSIX APIs which cannot easily be implemented using the Windows API, such as codice_4, codice_5 and codice_6. Applications written using a cross-platform library that has itself been ported to MinGW, such as SDL, wxWidgets, Qt, or GTK, will usually compile as easily in MinGW as they would in Cygwin.

Windows programs written with Cygwin run on top of a copylefted compatibility DLL that must be distributed with the program, unless statically linked. If dynamically linked, the program must also provide information on where to obtain Cygwin source. MinGW does not require a compatibility layer, since MinGW-based programs are compiled with direct calls to Windows APIs.

The combination of MinGW and MSYS provides a small, self-contained environment that can be loaded onto removable media without leaving entries in the registry or files on the computer.

It is also possible to cross-compile Windows applications with MinGW-GCC under POSIX systems. This means that developers do not need a Windows installation with MSYS to compile software that will run on Windows with or without Cygwin.

== See also ==
*Cygwin
*Windows Subsystem for Linux
*Mingw-w64

==References==
==External links==
* Official MinGW website
* nuwen 64-bit MinGW distro - maintained by a Microsoft employee
* MXE - Makefiles to build MinGW on Unix and many common dependencies libraries, pre-built packages available</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595758" start="0" end="5" title="MinGW" label="MinGW"/>
<link wikidata="Q595758" start="57" end="64" title="MinGW" label="mingw32"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="71" end="91" title="Free and open-source software" label="free and open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="92" end="112" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="135" end="152" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="185" end="189" title="porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="197" end="220" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GNU Compiler Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144975" start="228" end="240" title="GNU Binutils" label="GNU Binutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="254" end="263" title="assembler (computing)" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q523796" start="265" end="271" title="linker (computing)" label="linker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351368" start="273" end="288" title="Archive file" label="archive manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q98448101" start="338" end="349" title="header file" label="header file"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276556" start="355" end="378" title="Static library" label="static import libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="407" end="418" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598" start="450" end="461" title="GNU Project" label="GNU Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q464113" start="469" end="481" title="GNU Debugger" label="GNU Debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784741" start="536" end="547" title="Third-party software component" label="third-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="548" end="549" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444922" start="550" end="557" title="Runtime library" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q380319" start="558" end="578" title="dynamic-link library" label="dynamic-link library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="656" end="682" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="728" end="739" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="906" end="911" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q216192" start="960" end="966" title="Cygwin" label="Cygwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="1138" end="1144" title="software forking" label="forked"/>
<link wikidata="Q83868416" start="1209" end="1218" title="Mingw-w64" label="Mingw-w64"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="1482" end="1497" title="32-bit application" label="32-bit binaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144975" start="1663" end="1671" title="binutils" label="binutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q300867" start="1676" end="1680" title="make (software)" label="make"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="1868" end="1879" title="SourceForge" label="SourceForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q844595" start="2118" end="2130" title="Bourne shell" label="Bourne shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565108" start="2350" end="2354" title="OSDN" label="OSDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q83868416" start="2416" end="2425" title="Mingw-w64" label="Mingw-w64"/>
<link wikidata="Q83868416" start="2547" end="2552" title="MSYS2" label="MSYS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2642" end="2659" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q216192" start="2684" end="2690" title="Cygwin" label="Cygwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="2727" end="2731" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="2871" end="2872" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="2874" end="2877" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="2879" end="2890" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="2892" end="2905" title="Objective-C++" label="Objective-C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="2907" end="2914" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="2920" end="2923" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3072" end="3078" title="Microsoft Windows library files#MSVCRT.DLL and MSVCPP.DLL" label="MSVCRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q847296" start="3108" end="3118" title="Visual C++" label="Visual C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151257" start="3244" end="3247" title="C99" label="C99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931402" start="3273" end="3276" title="ANSI C" label="C89"/>
<link wikidata="Q838016" start="3462" end="3468" title="printf" label="printf"/>
<link wikidata="Q83868416" start="3719" end="3728" title="Mingw-w64" label="Mingw-w64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144323" start="4176" end="4189" title="GNU toolchain" label="GNU toolchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="4199" end="4202" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144975" start="4207" end="4215" title="binutils" label="binutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q310897" start="4291" end="4311" title="Windows command line" label="Windows command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="4334" end="4337" title="integrated development environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="4742" end="4747" title="shell (computer science)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q290098" start="4770" end="4774" title="rxvt" label="rxvt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="4794" end="4799" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336937" start="4827" end="4835" title="autoconf" label="autoconf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4894" end="4920" title="Case sensitivity#In filesystems" label="case-sensitive file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q844595" start="5136" end="5148" title="Bourne shell" label="Bourne shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437937" start="5492" end="5510" title="permissive license" label="permissive license"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="5555" end="5581" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="5875" end="5880" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="6142" end="6147" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="6281" end="6295" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q727439" start="6350" end="6353" title="Simple DirectMedia Layer" label="SDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q284982" start="6355" end="6364" title="wxWidgets" label="wxWidgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="6366" end="6368" title="Qt (toolkit)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="6373" end="6376" title="GTK" label="GTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q133475" start="6497" end="6505" title="copyleft" label="copyleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q380319" start="6522" end="6525" title="Microsoft Dynamic Link Library" label="DLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q907342" start="6719" end="6738" title="compatibility layer" label="compatibility layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q463244" start="6966" end="6974" title="Windows Registry" label="registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416699" start="7025" end="7038" title="cross compiler" label="cross-compile"/>
<link wikidata="Q216192" start="7254" end="7260" title="Cygwin" label="Cygwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23894260" start="7262" end="7289" title="Windows Subsystem for Linux" label="Windows Subsystem for Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q83868416" start="7291" end="7300" title="Mingw-w64" label="Mingw-w64"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362116" wikidata="Q963903" url="?curid=362116" title="Robinson projection">
<text>The Robinson projection is a map projection of a world map that shows the entire world at once. It was specifically created in an attempt to find a good compromise to the problem of readily showing the whole globe as a flat image.

The Robinson projection was devised by Arthur H. Robinson in 1963 in response to an appeal from the Rand McNally company, which has used the projection in general-purpose world maps since that time. Robinson published details of the projection&#x27;s construction in 1974. The National Geographic Society (NGS) began using the Robinson projection for general-purpose world maps in 1988, replacing the Van der Grinten projection. In 1998, NGS abandoned the Robinson projection for that use in favor of the Winkel tripel projection, as the latter &quot;reduces the distortion of land masses as they near the poles&quot;.

==Strengths and weaknesses==
The Robinson projection is neither equal-area nor conformal, abandoning both for a compromise. The creator felt that this produced a better overall view than could be achieved by adhering to either. The meridians curve gently, avoiding extremes, but thereby stretch the poles into long lines instead of leaving them as points.

Hence, distortion close to the poles is severe, but quickly declines to moderate levels moving away from them. The straight parallels imply severe angular distortion at the high latitudes toward the outer edges of the map – a fault inherent in any pseudocylindrical projection. However, at the time it was developed, the projection effectively met Rand McNally&#x27;s goal to produce appealing depictions of the entire world.

==Formulation==
The projection is defined by the table:

The table is indexed by latitude at 5-degree intervals; intermediate values are calculated using interpolation. Robinson did not specify any particular interpolation method, but it is reported that others used either Aitken interpolation (with polynomials of unknown degrees) or cubic splines while analyzing area deformation on the Robinson projection. The &quot;X&quot; column is the ratio of the length of the parallel to the length of the equator; the &quot;Y&quot; column can be multiplied by 0.2536 to obtain the ratio of the distance of that parallel from the equator to the length of the equator.

Coordinates of points on a map are computed as follows:

formula_1
where &quot;R&quot; is the radius of the globe at the scale of the map, &quot;λ&quot; is the longitude of the point to plot, and &quot;λ&quot;0 is the central meridian chosen for the map (both &quot;λ&quot; and &quot;λ&quot;0 are expressed in radians).

Simple consequences of these formulas are:
* With &quot;x&quot; computed as a constant multiplier to the meridian across the entire parallel, meridians of longitude are thus equally spaced along the parallel.
* With &quot;y&quot; having no dependency on longitude, parallels are straight horizontal lines.

== Applications ==
The Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook uses the Robinson projection in its political and physical world maps.

The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control recommends using the Robinson projection for mapping the whole world.

==See also==

* List of map projections
* Cartography
* Kavrayskiy VII

==References==
== Further reading ==
*Arthur H. Robinson (1974). &quot;A New Map Projection: Its Development and Characteristics&quot;. In: &quot;International Yearbook of Cartography&quot;. Vol 14, 1974, pp. 145–155.
*John B. Garver Jr. (1988). &quot;New Perspective on the World&quot;. In: &quot;National Geographic&quot;, December 1988, pp. 911–913.
*John P. Snyder (1993). &quot;Flattening The Earth—2000 Years of Map Projections&quot;, The University of Chicago Press. pp. 214–216.

==External links==

* Table of examples and properties of all common projections, from radicalcartography.net
* Numerical evaluation of the Robinson projection, from Cartography and Geographic Information Science, April, 2004 by Cengizhan Ipbuker</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963903" start="4" end="23" title="Robinson projection" label="Robinson projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q186386" start="29" end="43" title="map projection" label="map projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q653848" start="49" end="58" title="world map" label="world map"/>
<link wikidata="Q709647" start="271" end="289" title="Arthur H. Robinson" label="Arthur H. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586156" start="332" end="344" title="Rand McNally" label="Rand McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="509" end="536" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026877" start="633" end="659" title="Van der Grinten projection" label="Van der Grinten projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q861364" start="737" end="761" title="Winkel tripel projection" label="Winkel tripel projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q761699" start="916" end="926" title="Equal-area projection" label="equal-area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522071" start="931" end="940" title="conformal map projection" label="conformal"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="1084" end="1092" title="Meridian (geography)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="1790" end="1803" title="interpolation" label="interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60766767" start="1910" end="1930" title="Aitken interpolation" label="Aitken interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537263" start="1972" end="1984" title="cubic spline" label="cubic spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="2609" end="2615" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="2950" end="2977" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="2978" end="2992" title="The World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918501" start="3069" end="3119" title="European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control" label="European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434286" start="3207" end="3230" title="List of map projections" label="List of map projections"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="3233" end="3244" title="Cartography" label="Cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737359" start="3247" end="3261" title="Kavrayskiy VII projection" label="Kavrayskiy VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q709647" start="3301" end="3319" title="Arthur H. Robinson" label="Arthur H. Robinson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362120" wikidata="Q3215935" url="?curid=362120" title="Ladies and Gentlemen, The Fabulous Stains">
<text>Ladies and Gentlemen, The Fabulous Stains is a 1982 teen musical drama film about three teenage girls, played by Diane Lane, Laura Dern and Marin Kanter, who start a punk band. The film also features acting roles by real-life punk musicians including Steve Jones and Paul Cook of the Sex Pistols, Paul Simonon from the Clash, and Vince Welnick and Fee Waybill from the Tubes.

The Stains are depicted suffering the derision of male audiences and peers, but their dedication—and the fiery public persona of lead singer Corinne Burns—gains them a strong female fan base that ultimately eclipses their antagonists. The last scene is a triumphant MTV-style professional music video, which indicates the band finally achieved rock stardom.

Director Lou Adler and screenwriter Nancy Dowd (aided by Caroline Coon) disagreed starkly on the film&#x27;s finale, and it was put on hold for two years until it was capped by Adler with the music video. Although it failed to make any commercial headway with its initial release in late 1982, the film became a cult favorite on 1980s cable television, particularly the late-night series &quot;Night Flight&quot;. Its reputation grew, and it is considered an influence on the riot grrl movement.

==Plot==
Corinne Burns is a 17-year-old girl whose mother has recently died from lung cancer. Working in a fast food restaurant to help support herself and her younger sister, Corinne is interviewed by a local television station for a story about her town&#x27;s dwindling economy amidst the early 1980s recession. During the interview, Corinne becomes angry and belligerent towards the reporter, eventually lashing out at her overbearing and condescending boss and getting fired. The segment resonates with the station&#x27;s teenage viewers, who see Corinne as a kindred spirit. The station does a follow-up interview, which primarily consists of Corinne acting flippant and making sarcastic remarks to the journalist. However, she does manage to slip in a plug for her garage band &quot;The Stains&quot;, which consists of her, her sister Tracy, and their cousin Jessica.

Emboldened by appearing on television, Corinne attends a concert put on by small-time promoter Lawnboy, featuring the washed-up metal band the Metal Corpses and their opening act, an up-and-coming punk band called the Looters. Eager to end hostilities between the jaded Metal Corpses and the hedonistic Looters, Lawnboy signs the Stains without having heard them perform. Corinne and the Stains join the tour, witnessing firsthand the bands&#x27; animosity towards one another, largely the result of the conflict between the aging Lou, the frontman for the Metal Corpses, and Billy, the Looters&#x27; volatile lead singer.

At their first show, the Stains prove to be completely inept as a band: Neither Jessica nor Tracy can play instruments, and Corinne sings in an off-key monotone. The audience reacts angrily, prompting Corinne to lash out at them for a variety of real and perceived faults. After the show, the Metal Corpses&#x27; guitar player Jerry has fatally overdosed in the bathroom, and the band leaves the tour. Lawnboy makes the Looters the new headliners with the Stains as their opening act. A dissatisfied Billy asks Lawnboy to replace the Stains as soon as possible.

At their next show, Corinne debuts a new, more extreme punk look, with hair dyed to resemble a skunk and a see-through blouse worn over a pair of bikini briefs. Announcing that she &quot;never puts out&quot;, she goes on another tirade, grabbing more media attention. While male journalists focus on Corinne&#x27;s antisocial attitude and the band&#x27;s lack of talent, female journalists understand Corinne&#x27;s rants as calls for female empowerment and hail the Stains as a new voice of feminism. Soon the Stains become a national sensation, with girls all over the country emulating Corinne in every way possible, from dyeing their hair to running away from home.

During a tour stop at a motel, Billy attempts to seduce Corinne by sharing his feelings about the band and his alleged private shame of illiteracy. Over the course of their conversation, Billy recites the lyrics to a song, &quot;Join the Professionals&quot; which sums up his most personal feelings about the state of the world. At their next stop, the band is met by Lawnboy&#x27;s agent, Dave Robell, with the intended replacement act for the Stains (Black Randy and the Metrosquad). Although Billy tells Corinne that he only wanted her replaced early on in the tour, Corinne lashes out at him, and at the Stains&#x27; next show, they play a cover version of Billy&#x27;s song, which skyrockets the band to even further stardom. With Robell&#x27;s encouragement, Corinne signs a new contract, cutting Lawnboy out of any royalties and making the Stains the new headliners of the tour.

At the next show, Billy delivers a speech to the crowd about how the Stains have betrayed their &quot;never put out&quot; mantra by becoming corporate sellouts. When the Stains come onstage, the fans riot and Corinne is attacked by a girl with a tube of hair dye. The tour becomes a financial disaster and Robell cancels the Stains&#x27; contract. Corinne responds by threatening him with a bottle opener and taking the money he&#x27;s been withholding from her; Corinne then gives the money to Lawnboy as an apology.

The next morning, Corinne appears on television, where a belligerent male journalist chastises her for being a poor role model to her fans. Billy apologizes for ruining Corinne&#x27;s career and asks her to come back as the Looters&#x27; opening act. Corinne refuses; as she wanders the streets, she overhears a radio broadcast identifying the Stains&#x27; first song as a hit record. Sometime in the future, the Stains make their MTV debut, having become a successful act on Lawnboy&#x27;s new record label.

== Cast ==
The film features several punk rock musicians in acting roles: Steve Jones and Paul Cook of the Sex Pistols, Paul Simonon from the Clash, and Vince Welnick and Fee Waybill from the Tubes. Los Angeles punk rocker Black Randy from Black Randy and the Metrosquad makes an appearance as himself and as &quot;Mexican Randy&quot;.

Musician Barry Ford, formerly of the reggae band Merger, plays the promoter nicknamed Lawnboy. Ford composed the majority of the soundtrack including the title song &quot;All Washed Up&quot;, which features Jones, Cook, and Simonon. The song &quot;Join the Professionals&quot; was written and previously recorded by Jones and Cook&#x27;s post-Pistols band, the Professionals.

The complete cast includes:
* Diane Lane as Corinne Burns
* Laura Dern as Jessica McNeil
* Marin Kanter as Tracy Burns
* Christine Lahti as Aunt Linda
* Janet Wright as Aunt Linda&#x27;s friend Brenda
* Peter Donat as Harley Dennis
* David Clennon as Dave Robell, the agent
* Barry Ford as Lawnboy
* Ray Winstone as Billy, vocalist for The Looters
* Paul Simonon as Johnny, bassist for The Looters
* Steve Jones as Steve, guitarist for The Looters
* Paul Cook as Danny, drummer for The Looters
* Fee Waybill as Lou Corpse, vocalist for The Metal Corpses
* Vince Welnick as Jerry Jervey, guitarist for The Metal Corpses

There are also brief appearances by Elizabeth Daily as a hotel maid, and Brent Spiner.

== Production ==
The original project had the working title &quot;All Washed Up&quot;. Once underway, the film was directed by music business tycoon Lou Adler for Paramount Pictures. The script was written by Nancy Dowd, who had won the Best Screenplay Academy Award for &quot;Coming Home&quot;. The movie was produced by Joe Roth, who would later become chairman of Walt Disney Studios.

In the mid-1970s, Caroline Coon was working as a &quot;Melody Maker&quot; music journalist and had earned a reputation as an early proponent of punk rock. Dowd, who was interested in writing a script about the new movement, contacted her and made an exploratory visit to London. Coon told Dowd that feminism was &quot;the next big thing to come in punk rock&quot;, and the two began collaborating on the storyline to a film.

On his KLOS radio show in 2018, Steve Jones talked with Fee Waybill about how filming began in the winter of 1980 in Vancouver, Canada. Waybill recalled a scene that required Ray Winstone to hit him in the eye—which he did, accidentally, at full force. With his eye visibly swelling, Waybill completed the scene and it was kept in the final cut of the film.

Adler and Dowd had competing visions for the film right from the start. It was the ending, however, that caused them to collide. The original storyline was supposed to end with girls across the UK proudly emulating the Stains, but Coon says this inspirational concept was &quot;muted by its male director&quot;. Tensions rose as Adler demanded a rewrite, and ultimately Coon and Dowd walked off the set for good. Dowd removed her name from the script, and is credited under the pseudonym &quot;Rob Morton&quot; in the final cut. The film was shelved without an ending for two years, until Adler tacked on an exuberant Stains music video that gave the impression that the band had achieved stardom. The film fared poorly among test audiences and did not get a general release.

== Release ==
The film was screened in a tiny number of theaters in October 1982 and earned a box office gross just over US$25,000. Eventually the film made its way to cable television. &quot;Night Flight&quot;, the weekend counter-culture programming block on USA Network (of which Paramount was a partial owner), began regularly airing the film, and it found an audience. Off the positive reception of the airings, sub-distributor Films Inc. licensed the film from Paramount, and it eventually made its way to the art house circuit.

The film&#x27;s next theatrical engagements included showings at Film Forum in New York City on Wednesday, March 6, 1985, in Chicago in April 1985, in Atlanta and Los Angeles in July 1985, and at the Theater of the Living Arts in Philadelphia from Friday, August 23 to Saturday, August 24, 1985. The film continues to have screenings in various theaters through the present day.

Rhino Home Video released a DVD on September 16, 2008. The disc featured bonus commentary tracks, one from Adler and a second with both Lane and Dern together. A Blu-Ray edition was released in Australia in 2022 by ViaVision/Imprint.

== Reception ==
&quot;Ladies and Gentlemen, The Fabulous Stains&quot; holds a rating of 69% from 13 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes.

== Influence ==
Although it was a little-known obscurity for many years, it has developed a cult film status that continues to grow. Repertory screenings of the film, once a rarity, have grown more frequent in recent years.

The film predated the riot grrl scene of the 1990s, and among its early fans were members of Bikini Kill and Bratmobile. Other fans of the film include writer/podcaster Jake Fogelnest, and underground filmmaker Sarah Jacobson, as well as musician/actress Kate Nash, who revealed in a web interview that she dyed her hair to match Corinne&#x27;s. In 2000, Jacobson directed, with Sam Green, a short documentary on the film for the IFC television show &quot;Split Screen&quot;.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Film website at Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1146335" start="52" end="56" title="Teen film" label="teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="57" end="64" title="Musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="65" end="70" title="Drama film" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q255070" start="113" end="123" title="Diane Lane" label="Diane Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="125" end="135" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="166" end="175" title="punk rock" label="punk band"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="251" end="262" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="267" end="276" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="284" end="295" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q449804" start="297" end="309" title="Paul Simonon" label="Paul Simonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="315" end="324" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936454" start="330" end="343" title="Vince Welnick" label="Vince Welnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441158" start="348" end="359" title="Fee Waybill" label="Fee Waybill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165544" start="365" end="374" title="the Tubes" label="the Tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="643" end="646" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="666" end="677" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q568770" start="745" end="754" title="Lou Adler" label="Lou Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q517040" start="772" end="782" title="Nancy Dowd" label="Nancy Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247061" start="793" end="806" title="Caroline Coon" label="Caroline Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="1048" end="1061" title="Cult film" label="cult favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071792" start="1130" end="1142" title="Night Flight (TV series)" label="Night Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="1212" end="1221" title="riot grrl" label="riot grrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="1525" end="1546" title="early 1980s recession" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="2005" end="2016" title="garage rock" label="garage band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921530" start="4420" end="4450" title="Black Randy and the Metrosquad" label="Black Randy and the Metrosquad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="4995" end="5013" title="selling out" label="corporate sellouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12360" start="5245" end="5258" title="bottle opener" label="bottle opener"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="5804" end="5807" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="5957" end="5968" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="5973" end="5982" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="5990" end="6001" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q449804" start="6003" end="6015" title="Paul Simonon" label="Paul Simonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="6021" end="6030" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936454" start="6036" end="6049" title="Vince Welnick" label="Vince Welnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441158" start="6054" end="6065" title="Fee Waybill" label="Fee Waybill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165544" start="6071" end="6080" title="the Tubes" label="the Tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921530" start="6123" end="6153" title="Black Randy and the Metrosquad" label="Black Randy and the Metrosquad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340008" start="6269" end="6275" title="Merger (band)" label="Merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515331" start="6577" end="6594" title="The Professionals (band)" label="the Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q255070" start="6627" end="6637" title="Diane Lane" label="Diane Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="6657" end="6667" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q232941" start="6718" end="6733" title="Christine Lahti" label="Christine Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444251" start="6750" end="6762" title="Janet Wright" label="Janet Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074570" start="6800" end="6811" title="Peter Donat" label="Peter Donat"/>
<link wikidata="Q118763" start="6831" end="6844" title="David Clennon" label="David Clennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="6897" end="6909" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q449804" start="6947" end="6959" title="Paul Simonon" label="Paul Simonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="6997" end="7008" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="7047" end="7056" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441158" start="7093" end="7104" title="Fee Waybill" label="Fee Waybill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936454" start="7153" end="7166" title="Vince Welnick" label="Vince Welnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q258255" start="7253" end="7268" title="E. G. Daily" label="Elizabeth Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q311453" start="7290" end="7302" title="Brent Spiner" label="Brent Spiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q568770" start="7454" end="7463" title="Lou Adler" label="Lou Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="7468" end="7486" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q517040" start="7514" end="7524" title="Nancy Dowd" label="Nancy Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="7558" end="7571" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114683" start="7582" end="7593" title="Coming Home (1978 film)" label="Coming Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q919992" start="7627" end="7635" title="Joe Roth" label="Joe Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="7672" end="7691" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4247061" start="7712" end="7725" title="Caroline Coon" label="Caroline Coon"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="7749" end="7761" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191449" start="8127" end="8131" title="KLOS" label="KLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="8152" end="8163" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441158" start="8176" end="8187" title="Fee Waybill" label="Fee Waybill"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="8237" end="8254" title="Vancouver, Canada" label="Vancouver, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="8295" end="8307" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295790" start="9238" end="9253" title="general release" label="general release"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071792" start="9448" end="9460" title="Night Flight (TV series)" label="Night Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="9517" end="9528" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="9772" end="9781" title="art film" label="art house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448940" start="9857" end="9867" title="Film Forum" label="Film Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="9943" end="9950" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901743" start="9992" end="10018" title="Theater of the Living Arts" label="Theater of the Living Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="10022" end="10034" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="10518" end="10533" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="10628" end="10637" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="10783" end="10792" title="riot grrl" label="riot grrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="10854" end="10865" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q30509" start="10870" end="10880" title="Bratmobile" label="Bratmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124680" start="10930" end="10944" title="Jake Fogelnest" label="Jake Fogelnest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160059" start="10972" end="10986" title="Sarah Jacobson" label="Sarah Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q237548" start="11016" end="11025" title="Kate Nash" label="Kate Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q534662" start="11140" end="11149" title="Sam Green (filmmaker)" label="Sam Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="11191" end="11194" title="Independent Film Channel" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="11294" end="11310" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362121" wikidata="Q3530134" url="?curid=362121" title="Tobi Vail">
<text>Tobi Celeste Vail (born July 20, 1969) is an American independent musician, music critic and feminist activist from Olympia, Washington. She was a central figure in the riot grrl scene—she coined the spelling of &quot;grrl&quot;—and she started the zine &quot;Jigsaw&quot;. A drummer, guitarist and singer, she was a founding member of the band Bikini Kill. Vail has collaborated in several other bands figuring in the Olympia music scene. Vail writes for eMusic.

==Early life==
Tobi Celeste Vail was born in Auburn, Washington, to teenage parents. Both her grandfather and her father were drummers. When she was young her parents moved the family to rural Naselle, Washington, where her father worked in a youth detention center. The family moved to Olympia, Washington, where Vail attended high school. The first concert she went to on her own was a Wipers show in 1984. In 1988, Vail left Washington to live in Eugene, Oregon. After a year, she returned to Olympia.

While still in high school, Vail volunteered at KAOS (FM), the campus radio station at The Evergreen State College. At KAOS, Vail was exposed to a wide variety of independent music. She served off and on as a disc jockey from age 15 to 21.

==Music career==
===Early bands===
One of Vail&#x27;s first bands was the Go Team, a punk project started with Calvin Johnson in 1985. The group released several cassettes and nine singles on the independent label K Records, mostly on the 7&quot; vinyl format. Billy &quot;Billy Boredom&quot; Karren was one of the rotating musicians who played with the Go Team, and it was in this band that he and Vail played together for the first time. The band toured the West Coast in 1987 as a two-piece, then added Karren for two U.S. tours, both in 1989. After the Go Team disbanded, Vail played in various project bands and made a record as the drummer for Some Velvet Sidewalk; she toured with Some Velvet Sidewalk during early 1990. Since the beginning of her teens, Vail had tried to form an all-female band to &quot;rule the world and change how people view music and politics&quot;, including a group named Doris.

===Bikini Kill===

In October 1990, Vail and Evergreen State College classmates Kathi Wilcox and Kathleen Hanna determined to form a band, which they named Bikini Kill. Vail played drums and on some songs she sang. Through early 1991, Hanna and Wilcox swapped bass player and lead singer duties halfway through the set, and Wilcox also played guitar. After trying out a lot of female lead guitar players, none of whom seemed to fit, the band finally asked Karren to join as he was already known to Vail and a familiar figure in the Olympia music scene.

Soon after the band formed, they started a zine called &quot;Bikini Kill&quot; to promote the band and describe the band&#x27;s social and political views. Hanna, Vail and Wilcox contributed articles to the zine. In &quot;Bikini Kill&quot; #1, Vail commented on the punk music scene and its overemphasis on males. She wrote about the &quot;Yoko factor&quot;: the time when a male musician tells his girlfriend that she should not break up the band (comparing Yoko Ono&#x27;s influence on the breakup of the Beatles) and that the girlfriend would never be as important to him as his band. Through the &quot;Bikini Kill&quot; zine and publicity for the band, Vail voiced her belief that the world would change for the better if the number of girls joining bands increased until it was equal to the number of boys.

Bikini Kill performed at the International Pop Underground Convention in August 1991, and Vail and Hanna each performed separately on &quot;Girl Night&quot;.

Despite frequent mainstream media misrepresentation and serious violence at shows, they continued for several years and today are largely credited (along with Bratmobile) with starting riot grrrl, a movement that merged do it yourself (DIY) punk culture with feminism. The band Bikini Kill tried to reclaim feminism for the punk scene in an attempt to disrupt its male bias. The band fought against male aggression at their shows. Largely because of Hanna&#x27;s leadership, Bikini Kill encouraged girls to stand at the front of the stage for solidarity as well as for protection from male aggression. Vail and the other members of Bikini Kill encouraged girls to start their own bands. The general idea that girls should create their own independent culture grew rapidly in popularity through a largely underground network of similar-feeling fans, artists, musicians and writers, and soon regular meetings started taking place, usually in punk houses like Positive Force. By the summer of 1991, the riot grrrl movement had coalesced, with Bikini Kill moving to Washington, D.C., for a year.

In February 2016, Vail issued a YouTube takedown request after a pro-Hillary Clinton video utilizing the Bikini Kill song &quot;Rebel Girl&quot; began to go viral.

=== The Frumpies ===

In 1992, while still involved with Bikini Kill, Tobi started The Frumpies in Washington, D.C., with Bikini Kill bandmates Wilcox and Karren, and also with Molly Neuman of Bratmobile and the PeeChees, and later Michelle Mae. The Frumpies were distinctly less overtly political in nature than either Bikini Kill or Bratmobile, with a different sound. The band toured the U.S. with Huggy Bear in 1993 and they toured Italy with noise rock band Dada Swing in 2000.

In 1993, Vail started Bumpidee, a low-cost method for unsigned bands to increase their listener base, using the distribution of cassette recordings of their songs. This was another embodiment of Vail&#x27;s strong DIY principle. The name Bumpidee was chosen in honor of the children&#x27;s television show &quot;Bumpity&quot;. One of the Bumpidee bands was Worst Case Scenario which included Justin Trosper and Brandt Sandeno—these two musicians found success in the band Unwound, retaining the DIY ethic from their Bumpidee exposure.

===Spider and the Webs===
In mid-2004, Vail founded the band Spider and the Webs, with James Maeda on guitar and Chris Sutton on drums and bass. Vail sings and plays guitar, and she trades drumming roles with Sutton. Spider and the Webs played Ladyfest in 2005 in Olympia, and Vail spoke about the riot grrrl movement at other Ladyfest conferences held in Brighton and Madrid in October 2005, during a Spider and the Webs European tour. The band produced an EP in October 2006 on K Records: &quot;Frozen Roses&quot;, following a split EP with Partyline on Bristol, UK&#x27;s Local Kid records. A (cassette) album was eventually released in 2015, also available as a download.

===gSp===
Vail then formed &quot;supergroup&quot; girlSperm—also styled as gSp—with Layla Gibbon and Marissa Magic. gSp released their first album in 2017, receiving praise from Pitchfork, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; and the &quot;New York Times&quot;.

===Other projects===
Vail ran the mail order department at Kill Rock Stars from 1998 to 2011, after working there part-time from 1992 to 1997. In addition to blogging through her &quot;Jigsaw&quot; website, Vail also posts as &quot;Tabitha Says&quot; on Tumblr, beginning in August 2008.

With her sister Maggie, Vail joined Allison Wolfe, Cat Power, and members of Sleater-Kinney to organize the first Ladyfest in 2000, a music, activism, and arts conference held in Olympia. The Vail sisters played the festival in a band named Frenchie and the German Girls. In keeping with Vail&#x27;s DIY ethic, the Ladyfest founders turned the Ladyfest brand over to the public domain so that others could freely organize similar festivals.

From 2006 to 2008, Vail drummed with the Old Haunts, including on their final album, &quot;Poisonous Times&quot;. Vail has performed several solo shows, including one in Barcelona at &quot;Primera Persona&quot; in March 2012.

==Writing==
In 1989, Vail published the first issue of her feminist zine &quot;Jigsaw&quot;. When she published the zine, Vail was working at an Olympia sandwich shop with Kathi Wilcox who remembers being impressed by Vail&#x27;s focus on &quot;girls in bands, specifically,&quot; including an aggressive emphasis on feminist issues. While Kathleen Hanna was touring with Viva Knievel, she came upon a copy of &quot;Jigsaw&quot; #2, finding resonance in Vail&#x27;s &quot;Boxes&quot;, a five-page article about gender. Hanna wrote to Vail and submitted musician interviews to be published in &quot;Jigsaw&quot; while Hanna was on tour; this was the beginning of their collaboration. In &quot;Jigsaw&quot;, Vail wrote about &quot;angry grrls&quot;, combining the word &quot;girls&quot; with the powerful growl of &quot;grr&quot;. Vail&#x27;s third issue, published in 1991 after she spent time in Washington D.C., was subtitled &quot;angry grrrl zine&quot;. Vail soon became dismayed with the male-slanted media coverage of the riot grrrl scene. Janice Radway notes that her copy of &quot;Jigsaw&quot; #4, also published in 1991, has many instances of the printed word &quot;grrrl&quot;, but each one has been crossed out, &quot;presumably by Vail, as a protest against the popularity of the term.&quot;

The final issue of the printed version of &quot;Jigsaw&quot; was published in 1999. In 2001, Vail began an online blog named Bumpidee. Vail used the Bumpidee site to publish &quot;Jigsaw&quot; #8 in the spring and summer of 2003, including writings by Alan Licht and Becca Albee. She moved the Jigsaw blog to its own domain in September 2008. In mid-2013, &quot;Jigsaw&quot; issues from the 1990s were archived at Harvard University as a research resource along with 20,000 other countercultural zines.

Vail started working as a freelance writer after graduating from the Evergreen State College in 2009. Her work has been published by &quot;NPR&quot;, &quot;Artforum&quot;, &quot;The Believer&quot;, &quot;Punk Planet&quot; and &quot;Maximum Rock-N-Roll&quot;. She currently writes a monthly column for eMusic and was recently published by &quot;The Feminist Press&quot; in the anthologies &quot;Pussy Riot: A Punk Prayer for Freedom&quot; and &quot;The Riot Grrrl Collection&quot;. Hanna commented upon Vail&#x27;s song &quot;Free Pussy Riot&quot;, written in support of the Russian feminist punk band Pussy Riot after three members were arrested in March 2012. &quot;The Punk Singer&quot;, a 2013 documentary about Hanna, includes footage from three archival interviews with Vail. The film also includes archival footage of several Bikini Kill performances.

==Personal life==
Vail met Kurt Cobain when she was hanging around with Melvins in 1986. Cobain played guitar on one of the Go Team songs. Vail and Cobain briefly dated beginning in July 1990. The two discussed the possibility of starting a music project, and recorded a few songs together. Some of these songs ended up being Nirvana tracks. Referring to the Teen Spirit deodorant brand that Vail once used, Kathleen Hanna wrote &quot;Kurt smells like Teen Spirit&quot; with a sharpie on the wall of Cobain&#x27;s bedroom. Cobain, unaware of the deodorant brand, saw a deeper meaning in the phrase, and wrote the song &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;. Cobain and Vail soon split but remained friends.

Vail&#x27;s relationship with Tim Armstrong inspired him to write the Rancid song &quot;Olympia, WA&quot; from the album &quot;...And Out Come the Wolves&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Spider and the Webs bandcamp
*2005 Riot grrrl panel discussion at Ladyfest Brighton, with Tobi Vail, Allison Wolfe, Julia Downes and Red Chidgey</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3530134" start="0" end="17" title="Tobi Vail" label="Tobi Celeste Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="54" end="71" title="independent music" label="independent music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748889" start="76" end="88" title="music critic" label="music critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="93" end="101" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="116" end="135" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="169" end="178" title="riot grrl" label="riot grrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="249" end="253" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="345" end="356" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306617" start="419" end="438" title="Olympia music scene" label="Olympia music scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q286400" start="456" end="462" title="eMusic" label="eMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q661595" start="510" end="528" title="Auburn, Washington" label="Auburn, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q935645" start="658" end="677" title="Naselle, Washington" label="Naselle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18050" start="708" end="730" title="youth detention center" label="youth detention center"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="752" end="771" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889932" start="853" end="859" title="Wipers (band)" label="Wipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="915" end="929" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713719" start="1019" end="1028" title="KAOS (FM)" label="KAOS (FM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q941731" start="1058" end="1085" title="The Evergreen State College" label="The Evergreen State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="1134" end="1151" title="independent music" label="independent music"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1180" end="1191" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521059" start="1282" end="1293" title="the Go Team" label="the Go Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1297" end="1301" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q942680" start="1323" end="1337" title="Calvin Johnson (musician)" label="Calvin Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="1374" end="1383" title="Compact cassette" label="cassettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1393" end="1399" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="1408" end="1425" title="independent label" label="independent label"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080929" start="1426" end="1435" title="K Records" label="K Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1451" end="1464" title="7&amp;quot; vinyl" label="7&amp;quot; vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912821" start="1473" end="1511" title="Billy Karren" label="Billy &amp;quot;Billy Boredom&amp;quot; Karren"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="1672" end="1682" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559501" start="1862" end="1882" title="Some Velvet Sidewalk" label="Some Velvet Sidewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="2000" end="2015" title="all-female band" label="all-female band"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="2281" end="2292" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="3138" end="3146" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3182" end="3193" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647871" start="3521" end="3561" title="International Pop Underground Convention" label="International Pop Underground Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="3715" end="3723" title="violence against women" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30509" start="3810" end="3820" title="Bratmobile" label="Bratmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="3836" end="3846" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="3871" end="3885" title="DIY ethic" label="do it yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="3910" end="3918" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="4455" end="4466" title="subculture" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260401" start="4591" end="4601" title="punk house" label="punk house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233222" start="4608" end="4622" title="Positive Force" label="Positive Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="4813" end="4828" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182469" start="4866" end="4888" title="Rebel Girl (Bikini Kill song)" label="&amp;quot;Rebel Girl&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735396" start="4992" end="5004" title="The Frumpies" label="The Frumpies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896646" start="5086" end="5098" title="Molly Neuman" label="Molly Neuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756462" start="5117" end="5129" title="the PeeChees" label="the PeeChees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311433" start="5141" end="5153" title="Michelle Mae" label="Michelle Mae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929728" start="5310" end="5320" title="Huggy Bear (band)" label="Huggy Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q181861" start="5356" end="5366" title="noise rock" label="noise rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q598299" start="5505" end="5540" title="Cassette culture" label="distribution of cassette recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997346" start="5705" end="5712" title="Bumpity" label="Bumpity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318214" start="5785" end="5799" title="Justin Trosper" label="Justin Trosper"/>
<link wikidata="Q390380" start="5865" end="5872" title="Unwound" label="Unwound"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="6285" end="6293" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="6298" end="6304" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141176" start="6472" end="6481" title="Partyline" label="Partyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="6485" end="6492" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6494" end="6496" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535472" start="6690" end="6702" title="Skinned Teen" label="Layla Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="6784" end="6793" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6801" end="6814" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6835" end="6849" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741329" start="6917" end="6932" title="Kill Rock Stars" label="Kill Rock Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="7112" end="7118" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732851" start="7183" end="7196" title="Allison Wolfe" label="Allison Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q232348" start="7198" end="7207" title="Cat Power" label="Cat Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891322" start="7224" end="7238" title="Sleater-Kinney" label="Sleater-Kinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755602" start="7261" end="7269" title="Ladyfest" label="Ladyfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754850" start="7626" end="7640" title="the Old Haunts" label="the Old Haunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="7759" end="7768" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q549638" start="7884" end="7888" title="zine" label="zine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990549" start="7988" end="8000" title="Kathi Wilcox" label="Kathi Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q242608" start="8156" end="8170" title="Kathleen Hanna" label="Kathleen Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937468" start="8188" end="8200" title="Viva Knievel (band)" label="Viva Knievel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662673" start="8327" end="8333" title="gender studies" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="8843" end="8853" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q733560" start="8861" end="8874" title="Janice Radway" label="Janice Radway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="9234" end="9238" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830541" start="9372" end="9382" title="Alan Licht" label="Alan Licht"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727645" start="9387" end="9398" title="Becca Albee" label="Becca Albee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="9534" end="9552" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="9600" end="9615" title="Counterculture" label="countercultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q286400" start="9925" end="9931" title="eMusic" label="eMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551" start="10225" end="10235" title="Pussy Riot" label="Pussy Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052343" start="10291" end="10306" title="The Punk Singer" label="The Punk Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="10510" end="10521" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="10555" end="10562" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="10809" end="10816" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694320" start="10842" end="10853" title="Teen Spirit (deodorant)" label="Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="11107" end="11130" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="11218" end="11231" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="11258" end="11264" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q426028" start="11315" end="11341" title="...And Out Come the Wolves" label="...And Out Come the Wolves"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362124" wikidata="Q584601" url="?curid=362124" title="Baskin-Robbins">
<text>Baskin-Robbins is an American multinational chain of ice cream and cake specialty shops owned by Inspire Brands. Baskin-Robbins was founded in 1945 by Burt Baskin and Irv Robbins in Glendale, California. Its headquarters are in Canton, Massachusetts, and shared with sibling brand Dunkin&#x27; Donuts. It is the world&#x27;s largest chain of ice cream specialty stores, with more than 8,000 locations.

The company is known for its &quot;31 flavors&quot; slogan, with the idea that a customer could have a different flavor every day of any month. The logo includes a stylized &quot;31&quot; formed from the letters &quot;B&quot; and &quot;R&quot;. The slogan came from the Carson-Roberts advertising agency (which later merged into Ogilvy &amp; Mather) in 1953. The company has introduced more than 1,300 flavors since 1945, including the addition of vegan and non-dairy flavors in 2019.

==History==
Baskin-Robbins was founded in 1945 by American brothers-in-law Burt Baskin and Irv Robbins from the merging of their respective ice cream parlors, in Glendale, California. Burt Baskin learned about ice cream while he was in the military during World War II and opened Burton&#x27;s Ice Cream Shop in California in 1946. Irv Robbins managed an ice cream counter in his father&#x27;s store as a teenager and in 1945 used $6,000 to open Snowbird Ice Cream in California.

In 1948, they decided to combine their companies and call it Baskin-Robbins. Snowbird Ice Cream offered 21 flavors; when they merged the number of flavors was expanded to 31.
By 1948, Baskin and Robbins had opened six stores. The first franchise was executed on May 20, 1948, for the store at 1130 South Adams in Glendale (Store #1). In 1949, the company&#x27;s production facility opened in Burbank. Baskin and Robbins decided to start selling the stores to the managers. In 1953, Baskin-Robbins hired Carson-Roberts Advertising who recommended the adoption of the number 31 as well as the pink (cherry) and brown (chocolate) polka dots and typeface that were reminiscent of the circus. The first store that adopted the new 31 looks was 804 North Glendale Ave. in Glendale in March 1953.

Between 1949 and 1962, the corporate firm was known as Huntington Ice Cream Company. The name succeeded &quot;The Baskin-Robbins Partnership&quot; and was eventually changed back to Baskin-Robbins, Inc. on November 26, 1962. Baskin-Robbins was owned by its founders until it was acquired in 1967 (just before Burt Baskin&#x27;s death) by United Fruit. In the 1970s, the chain went international, opening stores in Japan, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, and Australia.
In 1972, the company went public when United Brands sold 17% in an IPO. A year later, the British food company J. Lyons and Co. purchased Baskin-Robbins from United Brands and all public stock. J. Lyons then merged with Allied Breweries, becoming Allied-Lyons in 1978. Allied-Lyons then merged with Pedro Domecq S.A. in 1994, becoming Allied Domecq. Baskin-Robbins and Dunkin&#x27; Donuts comprise Dunkin&#x27; Brands, Inc. Dunkin&#x27; Brands was part of Allied Domecq until its purchase in 2006 by a group of private equity firmsBain Capital, Thomas H. Lee Partners, and The Carlyle Group.
In 2006, the company&#x27;s &quot;BR&quot; logo was updated such that it doubles as the number &quot;31&quot; to represent the 31 flavors, with the &quot;31&quot; formed by the parts of the letters &quot;BR&quot; which are rendered in pink, in contrast to the rest of the logo which is rendered in blue.

In August 2012, Dunkin&#x27; Brands became completely independent of the private equity firms.
Baskin-Robbins struggled in the early years of the 2000s to retain business, but opened 36 new shops between 2013 and 2015. Many new Baskin-Robbins shops are co-branded with Dunkin&#x27; Donuts, including California&#x27;s first co-branded location of the two in San Diego, which opened in March 2014.

In 2014, Baskin-Robbins also began selling its ice cream for the first time in supermarkets across the U.S. In July 2017, Baskin-Robbins started adding their locations to delivery service platform DoorDash to deliver ice cream in 22 cities across the United States.

In December 2020, Dunkin&#x27; Brands was purchased by Inspire Brands.

Baskin-Robbins debuted an updated logo, alongside the new tagline &quot;Seize the Yay&quot;, on April 11, 2022.

Chris Buck and Barack Obama are two notable former employees.

==International presence==


As of 2017, Baskin-Robbins had more than 8,000 shop locations in Aruba, Australia, Bahrain, Bhutan, Canada, China, Colombia, Curaçao, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Egypt, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, Tajikistan, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uzbekistan, Vietnam and Yemen. International locations feature flavors of ice cream popular in each country, such as Red Bean, Litchi Gold, Blackcurrant and Cantaloupe. 
The most popular flavors of Baskin-Robbins in Asia are Mint Chocolate Chip and Cookies &amp; Cream.

Baskin-Robbins has previously been present in other countries such as Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Malta, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Netherlands, Panama, Philippines, Portugal, Russia, South Africa, and St. Maarten. 

Cambodia does not have any locations of Baskin-Robbins but their products are officially available at an Au Bon Pain bakery franchise.

The standalone stores in Bangladesh were closed down, but their products are available at multiple local stores.

In Japan, Taiwan, China, and the Philippines, Baskin-Robbins is known popularly as &quot;31&quot; or &quot;31 ice cream&quot;.

===Australia===
Baskin-Robbins Australia is a wholly owned and operated subsidiary of Inspire Brands, the parent company of Baskin-Robbins and Dunkin&#x27;. In October 2010, Dunkin&#x27; Brands terminated its license agreement with the collapsed Allied Brands Group for Baskin-Robbins in Australia, and now supports its Australian franchisees directly. The Baskin-Robbins Australia Franchise Support &amp; Training Centre is based in Brisbane.

===Ireland===
Baskin Robbins opened in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland in 2015 with a total of 8 shops.

== Advertisement controversy ==
In 2019, an ad advertising a new ice cream flavor in South Korea, &quot;Pink Star&quot;, featuring child model Ella Gross, sparked a controversy, with some internet users describing the ad as &quot;overly sexualized&quot;. The company withdrew the ad and apologized to its customers.

== See also ==
* List of ice cream parlor chains
* Häagen-Dazs
* Ben &amp; Jerry&#x27;s

==References==
==External links==
** Baskin Robbins Australia
** Baskin Robbins Japan (The corporate name is “B-R 31 ICE CREAM CO., LTD.“ in Japan.)
** Baskin Robbins Middle East</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584601" start="0" end="14" title="Baskin-Robbins" label="Baskin-Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="53" end="62" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="67" end="71" title="cake" label="cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975762" start="72" end="87" title="specialty store" label="specialty shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074808" start="97" end="111" title="Inspire Brands" label="Inspire Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000681" start="151" end="162" title="Burt Baskin" label="Burt Baskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673265" start="167" end="178" title="Irv Robbins" label="Irv Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="182" end="202" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429670" start="228" end="249" title="Canton, Massachusetts" label="Canton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="281" end="300" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937850" start="732" end="751" title="Ogilvy (agency)" label="Ogilvy &amp;amp; Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="851" end="856" title="Veganism" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="865" end="870" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000681" start="964" end="975" title="Burt Baskin" label="Burt Baskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673265" start="980" end="991" title="Irv Robbins" label="Irv Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="1051" end="1071" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1145" end="1157" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="1762" end="1769" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771942" start="2498" end="2510" title="United Fruit" label="United Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2574" end="2579" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="2581" end="2593" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="2595" end="2606" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2612" end="2621" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="2690" end="2693" title="IPO" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106384" start="2734" end="2750" title="J. Lyons and Co." label="J. Lyons and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q3078781" start="2843" end="2859" title="Allied Breweries" label="Allied Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838301" start="2958" end="2971" title="Allied Domecq" label="Allied Domecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="2992" end="3011" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037686" start="3021" end="3046" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Brands, Inc." label="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Brands, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="3154" end="3166" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790296" start="3168" end="3190" title="Thomas H. Lee Partners" label="Thomas H. Lee Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="3196" end="3213" title="The Carlyle Group" label="The Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714323" start="4115" end="4123" title="DoorDash" label="DoorDash"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074808" start="4240" end="4254" title="Inspire Brands" label="Inspire Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q156596" start="4370" end="4380" title="Chris Buck" label="Chris Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4385" end="4397" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818942" start="5498" end="5509" title="Au Bon Pain" label="Au Bon Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="5914" end="5926" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="6259" end="6278" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="6283" end="6299" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126015441" start="6477" end="6487" title="Ella Gross" label="Ella Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623847" start="6668" end="6699" title="List of ice cream parlor chains" label="List of ice cream parlor chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143333" start="6702" end="6713" title="Häagen-Dazs" label="Häagen-Dazs"/>
<link wikidata="Q816412" start="6716" end="6738" title="Ben &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;#x27;s" label="Ben &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362130" wikidata="Q7291784" url="?curid=362130" title="Randolph Apperson Hearst">
<text>Randolph Apperson Hearst (December 2, 1915 – December 18, 2000) was a newspaper publisher and member of the wealthy Hearst family. He was the fourth of five sons of William Randolph Hearst and Millicent Hearst as well as the father of Patty Hearst.

==Early life==
Randolph Apperson Hearst was born on December 2, 1915, with his twin brother, David (1915–1986), to Millicent Hearst and William Randolph Hearst in New York City. He attended the Lawrenceville School in Lawrenceville, New Jersey, and attended Harvard University for one year.

==Career==
After graduating, Hearst joined the family business, the Hearst Corporation. In the late 1930s, he worked for &quot;The Atlanta Georgian&quot;, one of the Hearst family&#x27;s papers. After the Georgian was sold in 1940, he moved to San Francisco and worked on &quot;The San Francisco Call&quot;. In 1942, he joined the United States Army Air Forces&#x27;s Air Transport Command and rose to the rank of captain. After leaving the Army, he became an associate publisher of the &quot;Oakland Post-Enquirer&quot; and in 1947, he returned to the &quot;San Francisco Call&quot; as an executive editor. In 1950, he became the publisher of the &quot;Call&quot;.

Long active in management of the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;, he eventually became chairman of the Hearst board (1973–96). He retired in favor of his nephew, George Randolph Hearst Jr.

Randolph Hearst never had the opportunity to become Chief Executive Officer. His father&#x27;s will established a trust that had five family (initially his sons, then their heirs) and eight non-family trustees. All trustees served for life and elected their successors, which maintained the proportions of family and non-family trustees. The trustees name the corporation&#x27;s board of directors, and the trust does not dissolve until all grandchildren of William Randolph Hearst alive at his death have died. It was under Randolph Hearst&#x27;s chairmanship that the chief executive inherited from his father, Richard E. Berlin, finally retired, but the next three presidents were all also non-family trustees.

==Personal and family life==
Randolph Hearst was married three times, first on January 12, 1938, to Catherine Wood Campbell of Atlanta, Georgia, who was the mother of his five daughters: Catherine, Virginia, Patricia (Patty), Anne and Victoria. Catherine Hearst was a Roman Catholic and a conservative Regent of the University of California before resigning in 1976.

In 1974, his daughter Patty made front pages nationwide when she was kidnapped by an extremist group, the Symbionese Liberation Army, and was soon after caught on film helping the group to rob banks. She renounced the SLA soon after her arrest. The ordeal placed enormous strain on the Hearst marriage, eventually leading to divorce in 1982. After their divorce, the first Mrs. Hearst moved to Beverly Hills.

Randolph Hearst married his second wife, Maria Cynthia Scruggs (née Pachì, September 3, 1932 – July 17, 2017), originally of Rome, Italy, on May 2, 1982. The couple divorced in 1987. That year he married a third wife, Veronica de Gruyter (formerly de Beracasa y de Uribe).

==Later life and death==
Hearst bought Eastover in Manalapan, Florida, in 2000 from Melvin Simon.

Hearst died on December 18, 2000, from a stroke. His seat as a trustee of his father&#x27;s will went to Virginia Hearst Randt, second-oldest of his five daughters. He was buried on the family&#x27;s plot in Colma, California.

Hearst&#x27;s personal estate was estimated in his last will and testament, written in 1989, at $25 million for probate purposes, but his lawyer (a co-executor of the will) observed that much of his estate- including insurance policies, jointly-owned properties, and trusts- was outside probate and therefore not accounted for; prior to his death, Forbes magazine had estimated Hearst&#x27;s wealth as $1.8 billion.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7291784" start="0" end="24" title="Randolph Apperson Hearst" label="Randolph Apperson Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q125146346" start="116" end="129" title="Hearst family" label="Hearst family"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="165" end="188" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314333" start="193" end="209" title="Millicent Hearst" label="Millicent Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q229556" start="235" end="247" title="Patty Hearst" label="Patty Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314333" start="365" end="381" title="Millicent Hearst" label="Millicent Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="386" end="409" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351132" start="444" end="464" title="Lawrenceville School" label="Lawrenceville School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086191" start="468" end="493" title="Lawrenceville, New Jersey" label="Lawrenceville, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="508" end="526" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="610" end="628" title="Hearst Corporation" label="Hearst Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816078" start="669" end="689" title="The Atlanta Georgian" label="The Atlanta Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="786" end="799" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413963" start="820" end="842" title="The San Francisco Call" label="The San Francisco Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="873" end="902" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828235" start="910" end="931" title="Air Transport Command" label="Air Transport Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="1248" end="1270" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502891" start="1374" end="1400" title="George Randolph Hearst Jr." label="George Randolph Hearst Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7325346" start="2015" end="2032" title="Richard E. Berlin" label="Richard E. Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="2244" end="2260" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229556" start="2325" end="2333" title="Patty Hearst" label="Patricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768432" start="2343" end="2347" title="Anne Hearst" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="2433" end="2457" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429446" start="2591" end="2617" title="Symbionese Liberation Army" label="Symbionese Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="2879" end="2892" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3020" end="3024" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330879" start="3208" end="3216" title="Eastover (Manalapan, Florida)" label="Eastover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825409" start="3220" end="3238" title="Manalapan, Florida" label="Manalapan, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814070" start="3253" end="3265" title="Melvin Simon" label="Melvin Simon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3373" end="3394" title="Virginia Hearst Randt" label="Virginia Hearst Randt"/>
<link wikidata="Q987296" start="3476" end="3493" title="Colma, California" label="Colma, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362132" wikidata="Q14290107" url="?curid=362132" title="Glans">
<text>The glans (, : glandes ; from the Latin word for &quot;acorn&quot;) is a vascular structure located at the tip of the penis in male mammals or a homologous genital structure of the clitoris in female mammals.

==Structure==
The exterior structure of the glans consists of mucous membrane, which is usually covered by foreskin or clitoral hood in naturally developed genitalia. This covering, called the prepuce, is normally retractable in adulthood unless removed by circumcision.

The glans naturally joins with the frenulum of the penis or clitoris, as well as the inner labia in women, and the foreskin in men. In non-technical or sexual discussions, often the word &quot;clitoris&quot; refers to the external glans alone, excluding the clitoral hood, frenulum, and internal body of the clitoris. Similarly, phrases &quot;tip&quot; or &quot;head&quot; of the penis refers to the glans alone.

==Sex differences in humans==
In males, the glans is known as the glans penis, while in females the glans is known as the clitoral glans.

In females, the clitoris is above the urethra. The glans of the clitoris is the most highly innervated part of the external female genitalia.
In spotted hyenas, the female&#x27;s pseudo-penis can be distinguished from the male&#x27;s penis by its greater thickness and more rounded glans. In both male and female spotted hyenas, the base of the glans is covered with penile spines.

==Development==
In the development of the urinary and reproductive organs, the glans is derived from the genital tubercle.

==See also==
*Glanuloplasty

==References==
===Works cited===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14290107" start="4" end="9" title="Glans" label="glans"/>
<link wikidata="Q14290107" start="15" end="22" title="Glans" label="glandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="25" end="29" title="etymology" label="from"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="34" end="39" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914781" start="55" end="60" title="acorn" label="acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="73" end="81" title="Blood vessel" label="vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="118" end="123" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="132" end="138" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433381" start="145" end="173" title="List of homologues of the human reproductive system" label="homologous genital structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q873072" start="181" end="189" title="clitoris" label="clitoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="272" end="287" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q673203" start="317" end="325" title="foreskin" label="foreskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q503427" start="329" end="342" title="clitoral hood" label="clitoral hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="366" end="375" title="genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="467" end="479" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q445203" start="517" end="525" title="frenulum" label="frenulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="533" end="538" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q873072" start="542" end="550" title="clitoris" label="clitoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406501" start="573" end="578" title="Labia (genitalia)" label="labia"/>
<link wikidata="Q503427" start="740" end="753" title="clitoral hood" label="clitoral hood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="755" end="763" title="Clitoris#Frenulum" label="frenulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="962" end="973" title="glans penis" label="glans penis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1018" end="1032" title="Clitoris#Glans" label="clitoral glans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642349" start="1214" end="1226" title="pseudo-penis" label="pseudo-penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29625363" start="1402" end="1415" title="penile spines" label="penile spines"/>
<link wikidata="Q910346" start="1441" end="1491" title="development of the urinary and reproductive organs" label="development of the urinary and reproductive organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502241" start="1523" end="1539" title="genital tubercle" label="genital tubercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566650" start="1556" end="1569" title="Glanuloplasty" label="Glanuloplasty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362133" wikidata="Q16974360" url="?curid=362133" title="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation">
<text>The Mountain Pacific Sports Federation (MPSF) is a college athletic conference with members located mostly in the Western United States, although it has added members as far east as Massachusetts. The conference participates at the NCAA Division I level, primarily in Olympic sports that are not sponsored by a school&#x27;s primary conference (such as the Pac-12 and Big West, many of whose members participate in MPSF competition in at least one of its sports).

==History==
The MPSF was founded in 1992 to provide an outlet for competition in non-revenue-producing Olympic sports. The MPSF conducts championships in men&#x27;s volleyball, as well as indoor track, gymnastics, and water polo for both men and women. In 2010 the MPSF added women&#x27;s swimming and diving, and added those sports for men in the 2011–12 season. The 2012–13 school year was the last for MPSF competition in men&#x27;s soccer, and the 2020–21 school year was the last for MPSF women&#x27;s lacrosse.

The conference membership varies by sport; 48 schools are MPSF members in at least one of its sponsored sports. Schools are not required to participate in MPSF competition for a sponsored sport if their primary conference sponsors a competition in that sport (e.g. Pac-12 in soccer and women&#x27;s gymnastics).

All MPSF members have a primary conference affiliation. Two conferences are represented by eight members each: the Big West Conference (Cal State Fullerton, Cal State Northridge, Hawai&#x27;i, Long Beach State, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UC Riverside, UC San Diego) and the West Coast Conference (Gonzaga, Pacific, Pepperdine, Portland, Saint Mary&#x27;s, San Diego, San Francisco, Santa Clara). The Big Ten Conference is represented by five schools (Indiana, Oregon, UCLA, USC, Washington). The Pacific West Conference is represented by three schools (Concordia–Irvine, Menlo, Vanguard). Six conferences are represented by 2 schools: the Atlantic Coast Conference (California, Stanford), the Big 12 Conference (Arizona State, BYU), the California Collegiate Athletic Association (Cal Poly Humboldt, San Francisco State), the Mountain West Conference (Air Force and San Jose State), the Pac-12 Conference (Oregon State, Washington State), and the Western Athletic Conference (Grand Canyon and Southern Utah). Ten conferences are represented by one school each – the Allegheny Mountain Collegiate Conference (Penn State Behrend), the Big Sky Conference (Sacramento State), the College Conference of Illinois and Wisconsin (Augustana (IL)), the Great Northwest Athletic Conference (Alaska Anchorage), the Lone Star Conference (Texas Woman&#x27;s), the New England Women&#x27;s and Men&#x27;s Athletic Conference (Wheaton (MA)), the Presidents&#x27; Athletic Conference (Washington &amp; Jefferson), the Southeastern Conference (Oklahoma), the Southern Collegiate Athletic Conference (Austin), and the Southland Conference (Incarnate Word).

In 2025–26, the Big Sky Conference will be represented by three additional schools (Idaho, Northern Arizona, Northern Colorado); the SEC will also be represented by three additional schools (LSU, South Carolina, Texas); the WAC will be represented by two additional schools (California Baptist, Utah Tech); the ACC will also be represented by Florida State; the Southland Conference will also be represented by UTRGV; and Conference USA will be represented by New Mexico State. Grand Canyon&#x27;s conference affiliation for 2025–26 is in flux; the Antelopes had initially announced a 2025 move to the West Coast Conference, but reneged on that move in favor of joining the Mountain West Conference no later than 2026.

Due to the Big West addition of men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s swimming and diving as a sponsored sport beginning in the 2024-25 school year, six Big West members moved their aquatics programs to their primary conference, including three members (Bakersfield, Cal Poly, and UC Santa Barbara) for whom aquatics comprised their only MPSF teams and thus effectively left the MPSF.

The MPSF added four sports in 2024–25—the non-NCAA sport of men&#x27;s rowing, the fully recognized NCAA sports of women&#x27;s beach volleyball and men&#x27;s wrestling, and the emerging NCAA sport of women&#x27;s wrestling (which becomes a fully recognized NCAA sport in 2025–26). The men&#x27;s rowing league consists entirely of Division I members (California, Gonzaga, Oregon State, San Diego, Santa Clara, Stanford, UC San Diego, and Washington). By contrast, the wrestling leagues include only Division II members: Cal Poly Humboldt (men), Menlo (both), San Francisco State (men), and Vanguard (both).

The addition of swimming &amp; diving by the Big West left the MPSF with only two men&#x27;s and four women&#x27;s teams in that sport. The MPSF started a rebuilding process in that sport by announcing on February 13, 2025 that it would add seven members for swimming &amp; diving effective in 2025–26. At the time of announcement, all were housing swimming &amp; diving in the Western Athletic Conference, which is rumored to be dropping the sport after the 2024–25 season. Six of the new members sponsor only the women&#x27;s sport—Idaho, New Mexico State, Northern Arizona, Northern Colorado (returning to MPSF women&#x27;s swimming &amp; diving after a 13-year absence), Utah Tech, and UTRGV. The other new member, California Baptist, sponsors the sport for both sexes.

Al Beaird was the first Executive Director of the MPSF for 24 years, from 1998 to 2021. Foti Mellis became the second executive director on June 1, 2021. Mellis was a Senior Associate Athletic Director at the University of California.

==Members==
&quot;Source:&quot;

===Existing members===
===Future members===
===Former members===
;Notes
==Sports==
The Mountain Pacific Sports Federation sponsors championship competition in six fully NCAA-sanctioned men&#x27;s sports, five fully NCAA-sanctioned women&#x27;s sports, one coeducational NCAA sport, one sport within the NCAA Emerging Sports for Women program, and two non-NCAA sports (one each for men and women). The MPSF dropped men&#x27;s soccer after the 2012 season. The moves of Denver (all sports) and New Mexico (soccer only) to other conferences left the MPSF with six soccer members, but all six would soon leave due to moves by the Western Athletic Conference. MPSF soccer member Seattle was already in the WAC, and another MPSF soccer school, CSU Bakersfield, was already committed to join the WAC in 2013. Because the WAC dropped football after the 2012 season due to a near-complete membership turnover, it needed to add another men&#x27;s sport to maintain its Division I status. To that end, it invited the four remaining MPSF soccer schools to join them; all accepted, and the WAC began sponsoring men&#x27;s soccer in 2013–14.

In October 2015, Arizona State announced that it would elevate its club team in women&#x27;s lacrosse to full varsity status starting in the 2017–18 school year (2018 season), which will give the Pac-12 six women&#x27;s lacrosse schools. This number is required by league bylaws for official sponsorship of a sport, and is also the number of teams required for a conference to be an automatic NCAA tournament qualifier. This led the Pac-12 to announce that all of its women&#x27;s lacrosse teams would leave the MPSF for the new Pac-12 lacrosse league for the 2018 season. MPSF women&#x27;s lacrosse continued to operate through the 2021 season, though it would lose its automatic NCAA tournament bid after the 2019 season.

The next major change in conference membership came in January 2016, when the Golden Coast Conference, a water polo-only league that previously operated only a women&#x27;s competition, announced it would add a men&#x27;s division effective with the 2016–17 season. The GCC took six of the 10 members of the MPSF men&#x27;s water polo league, leaving the MPSF with only the four Pac-12 members that sponsor the sport.

On May 31, 2016, the Big West Conference announced that it would begin sponsoring men&#x27;s volleyball in the 2017–18 school year (2018 season). The Big West men&#x27;s volleyball league launched with full members Long Beach State, Cal State Northridge, UC Irvine, UC Santa Barbara and Hawai&#x27;i, plus associate member UC San Diego (which joined the Big West full-time in July 2020). UC San Diego left the federation with the launch of Big West men&#x27;s volleyball, but the other Big West members remain in the MPSF in other sports. California Baptist also exited the MPSF after dropping its only conference sport of men&#x27;s volleyball shortly after the 2017 season, and Cal State Bakersfield (now being rebranded athletically as Bakersfield) left the MPSF after dropping its last remaining conference sport of women&#x27;s water polo at the same time.

It was announced in August 2021 that the MPSF would add fencing, a sport with a single coeducational NCAA team championship, to the conference as its tenth sport.

It was announced in September 2021 that the MPSF would add women&#x27;s artistic swimming to the conference as the eleventh sport.

On November 9, 2023, the MPSF announced that it would add beach volleyball, a women-only sport at the NCAA level, for the 2025 season (2024–25 school year). The inaugural membership in that sport will consist mainly of schools that are leaving the Pac-12 Conference, which sponsors beach volleyball, after 2023–24: California, Oregon, Stanford, UCLA, USC, and Washington. The only member not coming from the Pac-12 is Grand Canyon. The following month, the MPSF announced that Saint Mary&#x27;s, which had been an MPSF member in women&#x27;s lacrosse before the school dropped the sport in 2017, had returned to the conference in women&#x27;s indoor track &amp; field. The MPSF later announced it would also add the non-NCAA sport of men&#x27;s rowing, plus men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s wrestling, in 2024–25.

The MPSF announced in February 2025 that it would add four beach volleyball members and seven swimming &amp; diving members in 2025–26. Of the new swim/dive members, six field only women&#x27;s teams and one fields teams for both men and women.

===Membership by sport===


==Aquatics==
Three sports are sponsored under the aquatics section. Men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s swimming and diving were launched in the 2010-11 season. Artistic swimming was later added in the 2021-22 season.

In June 2023, the Big West announced the addition of men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s swimming and diving as a sponsored sport beginning in the 2024-25 school year. As a result, six Big West members moved their aquatics programs to their primary conference, including three members (Bakersfield, Cal Poly, and UC Santa Barbara) who were only MPSF members in aquatics and thus effectively left the MPSF.

The MPSF will add seven members in swimming &amp; diving in 2025–26, with six joining for the women&#x27;s sport only and the other joining with both men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s teams. One of these schools had previously housed the women&#x27;s sport in the MPSF.

===Current members===

===Future members===

===Former members===


===Timeline===
 

===Conference Champions===
==Fencing==
Fencing was introduced as an MPSF sport in the 2021-22 season.

===Current members===
The MPSF currently has three members that participate in fencing. 
===Former members===
===Timeline===


===Conference Champions===
==Gymnastics==
Men&#x27;s gymnastics was introduced as an MPSF sport with the formation of the conference while women&#x27;s gymnastics was initiated for the 2001-02 season.

===Current members===
The MPSF currently has four members that participate in men&#x27;s gymnastics and four for women&#x27;s. One of the current women&#x27;s gymnastics members, UC Davis, will join the Mountain West Conference, which sponsors that sport, in 2026. However, the Aggies may stay in MPSF women&#x27;s gymnastics because the MW will lose two of its current four women&#x27;s gymnastics members to the reconfigured Pac-12 Conference in 2026, making future MW sponsorship of the sport uncertain.

===Former members===
===Timeline===
 

===Conference champions===


===National champions===

==Indoor Track &amp; Field==
Men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s indoor track &amp; field were introduced for the 1992–93 season as one of the conference&#x27;s inaugural sports. Conference records before 1999 are incomplete.

===Current members===


===Former members===

===Conference champions===

===National champions===
All national champions are in men&#x27;s volleyball.

==Rowing==
Men&#x27;s rowing became an MPSF sport in the 2024–25 season.

===Current members===
The MPSF men&#x27;s rowing league started with eight members. 
==Volleyball==
Men&#x27;s volleyball was introduced for the 1993 season (1992–93 school year) as one of the conference&#x27;s inaugural sports. The MPSF will add beach volleyball in the 2025 season (2024–25 school year). The MPSF added the sport in the wake of the collapse of the Pac-12 Conference, which saw 10 of its 12 members leave for other conferences after the 2023–24 school year. Of the 10 departing schools, nine sponsor beach volleyball. Three left for the Big 12 Conference, which announced it would start sponsoring beach volleyball in 2024–25. The other six, which joined either the Atlantic Coast Conference or the Big Ten Conference, made up almost all of the inaugural MPSF beach volleyball membership. California, Stanford, UCLA, and USC were already MPSF members in other sports, and Oregon and Washington were returning MPSF members. The only inaugural beach volleyball member not arriving from the Pac-12 is Grand Canyon.

After the spring 2025 season, the MPSF will add four more beach volleyball members—Florida State, LSU, South Carolina, and Texas. All are departing the Coastal Collegiate Sports Association.

===Current members===

=== Future members ===

===Former members===
===Timeline===
 


===Conference champions===

===National champions===
All national champions are in men&#x27;s volleyball.

† — Vacated due to NCAA violations
==Conference champions==
Source:

===Women&#x27;s lacrosse===
===Men&#x27;s soccer===


===Men&#x27;s track &amp; field indoor===
===Women&#x27;s track &amp; field indoor===


===Men&#x27;s water polo===
===Women&#x27;s water polo===

==NCAA titles==
The Mountain Pacific Sports Federation has won 100 NCAA titles in seven sports. UCLA has won 25 national titles. Stanford has won 20 titles. USC has won 16 titles. Oregon has won 12 titles. Oklahoma has won nine titles. California has won six titles. UC Irvine has won four titles. Arizona State and Brigham Young have won three titles. Pepperdine has won two titles. The MPSF has won every men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s water polo NCAA title since the inception of the conference.

===Men&#x27;s gymnastics===
===Men&#x27;s soccer===


===Men&#x27;s water polo===
===Women&#x27;s water polo===

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16974360" start="4" end="38" title="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation" label="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974360" start="40" end="44" title="Mountain Pacific Sports Federation" label="MPSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246291" start="51" end="78" title="college athletic conference" label="college athletic conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="114" end="135" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="182" end="195" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="232" end="247" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212434" start="268" end="282" title="Olympic sports" label="Olympic sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q128471" start="357" end="363" title="Pac-12 Conference" label="Pac-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q859500" start="368" end="376" title="Big West Conference" label="Big West"/>
<link wikidata="Q212434" start="568" end="582" title="Olympic sports" label="Olympic sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="630" end="640" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="660" end="665" title="Track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q326827" start="667" end="677" title="Artistic gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="683" end="693" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="901" end="907" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003796" start="959" end="980" title="women&amp;#x27;s lacrosse" label="women&amp;#x27;s lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128471" start="1248" end="1254" title="Pac-12 Conference" label="Pac-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q859500" start="1411" end="1430" title="Big West Conference" label="Big West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q204186" start="1564" end="1585" title="West Coast Conference" label="West Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="1690" end="1708" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122764" start="1786" end="1809" title="Pacific West Conference" label="Pacific West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q756355" start="1929" end="1954" title="Atlantic Coast Conference" label="Atlantic Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="1983" end="2000" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020346" start="2027" end="2069" title="California Collegiate Athletic Association" label="California Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="2116" end="2140" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q128471" start="2177" end="2194" title="Pac-12 Conference" label="Pac-12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q984286" start="2237" end="2264" title="Western Athletic Conference" label="Western Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731323" start="2356" end="2396" title="Allegheny Mountain Collegiate Conference" label="Allegheny Mountain Collegiate Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="2423" end="2441" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146352" start="2466" end="2510" title="College Conference of Illinois and Wisconsin" label="College Conference of Illinois and Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599697" start="2533" end="2568" title="Great Northwest Athletic Conference" label="Great Northwest Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671413" start="2593" end="2613" title="Lone Star Conference" label="Lone Star Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007436" start="2640" end="2699" title="New England Women&amp;#x27;s and Men&amp;#x27;s Athletic Conference" label="New England Women&amp;#x27;s and Men&amp;#x27;s Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241495" start="2720" end="2756" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Athletic Conference" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="2791" end="2814" title="Southeastern Conference" label="Southeastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569776" start="2831" end="2870" title="Southern Collegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern Collegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304770" start="2889" end="2909" title="Southland Conference" label="Southland Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="2945" end="2963" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="3351" end="3365" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="3603" end="3627" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189091" start="4204" end="4223" title="NCAA Emerging Sports for Women" label="emerging NCAA sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q984286" start="5013" end="5040" title="Western Athletic Conference" label="Western Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189091" start="5982" end="6012" title="NCAA Emerging Sports for Women" label="NCAA Emerging Sports for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620134" start="6543" end="6578" title="2010–2013 Western Athletic Conference realignment" label="a near-complete membership turnover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982248" start="7611" end="7634" title="Golden Coast Conference" label="Golden Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q128471" start="9359" end="9376" title="Pac-12 Conference" label="Pac-12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="11791" end="11815" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q128471" start="12015" end="12032" title="Pac-12 Conference" label="Pac-12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654692" start="12986" end="12994" title="2021–2024 NCAA conference realignment" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128471" start="13002" end="13019" title="Pac-12 Conference" label="Pac-12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="13190" end="13207" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q756355" start="13319" end="13344" title="Atlantic Coast Conference" label="Atlantic Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="13352" end="13370" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138273" start="13818" end="13855" title="Coastal Collegiate Sports Association" label="Coastal Collegiate Sports Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362134" wikidata="Q448644" url="?curid=362134" title="Harold Arlen">
<text>Harold Arlen (born Hyman Arluck; February 15, 1905 – April 23, 1986) was an American composer of popular music, who composed over 500 songs, a number of which have become known worldwide. In addition to composing the songs for the 1939 film &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (lyrics by Yip Harburg), including &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot;, which won him the Oscar for Best Original Song, he was nominated as composer for 8 other Oscar awards. Arlen is a highly regarded contributor to the Great American Songbook. &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot; was voted the 20th century&#x27;s No. 1 song by the RIAA and the NEA.

==Life and career==
Arlen was born in Buffalo, New York, the child of a Jewish cantor. His twin brother died the next day. He learned to play the piano as a youth, and formed a band as a young man. He achieved some local success as a pianist and singer before moving to New York City in his early twenties, where he worked as an accompanist in vaudeville and changed his name to Harold Arlen. Between 1926 and about 1934, Arlen appeared occasionally as a band vocalist on records by The Buffalodians, Red Nichols, Joe Venuti, Leo Reisman, and Eddie Duchin, usually singing his own compositions.

In 1929, Arlen composed his first well-known song: &quot;Get Happy&quot; (with lyrics by Ted Koehler). Throughout the early and mid-1930s, Arlen and Koehler wrote shows for the Cotton Club, a popular Harlem night club, as well as for Broadway musicals and Hollywood films. Arlen and Koehler&#x27;s partnership resulted in a number of hit songs, including the familiar standards &quot;Let&#x27;s Fall in Love&quot; and &quot;Stormy Weather&quot;. Arlen continued to perform as a pianist and vocalist with some success, most notably on records with Leo Reisman&#x27;s society dance orchestra.

In the mid-1930s, Arlen married, and spent increasing time in California, writing for movie musicals. It was at this time that he began working with lyricist E. Y. &quot;Yip&quot; Harburg. In 1938, the team was hired by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to compose songs for &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;, the most famous of which is &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot;, for which they won the Academy Award for Best Music, Original Song. They also wrote &quot;Down with Love&quot; (featured in the 1937 Broadway show &quot;Hooray for What!&quot;), &quot;Lydia the Tattooed Lady&quot;, for Groucho Marx in &quot;At the Circus&quot; in 1939, and &quot;Happiness Is a Thing Called Joe&quot;, for Ethel Waters in the 1943 movie &quot;Cabin in the Sky&quot;.

Arlen was a longtime friend and one-time roommate of actor Ray Bolger, who starred in &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;.

In the 1940s, he teamed up with lyricist Johnny Mercer, and continued to write hit songs like &quot;Blues in the Night&quot;, &quot;Out of this World&quot;, &quot;That Old Black Magic&quot;, &quot;Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive&quot;, &quot;Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home&quot;, &quot;Come Rain or Come Shine&quot; and &quot;One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)&quot;.

Arlen composed two of the defining songs of Judy Garland&#x27;s career: &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot; and &quot;The Man That Got Away&quot;, the last written for the 1954 version of the film &quot;A Star Is Born&quot;. At her famous 1961 Carnegie Hall concert, after finishing a set of his songs, Garland acknowledged Arlen in the audience and invited him to receive an ovation.

Arlen recorded his debut album as a vocalist, &quot;Harold Sings Arlen (With Friend)&quot;, in 1966. Barbra Streisand accompanied him on two songs.

==Marriage and death==
Arlen and Anya Taranda married on January 6, 1937, over the objection of their parents, because she was Gentile and he was Jewish. In 1951, Anya was institutionalized for seven years. Coming home the same year that Celia Arnuk (Harold&#x27;s mother) had died, she was diagnosed with a brain tumor in 1969, which became fatal by 1970.
Arlen never remarried. He died of cancer on April 23, 1986, at his Manhattan apartment at the age of eighty-one. Arlen is buried next to his wife at the Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York. After Arlen&#x27;s death, Irving Berlin summed up his life at a tribute, saying: &quot;He wasn&#x27;t as well known as some of us, but he was a better songwriter than most of us and he will be missed by all of us.&quot;

Shortly before his death, Arlen adopted his own nephew, Samuel, the 22-year-old adult son of his brother Julius &quot;Jerry&quot; Arluck; his estate would have an heir in order to extend his copyright. Known as Samuel Arlen, he is a musician in his own right, as both a saxophonist as well as a music publisher; his control extends to the company that owns the rights to the Arlen catalog.

==Timeline==


*1905 Arlen born in Buffalo, New York
*1920 (age 15) He formed his first professional band, Hyman Arluck&#x27;s Snappy Trio.
*1921 (16) Against his parents&#x27; wishes he left home.
*1923 (18) With his new band – The Southbound Shufflers, performed on the Crystal Beach lake boat &quot;Canadiana&quot; during the summer of 1923.
*1924 (19) Performed at Lake Shore Manor during the summer of 1924.
*1924 (19) Wrote his first song, collaborating with friend Hyman Cheiffetz to write &quot;My Gal, My Pal&quot;. Copyrighting the song as &quot;My Gal, Won&#x27;t You Please Come Back to Me?&quot; and listed lyrics by Cheiffetz and music by Harold Arluck.
*1925 (20) Makes his way to New York City with the group, The Buffalodians, with Arlen playing piano.
*1926 (21) Had first published song, collaborating with Dick George to compose &quot;Minor Gaff (Blues Fantasy)&quot; under the name Harold Arluck.
*1928 (23) Hyman (or Chaim (Hebrew name meaning life)) Arluck renames himself Harold Arlen.
*1929 (24) Landed a singing and acting role as Cokey Joe in the musical &quot;The Great Day&quot;.
*1929 (24) Composed his first well known song – &quot;Get Happy&quot; – under the name Harold Arlen.
*1929 (24) Signed a yearlong song writing contract with the George and Arthur Piantadosi firm.
*1930–1934 (25–29) Wrote music for the Cotton Club.
*1933 (28) At a party, along with partner Ted Koehler, wrote the major hit song &quot;Stormy Weather&quot;
*1934 (29) Wrote &quot;Ill Wind (You&#x27;re Blowin&#x27; Me No Good)&quot; with lyrics by Ted Koehler for their last show at the Cotton Club Parade, in 1934, which was sung by Adelaide Hall
*1935 (30) Went back to California after being signed by Samuel Goldwyn to write songs for the film &quot;Strike Me Pink&quot;.
*1937 (32) Composed the score for the Broadway musical Hooray for What!. Married 22-year-old Anya Taranda, a celebrated Powers Agency model and former Earl Carroll and Busby Berkeley showgirl, actress, and one of the Original &quot;Breck Girls&quot;.
*1938 (33) Hired by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to compose songs for &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;.
*1938 (33) While driving along Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood and stopping in front of Schwab&#x27;s Drug Store, he came up with the song &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot;.
*1939 (34) Wrote music for the Marx Brothers&#x27; film &quot;At the Circus&quot;.
*1941 (36) Wrote &quot;Blues in the Night&quot;
*1942 (37) Along with Johnny Mercer, he wrote one of his most famous songs, &quot;That Old Black Magic&quot;.
*1943 (38) Wrote &quot;My Shining Hour&quot;
*1944 (39) While driving with songwriter partner Johnny Mercer came up with the song &quot;Accentuate the Positive&quot;.
*1945 (40) In a single evening&#x27;s work in October with Johnny Mercer, came up with the song &quot;Come Rain or Come Shine&quot;.
*1949 (44) Collaborated with Ralph Blane to write the score for &quot;My Blue Heaven&quot;.
*1950 (45) Worked with old pal Johnny Mercer on the film &quot;The Petty Girl&quot;, out of which came the song &quot;Fancy Free&quot;.
*1951 (46) His wife Anya was institutionalized in a sanitarium for 7 years.
*1952 (47) Teamed up with Dorothy Fields on the film &quot;The Farmer Takes a Wife&quot;.
*1953 (48) Harold&#x27;s father, Cantor Samuel Arluck, died.
*1954 (49) The musical &quot;A Star Is Born&quot; starring Judy Garland singing the now classic, Harold Arlen and Ira Gershwin collaboration, &quot;The Man That Got Away&quot;.
*1954 (49) Becomes dangerously ill with a bleeding ulcer and is hospitalized but recovers to work with Truman Capote on the musical &quot;House of Flowers&quot;.
*1958 (53) His mother Celia Arluck dies and Harold does not touch music for over a year, mourning her loss.
*1962 (56) Wrote the score for the animated musical &quot;Gay Purr-ee&quot;, lyrics by E.Y. Harburg.
*1970 (65) Arlen&#x27;s wife Anya Taranda dies from a brain tumor. Arlen begins to lose interest in life, withdrawing from friends and family and becoming more reclusive.
*1974 (69) The theme song for the ABC sitcom &quot;Paper Moon&quot; is based on the song of that title, written by Arlen and E.Y. &quot;Yip&quot; Harburg in 1932. The series was based on a 1973 Peter Bogdanovich film of the same name, which used the same song.
*1979 (74) Is inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.
*1985 (80) Adopts Samuel (&quot;Sammy&quot;), son of his younger brother Jerry and Rita Arluck as his son and primary heir.
*1986 (81) Harold Arlen dies in New York City and is interred next to his wife at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York.

==Works for Broadway==
*&quot;Earl Carroll&#x27;s Vanities of 1930&quot; (1930) – revue – contributing composer
*&quot;You Said It&quot; (1931) – musical – composer
*&quot;Earl Carroll&#x27;s Vanities of 1932&quot; (1932) – revue – co-composer and co-lyricist with Ted Koehler
*&quot;Americana&quot; (1932) – revue – contributing composer
*&quot;George White&#x27;s Music Hall Varieties (1933)&quot; – revue – co-composer
*&quot;Life Begins at 8:40&quot; (1934) – revue – composer
*&quot;The Show Is On&quot; (1936) – revue – contributing composer
*&quot;Hooray for What!&quot; (1937) – musical – composer
*&quot;Bloomer Girl&quot; (1944) – musical – composer
*&quot;St. Louis Woman&quot; (1946) – musical – composer
*&quot;House of Flowers&quot; (1954) – musical – composer and co-lyricist
*&quot;Mr. Imperium&quot; (1951) – movie musical – featured composer
*&quot;Jamaica&quot; (1957) – musical – composer – Tony nomination for Best Musical
*&quot;Saratoga&quot; (1959) – musical – composer

==Major songs==

* &quot;A Sleepin&#x27; Bee&quot; – lyrics by Harold Arlen and Truman Capote
* &quot;Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;As Long as I Live&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;Blues in the Night&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Come Rain or Come Shine&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;Down with Love&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;For Every Man There&#x27;s a Woman&quot; – lyrics by Leo Robin
* &quot;Get Happy&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;Happiness Is a Thing Called Joe&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;Hit the Road to Dreamland&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Hooray for Love&quot; – lyrics by Leo Robin
* &quot;I Could Go On Singing&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;If I Only Had a Brain&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;I Had Myself A True Love&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;I Gotta Right to Sing the Blues&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;I Love a Parade&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;Ill Wind&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;I Never Has Seen Snow&quot; – lyrics by Harold Arlen and Truman Capote
* &quot;It Was Written in the Stars&quot; – lyrics by Leo Robin
* &quot;I&#x27;ve Got the World on a String&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;It&#x27;s Only a Paper Moon&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg, Billy Rose
* &quot;I Wonder What Became of Me&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Last Night When We Were Young&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Fall in Love&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Take a Walk Around the Block&quot; – lyrics by Ira Gershwin and E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;Like a Straw in the Wind&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;Lydia the Tattooed Lady&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;My Shining Hour&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;On the Swing Shift&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Out of This World&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;Right As The Rain&quot; – lyrics by E. Y. Harburg
* &quot;Sing My Heart&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;So Long, Big Time!&quot; – lyrics by Dory Langdon
* &quot;Stormy Weather&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
* &quot;That Old Black Magic&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;The Man That Got Away&quot; – lyrics by Ira Gershwin
* &quot;This Time the Dream&#x27;s on Me&quot; – lyrics by Johnny Mercer
* &quot;What&#x27;s Good About Goodbye?&quot; – lyrics by Leo Robin
* &quot;When the Sun Comes Out&quot; – lyrics by Ted Koehler
==Films==
*2003 – &quot;Stormy Weather: The Music of Harold Arlen&quot; (directed by Larry Weinstein)

==Biographies==
*

==References==
==External links==
*
*NPR profile of Harold Arlen on Weekend Edition Saturday
* 
* 
*&quot;Harold Sings Arlen (with Friend)&quot;, 1966 Columbia Records album , singing his own songs, dueting with Barbra Streisand on two
* Harold Arlen recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="0" end="12" title="Harold Arlen" label="Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="19" end="31" title="Harold Arlen" label="Hyman Arluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="85" end="93" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="247" end="263" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273621" start="281" end="292" title="Yip Harburg" label="Yip Harburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q161402" start="311" end="327" title="Over the Rainbow" label="Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="363" end="381" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151397" start="484" end="507" title="Great American Songbook" label="Great American Songbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="590" end="594" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="603" end="606" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="NEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="647" end="664" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="681" end="687" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="688" end="694" title="hazzan" label="cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q495464" start="1110" end="1121" title="Red Nichols" label="Red Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344139" start="1123" end="1133" title="Joe Venuti" label="Joe Venuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q137506" start="1135" end="1146" title="Leo Reisman" label="Leo Reisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q133720" start="1152" end="1164" title="Eddie Duchin" label="Eddie Duchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163164" start="1262" end="1271" title="Get Happy (song)" label="Get Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q363783" start="1294" end="1305" title="Ted Koehler" label="Ted Koehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="1382" end="1393" title="Cotton Club (New York City)" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="1405" end="1411" title="Harlem, Manhattan" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1439" end="1447" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="1448" end="1456" title="musical theater" label="musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="1461" end="1470" title="Hollywood, California" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="1471" end="1476" title="musical film" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532323" start="1589" end="1612" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238185" start="1629" end="1643" title="Stormy Weather (song)" label="Stormy Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q137506" start="1752" end="1763" title="Leo Reisman" label="Leo Reisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273621" start="1955" end="1984" title="Yip Harburg" label="E. Y. &amp;quot;Yip&amp;quot; Harburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="2017" end="2036" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="2064" end="2080" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q161402" start="2122" end="2138" title="Over the Rainbow" label="Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="2169" end="2212" title="Academy Award for Best Song" label="Academy Award for Best Music, Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303055" start="2236" end="2250" title="Down with Love (song)" label="Down with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898497" start="2299" end="2315" title="Hooray for What!" label="Hooray for What!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707703" start="2330" end="2353" title="Lydia the Tattooed Lady" label="Lydia the Tattooed Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="2365" end="2377" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214743" start="2387" end="2400" title="At the Circus" label="At the Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652336" start="2426" end="2457" title="Happiness Is a Thing Called Joe" label="Happiness Is a Thing Called Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q242725" start="2469" end="2481" title="Ethel Waters" label="Ethel Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024839" start="2506" end="2522" title="Cabin in the Sky (film)" label="Cabin in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240886" start="2590" end="2600" title="Ray Bolger" label="Ray Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="2689" end="2702" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907340" start="2748" end="2766" title="Blues in the Night" label="Blues in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111637" start="2780" end="2797" title="Out of This World (Johnny Mercer song)" label="Out of this World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405967" start="2811" end="2831" title="That Old Black Magic" label="That Old Black Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q938338" start="2845" end="2874" title="Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive" label="Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778170" start="2888" end="2919" title="Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home" label="Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113873" start="2933" end="2956" title="Come Rain or Come Shine" label="Come Rain or Come Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686357" start="2973" end="3016" title="One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)" label="One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="3069" end="3081" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749892" start="3136" end="3157" title="The Man That Got Away" label="The Man That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305622" start="3221" end="3235" title="A Star Is Born (1954 film)" label="A Star Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q178924" start="3257" end="3283" title="Judy at Carnegie Hall" label="1961 Carnegie Hall concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839032" start="3456" end="3488" title="Harold Sings Arlen (With Friend)" label="Harold Sings Arlen (With Friend)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="3505" end="3521" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778208" start="3586" end="3598" title="Anya Taranda" label="Anya Taranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="3680" end="3687" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3699" end="3702" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771319" start="4063" end="4081" title="Ferncliff Cemetery" label="Ferncliff Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002176" start="4085" end="4104" title="Hartsdale, New York" label="Hartsdale, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="4132" end="4145" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="4597" end="4608" title="saxophonist" label="saxophonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="4753" end="4770" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5414" end="5427" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="6062" end="6073" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q363783" start="6117" end="6128" title="Ted Koehler" label="Ted Koehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043315" start="6205" end="6251" title="Ill Wind (Arlen-Koehler song)" label="Ill Wind (You&amp;#x27;re Blowin&amp;#x27; Me No Good)"/>
<link wikidata="Q363783" start="6273" end="6284" title="Ted Koehler" label="Ted Koehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136776" start="6312" end="6323" title="Cotton Club" label="Cotton Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q293087" start="6359" end="6372" title="Adelaide Hall" label="Adelaide Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q72579" start="6430" end="6444" title="Samuel Goldwyn" label="Samuel Goldwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686988" start="6479" end="6493" title="Strike Me Pink (1936 film)" label="Strike Me Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898497" start="6556" end="6572" title="Hooray for What!" label="Hooray for What!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778208" start="6594" end="6606" title="Anya Taranda" label="Anya Taranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255137" start="6621" end="6634" title="John Robert Powers" label="Powers Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325780" start="6652" end="6664" title="Earl Carroll" label="Earl Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q503258" start="6669" end="6683" title="Busby Berkeley" label="Busby Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482594" start="6684" end="6692" title="showgirl" label="showgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="6772" end="6791" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="6819" end="6835" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="6874" end="6890" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="6894" end="6903" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599436" start="6929" end="6953" title="Schwab&amp;#x27;s Drug Store" label="Schwab&amp;#x27;s Drug Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q161402" start="6986" end="7002" title="Over the Rainbow" label="Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="7041" end="7054" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214743" start="7072" end="7085" title="At the Circus" label="At the Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907340" start="7116" end="7134" title="Blues in the Night" label="Blues in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="7163" end="7176" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405967" start="7223" end="7243" title="That Old Black Magic" label="That Old Black Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946371" start="7274" end="7289" title="My Shining Hour" label="My Shining Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="7345" end="7358" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q938338" start="7387" end="7410" title="Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive" label="Accentuate the Positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="7477" end="7490" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113873" start="7520" end="7543" title="Come Rain or Come Shine" label="Come Rain or Come Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945040" start="7621" end="7635" title="My Blue Heaven (1950 film)" label="My Blue Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="7674" end="7687" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q435241" start="7881" end="7895" title="Dorothy Fields" label="Dorothy Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305622" start="8035" end="8049" title="A Star Is Born (1954 film)" label="A Star Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="8065" end="8077" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059" start="8120" end="8132" title="Ira Gershwin" label="Ira Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749892" start="8154" end="8175" title="The Man That Got Away" label="The Man That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="8286" end="8299" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386117" start="8321" end="8337" title="House of Flowers (musical)" label="House of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962098" start="8511" end="8522" title="Gay Purr-ee" label="Gay Purr-ee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273621" start="8540" end="8552" title="Yip Harburg" label="E.Y. Harburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778208" start="8583" end="8595" title="Anya Taranda" label="Anya Taranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="8759" end="8762" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="8763" end="8769" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="8919" end="8936" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q603162" start="8937" end="8958" title="Paper Moon (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="9018" end="9047" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="9205" end="9218" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771319" start="9255" end="9273" title="Ferncliff Cemetery" label="Ferncliff Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002176" start="9277" end="9286" title="Hartsdale, New York" label="Hartsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q86750587" start="9329" end="9357" title="The Earl Carroll Vanities" label="Earl Carroll&amp;#x27;s Vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="9381" end="9386" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9402" end="9410" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057482" start="9418" end="9429" title="You Said It" label="You Said It"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="9445" end="9452" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9455" end="9463" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="9523" end="9528" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9534" end="9542" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q822146" start="9550" end="9558" title="lyricist" label="lyricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q363783" start="9564" end="9575" title="Ted Koehler" label="Ted Koehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="9608" end="9613" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9629" end="9637" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="9701" end="9706" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9712" end="9720" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9728" end="9747" title="Life Begins at 8:40" label="Life Begins at 8:40"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="9763" end="9768" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9771" end="9779" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="9817" end="9822" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9838" end="9846" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898497" start="9854" end="9870" title="Hooray for What!" label="Hooray for What!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="9886" end="9893" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9896" end="9904" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928196" start="9912" end="9924" title="Bloomer Girl" label="Bloomer Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="9940" end="9947" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="9950" end="9958" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589720" start="9966" end="9981" title="St. Louis Woman" label="St. Louis Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="9997" end="10004" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="10007" end="10015" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386117" start="10023" end="10039" title="House of Flowers (musical)" label="House of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="10055" end="10062" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="10065" end="10073" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q822146" start="10081" end="10089" title="lyricist" label="lyricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="10150" end="10158" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679817" start="10166" end="10173" title="Jamaica (musical)" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="10189" end="10196" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="10199" end="10207" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="10210" end="10214" title="Tony Award" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="10230" end="10242" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423345" start="10250" end="10258" title="Saratoga (musical)" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="10274" end="10281" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="10284" end="10292" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659572" start="10319" end="10338" title="A Sleepin&amp;#x27; Bee" label="A Sleepin&amp;#x27; Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="10374" end="10387" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q938338" start="10396" end="10425" title="Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive" label="Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="10444" end="10457" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778170" start="10466" end="10497" title="Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home" label="Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802923" start="10538" end="10555" title="As Long as I Live (Arlen-Koehler song)" label="As Long as I Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q363783" start="10574" end="10585" title="Ted Koehler" label="Ted Koehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899166" start="10594" end="10633" title="Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea (song)" label="Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907340" start="10672" end="10690" title="Blues in the Night" label="Blues in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113873" start="10731" end="10754" title="Come Rain or Come Shine" label="Come Rain or Come Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278115" start="10795" end="10823" title="Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead" label="Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273621" start="10842" end="10855" title="Yip Harburg" label="E. Y. Harburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303055" start="10864" end="10878" title="Down with Love (song)" label="Down with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940830" start="10919" end="10953" title="Casbah (film)" label="For Every Man There&amp;#x27;s a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q364124" start="10972" end="10981" title="Leo Robin" label="Leo Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163164" start="10990" end="10999" title="Get Happy (song)" label="Get Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652336" start="11038" end="11069" title="Happiness Is a Thing Called Joe" label="Happiness Is a Thing Called Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312028" start="11110" end="11135" title="Hit the Road to Dreamland" label="Hit the Road to Dreamland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743076" start="11228" end="11249" title="I Could Go On Singing" label="I Could Go On Singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990496" start="11290" end="11311" title="If I Only Had a Brain" label="If I Only Had a Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977396" start="11417" end="11448" title="I Gotta Right to Sing the Blues" label="I Gotta Right to Sing the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043315" start="11541" end="11549" title="Ill Wind (Arlen-Koehler song)" label="Ill Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940830" start="11667" end="11694" title="It Was Written in the Stars" label="It Was Written in the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967316" start="11731" end="11766" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got the World on a String" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got the World on a String"/>
<link wikidata="Q387410" start="11805" end="11832" title="It&amp;#x27;s Only a Paper Moon (song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Only a Paper Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q448948" start="11866" end="11876" title="Billy Rose" label="Billy Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386610" start="11952" end="11981" title="Last Night When We Were Young" label="Last Night When We Were Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532323" start="12022" end="12045" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Fall in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532590" start="12084" end="12123" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Take a Walk Around the Block" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Take a Walk Around the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059" start="12142" end="12154" title="Ira Gershwin" label="Ira Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707703" start="12244" end="12267" title="Lydia the Tattooed Lady" label="Lydia the Tattooed Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946371" start="12308" end="12323" title="My Shining Hour" label="My Shining Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303430" start="12364" end="12382" title="On the Swing Shift" label="On the Swing Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686357" start="12423" end="12466" title="One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)" label="One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111637" start="12507" end="12524" title="Out of This World (Johnny Mercer song)" label="Out of This World"/>
<link wikidata="Q161402" start="12565" end="12581" title="Over the Rainbow" label="Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522687" start="12680" end="12693" title="Sing My Heart" label="Sing My Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q452252" start="12769" end="12781" title="Dory Langdon" label="Dory Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238185" start="12790" end="12804" title="Stormy Weather (song)" label="Stormy Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405967" start="12843" end="12863" title="That Old Black Magic" label="That Old Black Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749892" start="12904" end="12925" title="The Man That Got Away" label="The Man That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786327" start="12965" end="12997" title="This Time the Dream&amp;#x27;s on Me" label="This Time the Dream&amp;#x27;s on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993041" start="13106" end="13128" title="When the Sun Comes Out" label="When the Sun Comes Out"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13183" end="13224" title="Stormy Weather: The Music of Harold Arlen" label="Stormy Weather: The Music of Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919907" start="13244" end="13259" title="Larry Weinstein" label="Larry Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="13493" end="13509" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="13550" end="13595" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362136" wikidata="Q1783608" url="?curid=362136" title="University of Northern Colorado">
<text>The University of Northern Colorado (UNCO) (previously abbreviated as UNC)is a public university in Greeley, Colorado, United States. It was founded in 1889 as the State Normal School of Colorado and has a long history in teacher education.

The institution has officially changed its name three times, first to Colorado State College of Education, at Greeley on February 16, 1935, Colorado State College on February 11, 1957, and its current form since May 1, 1970.

Approximately 10,000 students are enrolled in six colleges. Extended campus locations are in Loveland, Denver/Aurora, and Colorado Springs. UNCO&#x27;s 19 athletic teams compete in NCAA Division I as members of the Big Sky Conference.

==Campus==

The campus is divided into two main areas: central and west. UNCO&#x27;s Central Campus includes the areas north of 20th Street and west of 8th Avenue in Greeley, Colorado. The residence halls on Central Campus have been designated a state historic district.

==Organization==
The board of trustees for the university oversees the administration and approves the university annual budget. Several members of the university&#x27;s administrative team are ex officio members of the board.

===Presidents===
The university has had 13 presidents since its establishment:
* Thomas J. Gray — 1890–1891
* James H. Hayes — (interim) 1891, November 11, 1915 – 1916
* Zachariah Xenophon Snyder — 1891–1915
* John Grant Crabbe — Late summer 1916–1924
* George Willard Frasier — 1924–1947
* William Robert Ross — 1947–1964 (assumed office December 20, 1947)
* Darrell Holmes — 1964–1971
* Frank P. Lakin — 1969, 1971 (interim)
* Richard R. Bond — 1971–1981
* Charles Manning (acting) — 1981
* Robert C. Dickeson — 1981–1991
* Richard Davies (acting) — January 1 – August 29, 1987
* Stephen T. Hulbert (interim) — July 1 – September 30, 1991
* Herman Lujan — 1991–1996
* Howard Skinner (interim) — June 1996 – June 1998
* Hank Brown — July 1998 – June 2002
* Kay Norton — July 2002 – July 2018
* Andy Feinstein - July 2018 – present

==College of Performing and Visual Arts==

The College of Performing and Visual Arts (PVA) is an arts community of practitioners, scholars, and learners representing a range of arts traditions and disciplines.

UNCO has a tradition as an arts institution and its main college offices, located in Guggenheim Hall, are one of the oldest buildings on campus.
==Athletics==

Sports teams at the school are called &quot;Bears.&quot; Northern Colorado joined the Big Sky Conference on July 1, 2006. The school mascot is Klawz the Bear and the school colors are navy blue and gold. The Fight Song is the &quot;UNC Fight Song&quot;. Northern Colorado&#x27;s Athletic Director is Darren Dunn.

A number of the university&#x27;s alumni have gone on to have professional sports careers. Vincent Jackson attended and played football at Northern Colorado from 2001 to 2004 before being drafted by the San Diego Chargers in the 2005 NFL draft. Other football alumni of the school include punter Dirk Johnson, quarterback Kyle Sloter, safety Reed Doughty, and defensive lineman Aaron Smith.

Before upgrading to NCAA Division I in 2006, UNCO was a member of the Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference from 1923 to 1972 and the Great Plains Athletic Conference (1972–76). Following several years of being conference independent, the university joined the North Central Conference. The Bears have won two Division II Football National Championships in 1996 and 1997. On March 9, 2011, the Bears won the Big Sky Conference tournament championship in men&#x27;s basketball, clinching a trip to the 2011 NCAA Men&#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament, the first in the school&#x27;s history. The Northern Colorado men&#x27;s baseball program also ranks among the top 15 schools for most all-time NCAA College World Series appearances, tied with the University of Oklahoma at ten appearances apiece. The Northern Colorado women&#x27;s softball team appeared in the first eleven Women&#x27;s College World Series ever held in 1969–1979, advancing to but losing the title game in 1974.

===Mascots===
The bear became UNCO&#x27;s mascot in 1923. Before the school adopted the bear, athletes used the nickname &quot;the Teachers.&quot; The bear was said to be inspired by a bear on top of an Alaskan totem pole donated by an 1897 alumnus in 1914. The totem pole was kept in the University Center, but under the federal Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990, the pole was reclaimed by the Tlingit in 2003.

Klawz is the newest addition to the long line of Bears mascots.

==Notable alumni==
==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Albert Frank Carter – &quot;Forty years of Colorado State Teachers College, formerly the State Normal School of Colorado, 1890–1930&quot;
* Larson, Robert W; Boulder: Colorado Associated University Press, (1989). &quot;Shaping educational change: the first century of the University of Northern Colorado at Greeley&quot;. .
* Kurt Hinkle – &quot;Northern Light: The Complete History of the University of Northern Colorado Football Program.&quot; (1998).

==External links==
* 
* Northern Colorado athletics website
*University of Northern Colorado rugby football club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="4" end="35" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="University of Northern Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="37" end="41" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="UNCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="70" end="73" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="UNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="79" end="96" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q94274" start="100" end="117" title="Greeley, Colorado" label="Greeley, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="164" end="195" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="State Normal School of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374230" start="222" end="239" title="teacher education" label="teacher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="312" end="359" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="Colorado State College of Education, at Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783608" start="382" end="404" title="University of Northern Colorado" label="Colorado State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q876195" start="561" end="569" title="Loveland, Colorado" label="Loveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="571" end="577" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q49246" start="578" end="584" title="Aurora, Colorado" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="590" end="606" title="Colorado Springs" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="649" end="664" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="683" end="701" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q94274" start="870" end="887" title="Greeley, Colorado" label="Greeley, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q123479511" start="1633" end="1648" title="Richard R. Bond" label="Richard R. Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q931345" start="1925" end="1935" title="Hank Brown" label="Hank Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="2494" end="2512" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013045" start="2813" end="2828" title="Vincent Jackson" label="Vincent Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="2925" end="2943" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714948" start="2951" end="2965" title="2005 NFL draft" label="2005 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280833" start="3018" end="3030" title="Dirk Johnson" label="Dirk Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34645461" start="3044" end="3055" title="Kyle Sloter" label="Kyle Sloter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306643" start="3064" end="3076" title="Reed Doughty" label="Reed Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662451" start="3100" end="3111" title="Aaron Smith (American football)" label="Aaron Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="3134" end="3149" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355873" start="3184" end="3218" title="Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference" label="Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599768" start="3245" end="3277" title="Great Plains Athletic Conference" label="Great Plains Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q267616" start="3372" end="3396" title="North Central Conference" label="North Central Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="3519" end="3537" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="3565" end="3586" title="men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948729" start="3612" end="3665" title="2011 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament" label="2011 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="3864" end="3886" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030864" start="3992" end="4025" title="Women&amp;#x27;s College World Series" label="Women&amp;#x27;s College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="4523" end="4530" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980465" start="5190" end="5241" title="University of Northern Colorado rugby football club" label="University of Northern Colorado rugby football club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="362138" wikidata="Q3097883" url="?curid=362138" title="MetroCard">
<text>The MetroCard is a magnetic stripe card used for fare payment on transportation in the New York City area. It is a payment method for the New York City Subway (including the Staten Island Railway), New York City Transit buses and MTA buses. The MetroCard is also accepted by several partner agencies: Nassau Inter-County Express (NICE), the PATH train system, the Roosevelt Island Tramway, AirTrain JFK, and Westchester County&#x27;s Bee-Line Bus System.

The MetroCard was introduced in 1993 to enhance the technology of the transit system and eliminate the burden of carrying and collecting tokens. The MTA discontinued the use of tokens in the subway on May 3, 2003, and on buses on December 31, 2003.

The MetroCard is expected to be phased out by 2025. It will be replaced by OMNY, a contactless payment system where riders pay for their fare by waving or tapping credit or debit bank cards, smartphones, or MTA-issued smart cards.

The MetroCard is managed by a division of the MTA known as Revenue Control, MetroCard Sales, which is part of the Office of the Executive Vice President. The MetroCard Vending Machines are manufactured by Cubic Transportation Systems, Inc.

As of early 2019, the direct costs of the MetroCard system had totaled $1.5 billion.

==History and fares==
The idea for a farecard with a magnetic strip for the MTA system was proposed in 1983. It was the &quot;highest priority&quot; for then-MTA Chairman Richard Ravitch. The card would replace the tokens that were, at the time, used to pay transit fares. This plan was generally supported by the public. In 1984, Ravitch&#x27;s successor Bob Kiley said that he would try to create a system for the new farecards within the next four years. However, bureaucratic actions and disagreements delayed the rollout of the system. In March 1990, the MTA board voted to allocate funding for the magnetic fare collection system. Three months later, the New York state legislature voted to allow the MTA to proceed for its plans for the new system. By 1991, the token technology was becoming dated: almost all other transit systems were using magnetic farecards, which were found to be much cheaper than the token system. In July of that year, the MTA board approved the roll-out of the magnetic farecard system. The MTA opened a request for bids to furnish and operate the farecard system, and Cubic Transportation Systems offered the lowest bid at $100 million.

On October 30, 1992, the installation of Automated Fare Collection turnstiles began. The farecard system was given the name MetroCard by April 1993. At the time, the first subway stations were supposed to receive MetroCard-compatible turnstiles before year&#x27;s end, and buses were scheduled to be retrofitted with MetroCard collection equipment by late 1995. On June 1, 1993, MTA distributed 3,000 MetroCards in the first major test of the technology for the entire subway and bus systems. Less than a year later, on January 6, 1994, MetroCard-compatible turnstiles opened at Wall Street on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line () and Whitehall Street–South Ferry on the BMT Broadway Line (). All MetroCard turnstiles were installed by May 14, 1997, when the entire bus and subway system accepted MetroCard.

On September 28, 1995, buses on Staten Island started accepting MetroCard, and by the end of 1995, MetroCard was accepted on all New York City Transit buses.

Before 1997, the MetroCard design was blue with yellow lettering. These blue cards are now collector&#x27;s items. On July 4, 1997, the first free transfers were made available between bus and subway at any location with MetroCard. This program was originally billed as MetroCard Gold. Card colors changed to the current blue lettering on goldenrod background. On January 1, 1998, bonus free rides (10% of the purchase amount) were given for purchases of $15 or more. On July 4, six months later, 7-Day and 30-Day Unlimited Ride MetroCards were introduced, at $17 and $63 respectively. A 30-day Express Bus Plus MetroCard, allowing unlimited rides on express buses in addition to local buses and the subway, was also introduced at $120. The 1-Day Fun Pass was introduced on January 1, 1999, at a cost of $4. The debut of the MetroCard allowed the MTA to add bonus fare incentives, such as free bus transfers to other buses or subways. Half of the ridership increase between 1997 and 1999 was attributed to these incentives.

The first MetroCard Vending Machines (MVMs) were installed on January 25, 1999, in two stations, and by the end of 1999 347 MVMs were in service at 74 stations. On April 13, 2003, tokens were no longer sold. Starting May 4, 2003, tokens were no longer accepted, except on buses. The following fare increases were implemented:
* Base fare increased from $1.50 to $2.00
* 1-Day Unlimited MetroCard fare increased from $4 to $7
* 7-Day Unlimited MetroCard fare increased from $17 to $21
* 30-day Express Bus Plus was replaced with a 7-day Express Bus Plus card, which cost $33 each.
* 30-Day Unlimited MetroCard fare increased from $63 to $70
* The bonus for pay-per-ride increased to 20% of the purchase amount for purchases of $10 or more
* Tokens would be phased out, but for the next two months they acted as $1.50 credit towards a $2 bus ride.

On February 27, 2005, another fare hike occurred:
* 7-day Express Bus Plus increased by $8, to $41.
* 7-Day Unlimited increased by $3, to $24.
* 30-Day Unlimited increased by $6, to $76.
On April 1, 2007, MetroCard started to be accepted by the Westchester Bee-Line Bus System as all of its buses were now equipped with new fareboxes that could accept MetroCard.

On March 2, 2008, another set of fare increases was implemented:
* 1-Day Unlimited fare increased by 50 cents, to $7.50.
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased by $1, to $25.
* 14-Day Unlimited was introduced for $47.
* 30-Day Unlimited increased by $5, to $81.
* The bonus for pay-per-ride decreased to 15% of the purchase amount for purchases of $7 or more.

On June 28, 2009, the agency had its second fare hike in as many years:
* The base fare and single-ride ticket increased by 25 cents, to $2.25.
* 1-Day Unlimited fare increased by 75 cents, to $8.25.
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased by $7, to $27.
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus fare increased by $4, to $45.
* 14-Day Unlimited fare increased by $4.50, to $51.50.
* 30-Day Unlimited increased by $8, to $89.
* The minimum purchase for a pay-per-ride bonus rose to $8.

On December 30, 2010, the bonus value for Pay-Per-Ride decreased to 7% for every $10, and the 1-Day Fun Pass and the 14-Day Unlimited Ride were discontinued altogether. Additionally:
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased by $2, to $29.
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus fare increased by $5, to $50.
* 30-Day Unlimited fare increased by $15, to $104.

In 2012, the MTA allowed advertisements to be printed on the fronts of MetroCards. The backs of MetroCards had already been used for advertisements since 1995. This change meant that advertisers could remove the MTA logo from the fronts of MetroCards.

As a result of Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, three free transfers were offered on the MetroCard. The first was between the Q22, the Q35, and the at the Flatbush Avenue–Brooklyn College subway station. The second between the Q22, either the Q52 Limited or the Q53 Limited, and the at the Rockaway Boulevard station. Finally, a three-hour transfer window applied from transfers from any subway station to the Q22 or Q113 routes of MTA Bus, and then to the n31, n32, and n33 routes of NICE.

On December 19, 2012, the MTA voted for the following fare increases:
* Base fare and single-ride ticket increased by 25 cents, to $2.50.
* 7-Day Unlimited MetroCard fare increased by $1, to $30.
* 30-Day Unlimited MetroCard fare increased by $8, to $112.
* The bonus for a pay-per-ride MetroCard decreased from 7% to 5% but the cutoff for the bonus decreased from $10 to $5.

Starting February 20, 2013, people were able to refill cards with both time and value, so that when a MetroCard is filled with both an unlimited card and fare value, the unlimited ride portion is used first where applicable. If not started already, the unlimited ride period would begin when the card is next used, and when the unlimited period expires, the regular fare would be charged. On March 3, 2013, a $1 fee was imposed on new card purchases in-system in order to reduce the number of discarded MetroCards. However, MetroCards purchased through the Extended Sales retail network carry no new card fee.

On March 22, 2015, the MTA voted for the following fare increases:
* Base Fare increased by 25 cents, to $2.75;
* Express Bus fare increased, to $6.50;
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased by $1, to $31;
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus fare increased by $7.25, to $57.25;
* 30-Day Unlimited increased by $4.50, to $116.50;
* Single Ride ticket increased by 50 cents, to $3.00; and:
* the bonus for a pay-per-ride MetroCard was increased to 11%.

On March 19, 2017, the following fare increases went into place:
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased by $1, to $32;
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus fare increased by $2.25, to $59.50;
* 30-Day Unlimited increased by $4.50, to $121; and
* the bonus for a pay-per-ride MetroCard was reduced from 11% to 5%.

On October 23, 2017, it was announced that the MetroCard would be phased out and replaced by OMNY, a contactless fare payment system also by Cubic, with fare payment being made using Apple Pay, Google Wallet, debit/credit cards with near-field communication enabled, or radio-frequency identification cards. All buses and subway stations would use the OMNY system by 2020. However, support of the MetroCard is slated to remain until 2023.

In mid-2018, city officials tentatively agreed to start a program in which they would provide half-fare MetroCards to almost 800,000 New York City residents living below the federal poverty line. The program would start in January 2019, and the New York City allocated $106 million in fiscal year 2019 to subsidize the half-fare MetroCards for at least six months. After uncertainty over whether the program would be implemented, the half-fare MetroCards were rolled out starting on January 4, 2019. Initially, the reduced-fare MetroCards would be rolled out to 30,000 residents, though another 130,000 New Yorkers receiving SNAP benefits would also be allowed to receive the half-fare MetroCards in April 2019. However, in the revised plan, only a portion of the originally projected 800,000 residents (around 20%) would be eligible for the reduced-fare cards.

On April 21, 2019, the following fare increases went into place:
* Express Bus fare increased by 25 cents, to $6.75;
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased by $1, to $33;
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus fare increased by $2.50, to $62;
* 30-Day Unlimited fare increased by $6, to $127; and
* the bonus for a pay-per-ride MetroCard was eliminated.

In August 2023, the following fare increases went into place:
* Base Fare increased by 15 cents, to $2.90
* Express Bus fare increased, to $7.00
* 7-Day Unlimited fare increased to $34
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus fare increased to $64.00
* 30-Day Unlimited fare increased to $132
* Single Ride ticket increased by 25 cents, to $3.25

The MetroCard itself costs $1.

==Technology==

During a swipe, the MetroCard is read, re-written to, then check-read to verify correct encoding.
Each MetroCard stored value card is assigned a unique, permanent ten-digit serial number when it is manufactured. The value is stored magnetically on the card itself, while the card&#x27;s transaction history is held centrally in the Automated Fare Collection (AFC) Database. When a card is purchased and fares are loaded onto it, the MetroCard Vending Machine or station agent&#x27;s computer stores the amount of the purchase onto the card and updates the database, identifying the card by its serial number. Whenever the card is swiped at a turnstile, the value of the card is read, the new value is written, the customer is let through, and then the central database is updated with the new transaction as soon as possible. Cards are not validated in real time against the database when swiped to pay the fare. The AFC Database is necessary to maintain transaction records to track a card if needed. It has actually been used to acquit criminal suspects by placing them away from the scene of a crime. The database also stores a list of MetroCards that have been invalidated for various reasons. Reasons include the MetroCard being lost, stolen, expired student, or an expired monthly card, and it distributes the list to turnstiles in order to deny access to a revoked card.

The older blue MetroCards were not capable of the many kinds of fare options that the gold ones currently offer. The format of the magnetic stripe used by the blue MetroCard offered very little other than the standard pay-per-swipe fare. Gold MetroCards allow groups of people (up to four) to ride together using a single pay-per-swipe MetroCard. The gold MetroCard keeps track of the number of swipes at a location in order to allow those same number of people to transfer at a subsequent location, if applicable. The MetroCard system was designed to ensure backward compatibility, which allowed a smooth transition from the blue format to gold.

Cubic later used the proprietary MetroCard platform to create the Chicago Card and Tren Urbano&#x27;s fare card, which are physically identical to the MetroCard except for the labeling.

== Physical attributes ==
* Dimensions: ; thickness
* Material: Polyester

==Card types==

===SingleRide Ticket===

The SingleRide Ticket (introduced to replace subway tokens and single cash fares) is a piece of paper with a magnetic strip on the front, and with the date and time of purchase stamped on the back. They cost $3.25 for one subway or local bus ride, with one free transfer allowed between buses, issued by the bus operator upon request. SingleRide Tickets do not allow transfers between subways and buses. SingleRide tickets can only be purchased at MetroCard Vending Machines, which are usually located within subway stations, and expire two hours from time of purchase. Because of these limitations, SingleRide Tickets are not frequently used, having been used by only 3% of subway riders in 2009.

Although the Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard is accepted on PATH, the regular SingleRide ticket is not. However, a PATH SingleRide ticket is available from MVMs in PATH stations for $2.75, valid for 2 hours and only on PATH. PATH also accepts 2-Trip PATH MetroCards, which cost $5.50 and are also valid only on PATH.

===Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard===
The Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard costs $1, and can be filled with an initial value in any increment between $5.80 and $80, though vending machines only sell values in multiples of 5 cents. Cards can be refilled in 1 cent increments at station booths (formerly called token booths), and in 5 cent increments at vending machines. A MetroCard holder can spend up to $80 in one transaction and up to a total value of $100. Pay-Per-Ride MetroCards can also be filled with unlimited ride time in 7- or 30-day increments. As of 2022, station booths no longer do any MetroCard transactions.

The Pay-Per Ride MetroCard is accepted on the New York City Subway; MTA express, local, limited, and Select Bus Service buses; and the Staten Island Railway. Outside agencies also accept the MetroCard, including Nassau Inter-County Express; the PATH, operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey; the AirTrain JFK, operated by the Port Authority; the Roosevelt Island Tramway; and the Westchester County Bee-Line Bus System. However, PATH does not accept reduced fare MetroCard.

Pay-Per-Ride MetroCards deduct different values depending on which service is used. Subway, Staten Island Railway, Roosevelt Island Tramway, or local/limited/Select bus uses, cost $2.90 per trip and usually allow one valid transfer, though two transfers may be allowed depending on which routes are being used (see below). Although the PATH charges $2.75 as well, it does not offer any free transfers. A ride on an MTA express bus costs $7.00, with transfers allowed to or from the subway, Staten Island Railway, or non-express MTA buses. The BxM4C Bee-Line Bus deducts $7.50 per trip, and no free or discounted transfers are allowed to or from that route. The AirTrain JFK costs $8.50 per trip if the passenger enters or leaves at Jamaica or Howard Beach–JFK Airport stations.

Transfers are available within two hours of initial entry, with the following structure:
* One free transfer from
** subway to local bus
** bus to subway
** bus to local bus
** express bus to express bus
** bus or subway to Staten Island Railway
** subway to subway between the Lexington Avenue–59th Street () stations and the Lexington Avenue–63rd Street () station or between Junius Street () station and Livonia Avenue () station
* Two consecutive free transfers are available with the MetroCard for certain transfers. The transfers must be made within two hours of each other (e.g. when one makes the first transfer, they have two hours to make the second transfer).
** Between Staten Island bus routes crossing the Staten Island Railway, through St. George Ferry Terminal, and then any MTA local bus or NYC subway service below Fulton Street in Lower Manhattan.
** Between certain bus routes as specified in 
* $4.10 for each local bus or subway to express bus transfer.
* Transfers with coins (pennies and half-dollar coins not accepted) are good for use on one connecting local bus route (restrictions apply).
* Customers transferring to suburban buses from another system with a lower base fare must pay the difference between the fare on the first bus and the fare on the second bus.
* No transfers to the BxM4C.
* No free transfer between PATH and NYC Subway, Bus and MTA Bus.
* Up to 4 people can ride together on a single Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard, with one free transfer granted.

Expired card balance may be transferred to a new card at any MetroCard Vending Machine, up to one year after expiration. After one year the card must be sent to the Customer Claims area of the MTA.

===EasyPayXPress MetroCard===
The EasyPayXPress MetroCard functions like a pay per ride or unlimited MetroCard, but is automatically refilled from a linked credit or debit card. An EasyPayXpress account is opened with either $30 or a 30-day unlimited balance of $121. , another $45 is automatically added for Pay-Per-Ride customers when balance drops below $20. To reduce this, a one-time payment may be made online before the balance drops below $20. All rules for standard pay per ride or unlimited cards apply, and EasyPay customers can review the account and ride usage online. Reduced-fare EasyPay version converts from Pay-Per-Ride to Unlimited rides (during that billing cycle) once the value of fares used meet or exceed the cost of a reduced-fare 30-Day Unlimited Ride card. Express bus fares do not contribute, and EasyPay cannot be used on PATH trains.

===AirTrain JFK Discount MetroCard===
The AirTrain JFK Discount MetroCard offers 10 trips on AirTrain JFK at $26.50. This card can only be purchased at specially marked MetroCard Vending Machines. It can be refilled, and once done so, becomes a Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard. However, although the AirTrain fare is also payable using a regular Pay-Per-Ride MetroCard, no discount is given for Pay-Per-Ride cards. There is also an unlimited-ride 30-day card that costs $40 and is only valid on AirTrain JFK.

===Unlimited MetroCard===
, four types of Unlimited-ride MetroCards are sold:
* 7-Day Unlimited Ride Card, $34 for unlimited subway and local bus rides until midnight on the seventh day following first usage.
* 30-Day Unlimited Ride Card, $132 for unlimited subway and local bus rides until midnight on the thirtieth day following first usage.
* 7-Day Express Bus Plus Card, $64 for unlimited express bus, local bus, and subway rides until midnight on the seventh day following first usage.
* 30-Day AirTrain JFK Unlimited Ride Card, $40 for unlimited trips on the AirTrain (operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey) until midnight on the thirtieth day from first usage. This card can only be purchased at specially marked MetroCard Vending Machines at the Howard Beach–JFK Airport () or Sutphin Boulevard–Archer Avenue–JFK Airport () stations and at MetroCard vendors in JFK Airport. There are no transfer privileges with this card as it only works on the AirTrain. This is the only unlimited card accepted on the AirTrain.

Any Unlimited Ride Card cannot be used at the same subway station or bus route for 18 minutes after it is swiped. Every MetroCard can be refilled in increments of 7 or 30 days&#x27; worth of unlimited ride time, or with pay-per-ride value, but time is used before value unless the time on the card cannot be applied to the ride taken. The 7 Day Express Bus Plus card is the only unlimited card that can be used on express buses. Unlimited rides cannot be applied to non-MTA transit systems such as the PATH or AirTrain JFK; to use these systems that require a value-based fare, riders can load money on their Unlimited Ride MetroCard by selecting &quot;Add Value&quot; when refilling at a MetroCard Vending Machine or at a station booth. Turnstiles for these systems will simply deduct the fare from the value portion of the MetroCard. 30-Day Unlimited and 7-Day Express Bus Plus Cards that are purchased using a credit, debit or ATM card from a MetroCard vending machine can be reported lost or stolen to receive a pro-rated credit for the card.

Standard 7- and 30-day unlimited cards are accepted on MTA New York City Subway; non-express buses from either the MTA, NICE, or Bee-Line; the Roosevelt Island Tramway; and the Staten Island Railway. 7-Day Express Bus Plus is accepted on MTA express buses. The AirTrain JFK only accepts the Unlimited AirTrain JFK card.

===Student MetroCard===

The Student MetroCard was issued to New York City public and private school students who live within the city limits. It allowed free access to the NYCT buses and trains, depending on the distance traveled between their school and their home. The card program was managed by the NYCDOE Office of Pupil Transportation. In NYC, these cards were replaced by Student OMNY cards. In Nassau County, Student MetroCards are issued by individual schools which have pre-paid for the cards. In Westchester County, cards are also issued, but cost $58 per month, or $580 a school year.

The DOE issues different colors of cards to students who live in New York City. Orange cards are given to students who are in grade K-6. Green cards are given to students who are in grades 7–12. Student MetroCards are allowed on the New York City Subway, non-express MTA buses, and the Staten Island Railway. Formerly, there was also a half-fare card that could only be used on non-express buses, discontinued in mid-2019. Red cards are issued to students and parents when there is a school bus work stoppage. Blue and purple cards are issued to Nassau County students and are only allowed to use the cards on NICE buses. Up to three trips per day may be made on student MetroCards, though four-trip MetroCards can be authorized individually for students who must make more than one transfer between home and school.

Students who receive a student MetroCard must live:
* More than 0.5 miles away if they are in grades K–2
* More than 1.0 miles away if they are in grades 3–6
* More than 1.5 miles away if they are in grades 7–12

In May 2019, the MTA voted to phase out the half-fare student MetroCard and distribute only full-fare cards for students who qualify for a MetroCard.

===Disabled/Senior Citizen Reduced-Fare MetroCard===

Senior citizen MetroCards are received via application or by submitting the application in person with required ID and copies of proof of age at the NYC Transit Customer Service Center at 3 Stone St in lower Manhattan and act as a combination photo ID and MetroCard. It allows half-fare within the MTA system, and on express buses during off-peak hours only. Half fare is also available on the 7-day and 30-day Unlimited MetroCards. &quot;Autogate&quot; cards are issued to persons with mobility impairments and are accepted at wheelchair doors at selected stations. The card back is color-coded to indicate the gender of the card holder, and the card face is marked with &quot;Photo ID Pass&quot;. Later issues of Senior Citizen and Disability MetroCards are uncolored (all white with black printing on back with photo, gold face remains unchanged) for gender neutral requests.
Temporary replacement cards are purple with no photo, or blue for Autogate MetroCard holders, and the value cannot be refunded if the original card is stolen or lost. A Senior &amp; Disabled Reduced-fare EasyPay (automatic refill) card is also available.

This type of card is accepted everywhere the Pay-Per-Ride or time-based MetroCard is, with two exceptions: it is not valid on the PATH, and it is not valid for ticket purchase on New York City-bound LIRR and Metro-North trains in the morning. Reduced-Fare MetroCards (in any variety) are also not accepted at PATH stations. Reduced fare customers who do not have a MetroCard may purchase a full-fare round trip MetroCard from a subway station agent by presenting proof of eligibility.

This type of card caused complaints because it took up to three months to replace.

=== Fair Fares MetroCard ===
The Fair Fares MetroCard pilot program was implemented in January 2019. These are distributed by Fair Fares NYC, which sends letters to eligible residents that meet the income criteria, including veteran students, New York City Housing Authority residents, City University of New York students, and residents who receive benefits from the Department of Social Services. These residents must then register online to receive the Fair Fare MetroCard. Holders of the Fair Fare MetroCard can purchase Pay-Per-Ride or time-based fares at half the regular price. This type of card is accepted only on local/limited/Select buses, the subway, and the Staten Island Railway.

===Emergency services===

An emergency MetroCard is carried by police officers, firefighters, and emergency medical personnel while on duty so they can access the subway system during an emergency.

==Fares==
===MetroCard Bus Transfer===
The MetroCard Bus Transfer is issued upon request to passengers who pay cash fares on buses accepting MetroCard. The transfer is inserted into the fare box on the second bus, which retains it. Westchester Bee Line bus system and Nassau Inter-County Express and MTA New York City Transit bus is free to transfer from one bus to another bus that is accepted with MetroCard. The bus transfer is paper like the SingleRide Metrocard. This transfer does not grant cash customers subway access.

For suburban transfers, if the fare paid to get the transfer is less than that required on the second bus, the difference must be paid on boarding. For transfers from NICE to New York City Transit, no step up fee is required.

The predecessor to the MetroCard bus transfer was the &quot;original&quot; bus transfer. These paper tickets allowed bus to bus transfers. Available in pads of several different colors for use at different times, boroughs or directions, they would be torn at a certain time-marked line to indicate when the transfer would expire. A version of this still exists today as the &quot;General Order Transfer&quot; (aka &quot;block ticket&quot;) which is provided to customers as they leave the subway system during service disruptions to re-enter the system at another point (often via a shuttle bus).

==Purchase options==
All new MetroCard purchases are charged a $1 fee, except to reduced fare customers and those exchanging damaged/expired cards. This purchase fee does not apply to MetroCard refills.

===Subway station booths===
As of 2022, booths no longer handle any transactions, and station agents have been reassigned to other functions within the station. Prior to this booths staffed by MTA station agents (at specified time periods) are located in all MTA subway stations. Every type of MetroCard could be purchased at a booth, with the exception of the SingleRide ticket (purchased at the MetroCard Vending Machine) and MetroCards specific to other transit systems (AirTrain JFK and PATH). All booth transactions had to be in cash.

===MetroCard vending machines===
MetroCard Vending Machines (MVMs) are located in all subway stations, PATH stations (with the added ability to reload SmartLink cards), Staten Island Ferry terminals, Roosevelt Island Tramway stations, and the Hempstead Transit Center, Eltingville Transit Center, and Central Terminal at LaGuardia Airport.

MVMs debuted on January 25, 1999, and are found in two models. Standard MVMs accept cash, credit cards, and debit cards, and are located in every subway station. Cash transactions are required for purchases of less than $1, and they can return up to $9 in coin change (this amount was changed in later years to $6). MVMs can also reload previously issued MetroCards. MetroCard Express Machines (MEMs) are smaller MVMs that only accept credit and ATM/debit cards. Both models allow customers to purchase any type of MetroCard through a touchscreen. The machines also comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, through use of Braille and a headset jack: audible commands for each menu item are provided once a headset is connected and the proper sequence is keyed through the keypad; all non-visual commands are then entered via the keypad instead of the touchscreen. The MEMs and MVMs are geared to allow a maximum of 2 transactions per day when payment is made by either credit or debit card. PATH fare vending machines (only in PATH stations) can dispense MetroCards. MetroCards that have expired can be exchanged using a MVM or MEM if done within one year of the expiration date printed on the back of the card. This is done by using the Refill option on the machine screen. Any cash value that is left on the expired card will be transferred to the new card. No fee is charged for a new MetroCard in this instance.

===MetroCard bus and van===
A number of MetroCard sales vans and a MetroCard bus (a retired bus converted for sales duty) routinely travel to specific locations in New York City and Westchester County, stopping for a day (or half a day) at the announced locations. MetroCards can be purchased or refilled directly from these vehicles. Reduced-fare MetroCard applications can also be processed on the bus, including taking photographs for these cards.

The MetroCard van serves all five boroughs and Westchester County, while the MetroCard bus serves Manhattan, the Bronx, Queens, and parts of Brooklyn.

===Neighborhood MetroCard merchants===
Vendors can apply to sell MTA fare media at their business. Only presealed, prevalued cards are available, and no fee is charged. A comprehensive listing of neighborhood MetroCard merchants can be found on the MTA website.

===Commuter railroad ticket vending machines===
Ticket vending machines (TVMs) for the MTA&#x27;s two commuter railroad systems, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Railroad, offer the option to purchase combined tickets/passes and MetroCards. A $5.50 MetroCard is available with a round-trip ticket, and a $50 MetroCard is available with a monthly pass. In addition, the machines sell separate $25 MetroCards. TVMs at Jamaica station and Penn Station sell AirTrain JFK monthly passes on the back of LIRR tickets. All cards sold from these machines are of thick paper stock, not the normal plastic.

Beginning in 2007, with the start of the S89 bus service, a combined Hudson–Bergen Light Rail (HBLR) monthly pass and monthly MetroCard became available at NJ Transit ticket vending machines at HBLR stations.

==Future==
In 2006, the MTA and Port Authority announced plans to replace the magnetic strip with smart cards.

On July 1, 2006, MTA launched a six-month pilot program to test the new contact-less smart card fare collection system, initially ending on December 31, 2006, but extended until May 31, 2007. This program was tested at all stations on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line and at four stations in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens. The testing system utilized Citibank MasterCard&#x27;s Paypass keytags. This smart card system was intended to ease congestion near the fare control area by reducing time spent paying for fare. MTA and other transportation authorities in the region said they would eventually implement it system-wide.

=== OMNY ===

In October 2017, MTA signed a $573 million contract with Cubic Transportation Systems for OMNY (short for One Metro New York), a new fare payment system. This will use the contactless payment system, with riders waving or tapping credit or debit bank cards, smartphones, and/or MTA-issued smart cards to pay their fare. This contactless system was originally developed by Transport for London at a cost of £11 million (at the time equivalent to around $14 million), before being licensed to Cubic for worldwide sale. MTA expects to spend at least six years rolling out the system, with new electronic readers and vending machines. The new fare system would be rolled out on a limited basis in May 2019. It was intended that by 2024, the MetroCard would be phased out entirely, although this target has not been met.

== Unauthorized resale and scams==

The MetroCard system is susceptible to various types of unauthorized resale, colloquially known as &quot;selling swipes&quot;.

At times, this may involve individuals charging to swipe another commuter into the subway system at a discount below the official fare, either by using an &quot;unlimited ride&quot; MetroCard, or by manipulating a spent MetroCard to obtain an extra, unpaid ride. A 2004 press release from New York State Senator Martin J. Golden claims these behaviors cost the MTA $260,000 a year.

So-called &#x27;swipers&#x27; reportedly may secure customers by maliciously damaging the coin and bill acceptor mechanisms of metrocard vending machines Nearly half of broken vending machines were in Manhattan, and the MTA spent $26.5 million on MVM repairs as of 2017. An 18-minute delay between uses of an &quot;unlimited ride&quot; MetroCard at any given station, and the expense of unlimited ride MetroCards, have historically limited their use for selling swipes.

More commonly, &quot;swipers&quot; use a technique which involves bending a spent MetroCard in a precise way that then allows a further use of that MetroCard when swiped and unkinked according to a specific procedure at a turnstile. Swipers employ this procedure to sell discount entry to the subway; some riders simply use the technique to garner free subway entry themselves. The bend purportedly damages the magnetic stripe on the MetroCard which indicates it no longer has value, prompting the turnstile reader to defer to a back-up field which indicates that the metrocard has one remaining fare. When the technique was discovered, it could be performed an unlimited number of times with the same MetroCard. However, a software correction soon limited the technique to just once per used MetroCard, in which a turnstile computer which had deferred to that &quot;backup&quot; field would require the MetroCard be swiped additional times through the reader/writer before granting entry so any lingering indication of value could be deleted from the card, making it impossible to manipulate a given MetroCard in the same way once again.

Criminal charges leveled against those using this bent-MetroCard technique have included petit larceny and, in a state law introduced specifically to target swipers in the year 2006, with &quot;unauthorized sale of transportation services.&quot; As early as 2001, however, police and prosecutors began to charge people bending MetroCards to seek free rides (either to sell, or for personal use) with various forms of forgery.

While misdemeanor forgery charges have been used in a number of jurisdictions, the Manhattan District Attorney&#x27;s Office championed felony forgery charges for those in possession of manipulated metrocards, including &quot;criminal possession of a &#x27;forged instrument&#x27; in the 2nd Degree&quot;, a felony. A representative of that office successfully defended the charge to the state&#x27;s highest court, the New York State Court of Appeals, in a case decided in 2009. Critics have argued, however, that the court&#x27;s decision is based on an incomplete—and possibly incorrect—understanding of MetroCard technology, calling to question the status of a bent metrocard as a &quot;forged instrument&quot;. The MetroCard technology has no public documentation, and has never been made available to criminal defendants who might dispute claims that a simple bend to a MetroCard alters its data as read by a turnstile computer in the way claimed by Manhattan prosecutors. It is unclear, for example, why a bent MetroCard cannot be used to obtain an unpaid ride on a New York City bus if simply bending a MetroCard can actually alter how it is read by a subway turnstile computer as prosecutors claim. One researcher has argued that a bent MetroCard must be subject to further procedures in order to be seen by the turnstile computer as legitimate, which requires both concealing data from the turnstile computer with a bend, as well as having fresh data written to the MetroCard by the turnstile computer itself. Because a bent MetroCard will not actually appear legitimate to a turnstile computer without further steps to allow the turnstile computer to write that fresh data, this casts doubt on the claim that a bent MetroCard – often cited as evidence in the prosecutions of swipers – actually constitutes a &quot;forged instrument&quot; as defined in New York State law.

A $1 fee on new MetroCards imposed in 2013 significantly curtailed the bent-MetroCard form of selling swipes. The fee motivated riders to keep and refill their existing MetroCards, undermining the vast supply of discarded spent MetroCards from which swipers previously drew as their stock-in-trade. Nonetheless, people continue to sell swipes of bent MetroCards which have been discarded. Swipers continue to be prosecuted under forgery laws, according to research published in 2019.

The MetroCard has resisted digital duplication through software. The MetroCard has a magnetic stripe, but both the track offsets and the encoding differ from standard Magstripe cards. It is a proprietary format developed by the contractor Cubic. Off-the-shelf reader/writers for the standard cards are useless to read from or write to MetroCards without mechanical modification and custom software. Self-identified hackers have had success decoding MetroCard data by treating Metrocard contents as sound, and converting its contents to binary using a computer sound card, inferring the role of data fields by comparing MetroCards with known properties, and developing custom Linux software to decode MetroCard data. Moreover, MetroCard data has been duplicated to other media, also by treating it as sound, using an eight-track tape player. While duplicates may be usable to enter the subway in the short term, they are likely to be invalidated after the AFC database discovers imbalance between fares purchased for a MetroCard with a certain serial number, and fares used from one or more MetroCards bearing that serial number.

==Limited editions==
Over the years, the MTA has issued limited-edition MetroCards in honor of certain events, people, or structures.

=== Back side designs ===
For much of the MetroCard&#x27;s history, images were printed only on the back side of MetroCards. These have included cards with the Statue of Liberty, the New York City bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics, a Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum exhibit, and the Circle Line ferry. Sporting events have also been commemorated, including the Subway Series, the 2014 Super Bowl, and the 2014–15 season of the Brooklyn Nets.

In 2017, the MTA started issuing Supreme-branded MetroCards at eight subway stations. The Supreme-branded cards were popular, and there were reports that some were resold for hundreds of dollars. The MTA issued MetroCards featuring Mariska Hargitay, the main actor in the TV series &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;, in 2024 to celebrate the show&#x27;s 25th anniversary.

=== Front side designs ===


The MTA started allowing front side advertising in 2012. One of the earlier front side designs was an I Love New York card first sold in October 2013. Three hundred thousand cards were printed in remembrance of Hurricane Sandy the previous year.

Starting in December 2018, the MTA started issuing 250,000 &quot;Game of Thrones&quot;-themed MetroCards at Grand Central–42nd Street, in honor of the show&#x27;s final season. The cards came in four designs. Starting in May 2019, coinciding with the opening of the Memorial Glade at the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum, the MTA issued 250,000 MetroCards with images of first responders at the World Trade Center site after 9/11. The MetroCards were issued at ten subway stations: six in Lower Manhattan and four high-traffic stations in midtown and Brooklyn. In June 2019, the MTA celebrated Stonewall 50 - WorldPride NYC 2019 with LGBT pride-themed MetroCards.

In November 2020, the MTA celebrated Veterans Day with Veterans Day themed MetroCards. The MetroCards were available at six stations: two in Brooklyn, one in Queens, two in Midtown Manhattan, and one in The Bronx. In 2023, the MTA issued special Cam&#x27;ron, LL Cool J, Rakim, and Pop Smoke MetroCards. In 2024, the MTA issued Ice Spice MetroCards to celebrate the launch of Ice Spice&#x27;s first album. That May, the MTA announced that two final front-side MetroCard designs would be issued, as the MTA was in the process of retiring the MetroCard itself. The second-to-last commemorative card was themed to Olivia Rodrigo and was sold starting in October 2024. The last promotional Metrocard, collaborating with Instagram, features social media stars &quot;New York Nico&quot;, &quot;SubwayTakes&quot; and &quot;Overheard NY&quot; were sold starting on December 9, 2024.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3097883" start="4" end="13" title="MetroCard" label="MetroCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="19" end="39" title="magnetic stripe card" label="magnetic stripe card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142227" start="49" end="53" title="fare" label="fare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321208" start="65" end="105" title="transportation in New York City" label="transportation in the New York City area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="138" end="158" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273068" start="174" end="195" title="Staten Island Railway" label="Staten Island Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="198" end="219" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="New York City Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="230" end="239" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967576" start="301" end="328" title="Nassau Inter-County Express" label="Nassau Inter-County Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="341" end="345" title="PATH (rail system)" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q641980" start="364" end="388" title="Roosevelt Island Tramway" label="Roosevelt Island Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q406683" start="390" end="402" title="AirTrain JFK" label="AirTrain JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879491" start="434" end="453" title="Bee-Line Bus System" label="Bee-Line Bus System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="593" end="599" title="New York City transit fares#Token and change" label="tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q64223567" start="781" end="785" title="OMNY" label="OMNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q625903" start="789" end="808" title="contactless payment" label="contactless payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q806806" start="885" end="894" title="bank card" label="bank card"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="897" end="907" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220021" start="924" end="935" title="contactless smart card" label="smart cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192235" start="1143" end="1177" title="Cubic Transportation Systems, Inc." label="Cubic Transportation Systems, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7328603" start="1436" end="1451" title="Richard Ravitch" label="Richard Ravitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933026" start="1621" end="1630" title="Bob Kiley" label="Bob Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192235" start="2367" end="2395" title="Cubic Transportation Systems" label="Cubic Transportation Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146283" start="2995" end="3004" title="turnstile" label="turnstile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183775" start="3016" end="3027" title="Wall Street (IRT Lexington Avenue Line)" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620591" start="3035" end="3060" title="IRT Lexington Avenue Line" label="IRT Lexington Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630288" start="3068" end="3096" title="Whitehall Street–South Ferry (BMT Broadway Line)" label="Whitehall Street–South Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877193" start="3104" end="3121" title="BMT Broadway Line" label="BMT Broadway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="3492" end="3513" title="collectable" label="collector&amp;#x27;s item"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097883" start="4436" end="4462" title="MetroCard Vending Machines" label="MetroCard Vending Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879491" start="5530" end="5549" title="Bee-Line Bus System" label="Bee-Line Bus System"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="7061" end="7076" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608467" start="7172" end="7175" title="Q22 (New York City bus)" label="Q22"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088851" start="7181" end="7184" title="Q35 (New York City bus)" label="Q35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617650" start="7201" end="7233" title="Flatbush Avenue–Brooklyn College (IRT Nostrand Avenue Line)" label="Flatbush Avenue–Brooklyn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091329" start="7289" end="7319" title="Woodhaven and Cross Bay Boulevards buses" label="Q52 Limited or the Q53 Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331252" start="7336" end="7354" title="Rockaway Boulevard (IND Fulton Street Line)" label="Rockaway Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035660" start="7463" end="7467" title="Q113 (New York City bus)" label="Q113"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7503" end="7520" title="List of bus routes in Nassau County, New York#n31" label="n31, n32, and n33"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967576" start="7531" end="7535" title="Nassau Inter-County Express" label="NICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q64223567" start="9350" end="9354" title="OMNY" label="OMNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q625903" start="9358" end="9382" title="Contactless payment" label="contactless fare payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010990" start="9440" end="9449" title="Apple Pay" label="Apple Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111988573" start="9451" end="9464" title="Google Wallet" label="Google Wallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="9490" end="9514" title="near-field communication" label="near-field communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="9527" end="9557" title="radio-frequency identification" label="radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="9879" end="9891" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q556318" start="10322" end="10326" title="Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program" label="SNAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8428168" start="11387" end="11404" title="stored value card" label="stored value card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198578" start="11447" end="11460" title="serial number" label="serial number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11506" end="11518" title="Digital card#Magnetic storage" label="magnetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="11638" end="11646" title="Database" label="Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360677" start="12360" end="12376" title="crime scene" label="scene of a crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="12784" end="12799" title="magnetic stripe" label="magnetic stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="13212" end="13234" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095525" start="13367" end="13379" title="Chicago Card" label="Chicago Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577126" start="13384" end="13395" title="Tren Urbano" label="Tren Urbano"/>
<link wikidata="Q751944" start="13649" end="13661" title="subway token" label="subway token"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="14354" end="14358" title="Port Authority Trans-Hudson" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447635" start="15320" end="15326" title="Select Bus Service" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967576" start="15431" end="15458" title="Nassau Inter-County Express" label="Nassau Inter-County Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="15464" end="15468" title="Port Authority Trans-Hudson" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="15486" end="15527" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q406683" start="15533" end="15545" title="AirTrain JFK" label="AirTrain JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q641980" start="15583" end="15607" title="Roosevelt Island Tramway" label="Roosevelt Island Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879491" start="15636" end="15655" title="Bee-Line Bus System" label="Bee-Line Bus System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="16444" end="16451" title="Jamaica (LIRR station)" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="16455" end="16479" title="Howard Beach–JFK Airport (IND Rockaway Line)" label="Howard Beach–JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608484" start="17173" end="17197" title="List of bus routes in Staten Island" label="Staten Island bus routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273068" start="17211" end="17232" title="Staten Island Railway" label="Staten Island Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q406683" start="19139" end="19151" title="AirTrain JFK" label="AirTrain JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q406683" start="20047" end="20059" title="AirTrain (JFK)" label="AirTrain JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="20138" end="20179" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q648421" start="20321" end="20345" title="Howard Beach–JFK Airport (IND Rockaway Line)" label="Howard Beach–JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q649968" start="20352" end="20395" title="Sutphin Boulevard–Archer Avenue–JFK Airport (New York City Subway)" label="Sutphin Boulevard–Archer Avenue–JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q408230" start="22263" end="22269" title="New York City Department of Education" label="NYCDOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q64223567" start="22339" end="22351" title="OMNY" label="Student OMNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983035" start="25742" end="25773" title="New York City Housing Authority" label="New York City Housing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="25785" end="25812" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879491" start="26625" end="26656" title="Bee-Line Bus System" label="Westchester Bee Line bus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967576" start="26661" end="26688" title="Nassau Inter-County Express" label="Nassau Inter-County Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="26693" end="26722" title="MTA New York City Transit bus" label="MTA New York City Transit bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q928830" start="28213" end="28228" title="metro station" label="subway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543873" start="28642" end="28651" title="SmartLink (smart card)" label="SmartLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048582" start="28660" end="28679" title="Staten Island Ferry" label="Staten Island Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q641980" start="28691" end="28715" title="Roosevelt Island Tramway" label="Roosevelt Island Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367102" start="28734" end="28758" title="Hempstead Transit Center" label="Hempstead Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367820" start="28760" end="28786" title="Eltingville Transit Center" label="Eltingville Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="28812" end="28829" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="28922" end="28933" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q13499" start="28940" end="28950" title="debit card" label="debit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="29367" end="29378" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="29414" end="29453" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="29470" end="29477" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="29484" end="29491" title="headphones" label="headset"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="30429" end="30442" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="30447" end="30465" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="31261" end="31282" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="31287" end="31307" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11310077" start="31553" end="31568" title="Jamaica station" label="Jamaica station"/>
<link wikidata="Q406683" start="31591" end="31603" title="AirTrain JFK" label="AirTrain JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608484" start="31775" end="31782" title="S89 (New York City Bus)" label="S89 bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357874" start="31803" end="31827" title="Hudson–Bergen Light Rail" label="Hudson–Bergen Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="31890" end="31900" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="32042" end="32053" title="smart cards" label="smart cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="32141" end="32151" title="smart card" label="smart card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620591" start="32295" end="32320" title="IRT Lexington Avenue Line" label="IRT Lexington Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="32405" end="32413" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="32414" end="32424" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="32432" end="32439" title="Paypass" label="Paypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192235" start="32751" end="32779" title="Cubic Transportation Systems" label="Cubic Transportation Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q64223567" start="32784" end="32788" title="OMNY" label="OMNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220021" start="32866" end="32877" title="Contactless smart card" label="contactless"/>
<link wikidata="Q806806" start="32940" end="32949" title="bank card" label="bank card"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="32952" end="32962" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220021" start="32983" end="32994" title="contactless smart card" label="smart cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="33066" end="33086" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192235" start="33185" end="33190" title="Cubic Transportation Systems" label="Cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775543" start="33987" end="34003" title="Martin J. Golden" label="Martin J. Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013416" start="36179" end="36220" title="New York County District Attorney" label="Manhattan District Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="36516" end="36547" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York State Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="38632" end="38641" title="Magstripe" label="Magstripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="39890" end="39907" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013317" start="39913" end="39959" title="New York City bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="New York City bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="39963" end="39991" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092781" start="40009" end="40020" title="Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises" label="Circle Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q181448" start="40087" end="40100" title="Subway Series" label="Subway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190093" start="40106" end="40121" title="Super Bowl XLVIII" label="2014 Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191100" start="40131" end="40145" title="2014–15 NBA season" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="40153" end="40166" title="Brooklyn Nets" label="Brooklyn Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659229" start="40202" end="40209" title="Supreme (brand)" label="Supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="40401" end="40417" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40457" end="40494" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353042" start="40689" end="40704" title="I Love New York" label="I Love New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="40798" end="40813" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="40899" end="40914" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982151" start="40942" end="40967" title="Grand Central–42nd Street (New York City Subway)" label="Grand Central–42nd Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q30887543" start="40997" end="41009" title="Game of Thrones (season 8)" label="final season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136137" start="41122" end="41165" title="National September 11 Memorial &amp;amp; Museum" label="National September 11 Memorial &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692282" start="41240" end="41263" title="World Trade Center site" label="World Trade Center site"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="41270" end="41274" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q65035049" start="41439" end="41473" title="Stonewall 50 - WorldPride NYC 2019" label="Stonewall 50 - WorldPride NYC 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="41479" end="41489" title="LGBT pride" label="LGBT pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q755999" start="41547" end="41559" title="Veterans Day" label="Veterans Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q434913" start="41756" end="41768" title="Cam&amp;#x27;ron" label="Cam&amp;#x27;ron"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="41770" end="41779" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q364214" start="41781" end="41786" title="Rakim" label="Rakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q81698554" start="41792" end="41801" title="Pop Smoke" label="Pop Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q114114977" start="41838" end="41847" title="Ice Spice" label="Ice Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q63243883" start="42121" end="42135" title="Olivia Rodrigo" label="Olivia Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="42226" end="42235" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q104772824" start="42271" end="42284" title="New York Nico" label="New York Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113697" start="42326" end="42338" title="Overheard in New York" label="Overheard NY"/>
</links>
</doc>
