<doc id="150185" wikidata="Q102251" url="?curid=150185" title="Sephardic Jews">
<text>Sephardic Jews, also known as Sephardi Jews or Sephardim, and rarely as Iberian Peninsular Jews, are a Jewish diaspora population associated with the Iberian Peninsula (Spain and Portugal). The term, which is derived from the Hebrew &quot;Sepharad&quot; (), can also refer to the Jews of the Middle East and North Africa, who were also heavily influenced by Sephardic law and customs. Many Iberian Jewish exiled families also later sought refuge in those Jewish communities, resulting in ethnic and cultural integration with those communities over the span of many centuries. The majority of Sephardim live in Israel.

The earliest documented Jewish presence in the Iberian Peninsula is often traced to the Roman period, during the first centuries CE. After enduring hardship under the Visigoths, Jewish communities thrived for centuries under Muslim rule in Al-Andalus following the Umayyad conquest, which ushered in a golden age. However, their fortunes declined with the Christian &quot;Reconquista&quot;. In 1492, the Alhambra Decree by the Catholic Monarchs expelled Jews from Spain, and in 1496, King Manuel I of Portugal issued a similar edict for Jews and Muslims. These actions led to migrations, mass conversions, and executions. By the late 15th century, Sephardic Jews had been largely expelled and dispersed across North Africa, Western Asia, Southern and Southeastern Europe, settling in established Jewish communities or pioneering new ones along trade routes like the Silk Road.

Historically, the vernacular languages of the Sephardic Jews and their descendants have been variants of either Spanish, Portuguese, or Catalan, though they have also adopted and adapted other languages. The historical forms of Spanish that differing Sephardic communities spoke communally were related to the date of their departure from Iberia and their status at that time as either New Christians or Jews. Judaeo-Spanish and Judaeo-Portuguese, also called &quot;Ladino&quot;, is a Romance language derived from Old Spanish and Old Portuguese that was spoken by the eastern Sephardic Jews who settled in the Eastern Mediterranean after their expulsion from Spain in 1492; Haketia (also known as &quot;Tetuani Ladino&quot; in Algeria), an Arabic-influenced variety of Judaeo-Spanish, was spoken by North African Sephardic Jews who settled in the region after the 1492 Spanish expulsion.

In 2015, more than five centuries after the expulsion, both Spain and Portugal enacted laws allowing Sephardic Jews who could prove their ancestral origins in those countries to apply for citizenship. The Spanish law that offered citizenship to descendants of Sephardic Jews expired in 2019, although subsequent extensions were granted by the Spanish government —due to the COVID-19 pandemic— in order to file pending documents and sign delayed declarations before a notary public in Spain. In the case of Portugal, the nationality law was modified in 2022 with very stringent requirements for new Sephardic applicants, effectively ending the possibility of successful applications without evidence of a personal travel history to Portugal —which is tantamount to prior permanent residence— or ownership of inherited property or concerns on Portuguese soil.

== Etymology ==
The name Sephardi means &quot;Iberian&quot; or &quot;Hispanic&quot;, derived from Sepharad (), a Biblical location. The location of the Biblical &quot;Sepharad&quot; points to the Iberian peninsula, then the westernmost outpost of Phoenician maritime trade. Jewish presence in Iberia is believed to have started during the reign of King Solomon, whose excise imposed taxes on Iberian exiles. Although the first date of arrival of Jews in Iberia is the subject of ongoing archaeological research, there is evidence of established Jewish communities as early as the 1st century CE.

Modern transliteration of Hebrew romanizes the consonant פ (&quot;pe&quot; without a &quot;dagesh&quot; dot placed in its center) as the digraph &quot;ph&quot;, in order to represent &quot;fe&quot; or the single phoneme &quot;/f/&quot; , the English sound that is voiceless labiodental fricative. In other languages and scripts, &quot;Sephardi&quot; may be translated as plural ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; , ; and .

== Definition ==
=== Narrow ethnic definition ===
In the narrower ethnic definition, a Sephardic Jew is one descended from the Jews who lived in the Iberian Peninsula in the late 15th century, immediately prior to the issuance of the Alhambra Decree of 1492 by order of the Catholic Monarchs in Spain, and the decree of 1496 in Portugal by order of King Manuel I.

In Hebrew, the term &quot;Sephardim Tehorim&quot; (, literally &quot;Pure Sephardim&quot;), derived from a misunderstanding of the initials ס&quot;ט &quot;Samekh Tet&quot; traditionally used with some proper names (which stand for &quot;sofo tov&quot;, &quot;may his end be good&quot; or &quot;sin v&#x27;tin&quot;, &quot;mire and mud&quot; has in recent times been used in some quarters to distinguish Sephardim proper, &quot;who trace their lineage back to the Iberian/Spanish population&quot;, from Sephardim in the broader religious sense. This distinction has also been made in reference to 21st-century genetic findings in research on &#x27;Pure Sephardim&#x27;, in contrast to other communities of Jews today who are part of the broad classification of Sephardi.

Ethnic Sephardic Jews have had a presence in North Africa and various parts of the Mediterranean and Western Asia due to their expulsion from Spain. There have also been Sephardic communities in South America and India.

==== Katalanim ====
Originally the Jews spoke of Sefarad referring to Al-Andalus and not the entire peninsula, nor as it is understood today, in which the term Sefarad is used in modern Hebrew to refer to Spain. This has caused a long misunderstanding, since traditionally the entire Iberian Diaspora has been included in a single group. But the historiographical research reveals that that word, seen as homogeneous, was actually divided into distinct groups: the Sephardim, coming from the countries of the Castilian crown, Castilian language speakers, and the / Katalaní, originally from the Crown of Aragon, Judeo-Catalan speakers.

===Broad religious definition===
The modern Israeli Hebrew definition of Sephardi is a much broader, religious based, definition that generally excludes ethnic considerations. In its most basic form, this broad religious definition of a Sephardi refers to any Jew, of any ethnic background, who follows the customs and traditions of Sepharad. For religious purposes, and in modern Israel, &quot;Sephardim&quot; is most often used in this wider sense. It encompasses most non-Ashkenazi Jews who are not ethnically Sephardi, but are in most instances of West Asian or North African origin. They are classified as Sephardi because they commonly use a Sephardic style of liturgy; this constitutes a majority of Mizrahi Jews in the 21st century.

The term &quot;Sephardi&quot; in the broad sense, describes the &quot;nusach&quot; (Hebrew language, &quot;liturgical tradition&quot;) used by Sephardic Jews in their Siddur (prayer book). A &quot;nusach&quot; is defined by a liturgical tradition&#x27;s choice of prayers, order of prayers, text of prayers and melodies used in the singing of prayers. Sephardim traditionally pray using &quot;Minhag Sefarad.&quot;

The term &quot;Nusach Sefard&quot; or &quot;Nusach Sfarad&quot; does not refer to the liturgy generally recited by Sephardim proper or even Sephardi in a broader sense, but rather to an alternative Eastern European liturgy used by many Hasidim, who are Ashkenazi.

Additionally, Ethiopian Jews, whose branch of practiced Judaism is known as Haymanot, have been included under the oversight of Israel&#x27;s already broad Sephardic Chief Rabbinate.

== History ==
=== Early history ===
The earliest significant Jewish presence in the Iberian Peninsula is typically traced back to the Roman period, during the first centuries CE. Evidence includes an amphora discovered in Ibiza, stamped with two Hebrew letters in relief, indicating possible trade between Judaea and the Balearics in the first century. Additionally, the Epistle to the Romans records Paul&#x27;s intent to visit Spain, hinting at a Jewish community in the region during the mid-first century CE. Josephus writes that Herod Antipas was deposed and exiled to Spain, possibly to Lugdunum Convenarum, in 39 CE.

Rabbinic literature from the Amoraic era references Spain as a distant land with a Jewish presence. For example, a tradition passed down by Rabbi Berekiah and Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, quoting second-century &quot;tanna&quot; Rabbi Meir, states: &quot;Do not fear, O Israel, for I help you from remote lands, and your seed from the land of their captivity, from Gaul, from Spain, and from their neighbors.&quot;

Medieval legends often traced the arrival of Jews in Spain to the First Temple period, with some associating the biblical Tarshish with Tartessus and suggesting Jewish traders were active in Spain during the Phoenician and Carthaginian eras. One such legend from the 16th century claimed that a funeral inscription in Murviedro belonged to Adoniram, a commander of King Solomon, who had supposedly died in Spain while collecting tribute. Another legend spoke of a letter allegedly sent by the Jews of Toledo to Judaea in 30 CE, asking to prevent the crucifixion of Jesus. These legends aimed to establish that Jews had settled in Spain well before the Roman period and to absolve them of any responsibility for the death of Jesus, a charge often leveled at them in later centuries.

Rabbi and scholar Abraham ibn Daud wrote in 1161: &quot;A tradition exists with the [Jewish] community of Granada that they are from the inhabitants of Jerusalem, of the descendants of Judah and Benjamin, rather than from the villages, the towns in the outlying districts [of Israel].&quot; Elsewhere, he writes about his maternal grandfather&#x27;s family and how they came to Spain after Jerusalem&#x27;s destruction in 70 CE: &quot;When Titus prevailed over Jerusalem, his officer who was appointed over Hispania appeased him, requesting that he send to him captives made-up of the nobles of Jerusalem, and so he sent a few of them to him, and there were amongst them those who made curtains and who were knowledgeable in the work of silk, and [one] whose name was Baruch, and they remained in Mérida.&quot;

Archaeological evidence of a Jewish presence in Spain prior to the third century CE is limited. However, from the third to sixth centuries, inscriptions confirm the existence of Jewish communities, particularly in the more Romanized regions of the south and east, such as Toledo, Mérida, Seville, and Tarragona. Additionally, these inscriptions suggest a Jewish presence in other locations, including Elche, Tortosa, Adra, and the Balearic Islands.

Around 300 CE, the Synod of Elvira, an ecclesiastical council convened in southern Spain, and enacted several decrees to restrict interactions between Christians and Jews. Among the measures were prohibitions on intermarriage between Jews and Christians, communal dining, and the participation of Jews in blessing fields. Despite these efforts, aimed to diminish Jewish influence on Christian communities, evidence indicates that everyday social relations between Jews and Christians continued to be prevalent in various locales.

=== Under Visigothic rule ===
By the mid-5th century, Spain came under the control of the Visigothic Kingdom, following a period of significant instability caused by Barbarian invasions that led to the collapse of the Western Roman Empire. Initially, the Christian Visigoths practiced Arianism and, while they generally did not engage in the persecution of Jews, they did not extend particular favor to them either. It was not until the reign of Alaric II (484–507) that a Visigothic king concerned himself with the Jews, as evidenced by the publication of the Breviary of Alaric in 506, which incorporated Roman legal precedents into Visigothic law.

The situation for Jews in Spain shifted dramatically after the conversion of the Visigothic monarchs to Catholicism under King Reccared in 587. As the Visigoths sought to unify the realm under their new religion, their policies towards Jews evolved from initial marginalization to increasingly aggressive measures aimed at their complete eradication from the kingdom. Under successive Visigothic kings and under ecclesiastical authority, many orders of expulsion, forced conversion, isolation, enslavement, execution, and other punitive measures were made. By 612–621, the situation for Jews became intolerable and many left Spain for nearby northern Africa. In 711, thousands of Jews from North Africa accompanied the Muslims who invaded Spain, subsuming Catholic Spain and turning much of it into an Arab state, Al-Andalus.

=== Jews in Muslim Iberia ===
In 711 CE, Muslim forces crossed the Strait of Gibraltar from North Africa and launched a successful military campaign in the Iberian Peninsula. This conquest resulted in the establishment of Muslim rule over much of the region, which they referred to as &quot;Al-Andalus&quot;. The territory would remain under varying degrees of Muslim control for several centuries. The Jewish community, having faced persecution under Visigothic rule, largely welcomed the new Muslim rulers who offered greater religious tolerance. Under Islamic rule, Jews, like Christians, were designated as &quot;dhimmis&quot;—protected but second-class monotheists—permitted to practice their religion with relative autonomy in exchange for paying a special tax.

To the Jews, Moors was perceived as, and indeed were, a liberating force. Wherever they went, the Muslims were greeted by Jews eager to aid them in administering the country. In many conquered towns the garrison was left in the hands of the Jews before the Muslims proceeded further north. Both Muslim and Christian sources claim that Jews provided valuable aid to the Muslim conquerors. Once captured, the defense of Cordoba was left in the hands of Jews, and Granada, Malaga, Seville, and Toledo were left to a mixed army of Jews and Moors. Although in some towns Jews may have been helpful to Muslim success, because of the small numbers they were of limited impact.

The Golden Age of Sephardic Jewry flourished during this period, particularly in cities like Cordoba, Granada and Toledo. Jewish scholars, poets, philosophers and scientists thrived, contributing to the broader intellectual life of Al-Andalus. Jews in Muslim Spain played significant roles in trade, finance, diplomacy, and medicine. In spite of the restrictions placed upon the Jews as &quot;dhimmis&quot;, life under Muslim rule was one of great opportunity and Jews flourished as they did not under the Christian Visigoths. Many Jews came to Iberia, seen as a land of tolerance and opportunity, from the Christian and Muslim worlds. Following initial Arab victories, and especially with the establishment of Umayyad rule by Abd al-Rahman I in 755, the native Jewish community was joined by Jews from the rest of Europe, as well as from Arab lands, from Morocco to Babylon. Jewish communities were enriched culturally, intellectually, and religiously by the commingling of these diverse Jewish traditions.

Arabic culture, of course, also made a lasting impact on Sephardic cultural development. General re-evaluation of scripture was prompted by Muslim anti-Jewish polemics and the spread of rationalism, as well as the anti-Rabbanite polemics of Karaites. The cultural and intellectual achievements of the Arabs, and much of the scientific and philosophical speculation of Ancient Greek culture, which had been best preserved by Arab scholars, was made available to the educated Jew. The meticulous regard the Arabs had for grammar and style also had the effect of stimulating an interest in philological matters in general among Jews. Arabic became the main language of Sephardic science, philosophy, and everyday business, as had been the case with Babylonian &quot;geonim&quot;. This thorough adoption of the Arabic language also greatly facilitated the assimilation of Jews into Moorish culture, and Jewish activity in a variety of professions, including medicine, commerce, finance, and agriculture increased.

By the ninth century, some members of the Sephardic community felt confident enough to take part in proselytizing amongst Christians. This included the heated correspondences sent between Bodo Eleazar, a former Christian deacon who had converted to Judaism in 838, and the Bishop of Córdoba Paulus Albarus, who had converted from Judaism to Christianity. Each man, using such epithets as &quot;wretched compiler&quot;, tried to convince the other to return to his former faith, to no avail.

The Golden Age is most closely identified with the reign of Abd al-Rahman III (882–942), the first independent Caliph of Cordoba, and in particular with the career of his Jewish councilor, Hasdai ibn Shaprut (882–942). Within this context of cultural patronage, studies in Hebrew, literature, and linguistics flourished.

Hasdai benefitted world Jewry not only indirectly by creating a favorable environment for scholarly pursuits within Iberia, but also by using his influence to intervene on behalf of foreign Jews: in his letter to Byzantine Princess Helena, he requested protection for the Jews under Byzantine rule, attesting to the fair treatment of the Christians of &quot;al-Andalus&quot;, and perhaps indicating that such was contingent on the treatment of Jews abroad.

One notable contribution to Christian intellectualism is Ibn Gabirol&#x27;s neo-Platonic &quot;Fons Vitae&quot; (&quot;The Source of Life;&quot; &quot;Mekor Hayyim&quot;). Thought by many to have been written by a Christian, this work was admired by Christians and studied in monasteries throughout the Middle Ages, though the work of Solomon Munk in the 19th century proved that the author of &quot;Fons Vitae&quot; was the Jewish ibn Gabirol.

In addition to contributions of original work, the Sephardim were active as translators. Mainly in Toledo, texts were translated between Greek, Arabic, Hebrew, and Latin. In translating the great works of Arabic, Hebrew, and Greek into Latin, Iberian Jews were instrumental in bringing the fields of science and philosophy, which formed much of the basis of Renaissance learning, into the rest of Europe.

In the early 11th century, centralized authority based at Cordoba broke down following the Berber invasion and the ousting of the Umayyads. In its stead arose the independent &quot;taifa&quot; principalities under the rule of local Muwallad, Arab, Berber, or Slavonic leaders. Rather than having a stifling effect, the disintegration of the caliphate expanded the opportunities to Jewish and other professionals. The services of Jewish scientists, doctors, traders, poets, and scholars were generally valued by Christian and Muslim rulers of regional centers, especially as order was restored in recently conquered towns. Rabbi Samuel ha-Nagid (ibn Naghrela) was the Vizier of Granada. He was succeeded by his son Joseph ibn Naghrela who was slain by an incited mob along with most of the Jewish community. The remnant fled to Lucena.
The first major and most violent persecution in Islamic Spain was the 1066 Granada massacre, which occurred on 30 December, when a Muslim mob stormed the royal palace in Granada, crucified Jewish vizier Joseph ibn Naghrela and massacred most of the Jewish population of the city after rumors spread that the powerful vizier was plotting to kill the weak-minded and drunk King Badis ibn Habus. According to the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia, &quot;More than 1,500 Jewish families, numbering 4,000 persons, fell in one day, a number contested by some historians who deem it to be an example of &quot;the usual hyperbole in numerical estimates, with which history abounds.&quot;

The decline of the Golden Age began before the completion of the Christian &quot;Reconquista&quot;, with the penetration and influence of the Almoravides, and then the Almohads, from North Africa. These more intolerant sects abhorred the liberality of the Islamic culture of &quot;al-Andalus&quot;, including the position of authority some &quot;dhimmis&quot; held over Muslims. When the Almohads gave the Jews a choice of either death or conversion to Islam, many Jews emigrated. Some, such as the family of Maimonides, fled south and east to the more tolerant Muslim lands, while others went northward to settle in the growing Christian kingdoms.

Meanwhile, the &quot;Reconquista&quot; continued in the north throughout the 12th century. As various Arab lands fell to the Christians, conditions for some Jews in the emerging Christian kingdoms became increasingly favorable. As had happened during the reconstruction of towns following the breakdown of authority under the Umayyads, the services of Jews were employed by the victorious Christian leaders. Sephardic knowledge of the language and culture of the enemy, their skills as diplomats and professionals, as well as their desire for relief from intolerable conditions — the very same reasons that they had proved useful to the Arabs in the early stages of the Muslim invasion — made their services very valuable.

However, the Jews from the Muslim south were not entirely secure in their northward migrations. Old prejudices were compounded by newer ones. Suspicions of complicity with the Muslims were alive and well as Jews immigrated, speaking Arabic. However, many of the newly arrived Jews of the north prospered during the late 11th and early 12th centuries. The majority of Latin documentation regarding Jews during this period refers to their landed property, fields, and vineyards.

In many ways life had come full circle for the Sephardim of &quot;al-Andalus&quot;. As conditions became more oppressive during the 12th and 13th centuries, Jews again looked to an outside culture for relief. Christian leaders of reconquered cities granted them extensive autonomy, and Jewish scholarship recovered somewhat and developed as communities grew in size and importance. However, the Reconquista Jews never reached the same heights as had those of the Golden Age.

=== After the Reconquista ===

Among the Sephardim were many who were the descendants, or heads, of wealthy families and who, as &quot;Marranos&quot;, had occupied prominent positions in the countries they had left. Some had been stated officials, others had held positions of dignity within the Church; many had been the heads of large banking-houses and mercantile establishments, and some were physicians or scholars who had officiated as teachers in high schools.
Their Spanish or Portuguese was a lingua franca that enabled Sephardim from different countries to engage in commerce and diplomacy.

With their social equals they associated freely, without regard to religion and more likely with regard to equivalent or comparative education, for they were generally well read, which became a tradition and expectation. They were received at the courts of sultans, kings, and princes, and often were employed as ambassadors, envoys, or agents. The number of Sephardim who have rendered important services to different countries is considerable as Samuel Abravanel (or &quot;Abrabanel&quot;—financial councilor to the viceroy of Naples) or Moses Curiel (or &quot;Jeromino Nunes da Costa&quot;-serving as Agent to the Crown of Portugal in the United Provinces). Among other names mentioned are those of Belmonte, Nasi, Francisco Pacheco, Blas, Pedro de Herrera, Palache, Pimentel, Azevedo, Sagaste, Salvador, Sasportas, Costa, Curiel, Cansino, Schönenberg, Sapoznik (Zapatero), Toledo, Miranda, Toledano, Pereira, and Teixeira.

The Sephardim distinguished themselves as physicians and statesmen, and won the favor of rulers and princes, in both the Christian and the Islamic world. That the Sephardim were selected for prominent positions in every country where they settled was only in part due to the fact that Spanish had become a world-language through the expansion of Spain into the world-spanning Spanish Empire—the cosmopolitan cultural background after long associations with Islamic scholars of the Sephardic families also made them extremely well educated for the times, even well into the European Enlightenment.

For a long time, the Sephardim took an active part in Spanish literature; they wrote in prose and in rhyme, and were the authors of theological, philosophical, (aesthetic rather than content-based writing), pedagogic (teaching), and mathematical works. The rabbis, who, in common with all the Sephardim, emphasized a pure and euphonious pronunciation of Hebrew, delivered their sermons in Spanish or in Portuguese. Several of these sermons have appeared in print. Their thirst for knowledge, together with the fact that they associated freely with the outer world, led the Sephardim to establish new educational systems. Wherever they settled, they founded schools that used Spanish as the medium of instruction.
Theatre in Constantinople was in Judæo-Spanish since it was forbidden to Muslims.
In Portugal, the Sephardim were given important roles in the sociopolitical sphere and enjoyed a certain amount of protection from the Crown (e.g. Yahia Ben Yahia, first &quot;Rabino Maior&quot; of Portugal and supervisor of the public revenue of the first King of Portugal, D. Afonso Henriques). Even with the increasing pressure from the Catholic Church, this state of affairs remained more or less constant and the number of Jews in Portugal grew with those running from Spain. This changed with the marriage of D. Manuel I of Portugal with the daughter of the Catholic Monarchs of the newly born Spain. In 1497 the Decree ordering the expulsion or forced conversion of all the Jews was passed, and the Sephardim either fled or went into secrecy under the guise of &quot;Cristãos Novos&quot;, i.e. New Christians (this Decree was symbolically revoked in 1996 by the Portuguese Parliament). Those who fled to Genoa were only allowed to land provided they received baptism. Those who were fortunate enough to reach the Ottoman Empire had a better fate: the Sultan Bayezid II sarcastically sent his thanks to Ferdinand for sending him some of his best subjects, thus &quot;impoverishing his own lands while enriching his (Bayezid&#x27;s)&quot;. Jews arriving in the Ottoman Empire were mostly resettled in and around Thessalonica and to some extent in Constantinople and İzmir. This was followed by a great massacre of Jews in the city of Lisbon in 1506 and the establishment of the Portuguese Inquisition in 1536. This caused the flight of the Portuguese Jewish community, which continued until the extinction of the Courts of Inquisition in 1821; by then there were very few Jews in Portugal.

In Amsterdam, where Jews were especially prominent in the 17th century on account of their number, wealth, education, and influence, they established poetical academies after Spanish models; two of these were the &quot;Academia de Los Sitibundos&quot; and the &quot;Academia de Los Floridos&quot;. In the same city they also organized the first Jewish educational institution, with graduate classes in which, in addition to Talmudic studies, the instruction was given in the Hebrew language. The most important synagogue, or Esnoga, as it is usually called amongst Spanish and Portuguese Jews, is the Amsterdam Esnoga—usually considered the &quot;mother synagogue&quot;, and the historical center of the Amsterdam minhag.

A sizable Sephardic community had settled in Morocco and other Northern African countries, which were colonized by France in the 19th century. Jews in Algeria were given French citizenship in 1870 by the &quot;décret Crémieux&quot; (previously Jews and Muslims could apply for French citizenship, but had to renounce the use of traditional religious courts and laws, which many did not want to do). When France withdrew from Algeria in 1962, the local Jewish communities largely relocated to France. There are some tensions between some of those communities and the earlier French Jewish population (who were mostly Ashkenazi Jews), and with Arabic-Muslim communities.

=== In the Age of Discoveries ===

The largest part of Spanish Jews expelled in 1492 fled to Portugal, where they eluded persecution for a few years. The Jewish community in Portugal was perhaps then some 15% of that country&#x27;s population. They were declared Christians by Royal decree unless they left, but the King hindered their departure, needing their artisanship and working population for Portugal&#x27;s overseas enterprises and territories. Later Sephardic Jews settled in many trade areas controlled by the Empire of Philip II and others. With various countries in Europe also the Sephardic Jews established commercial relations. In a letter dated 25 November 1622, King Christian IV of Denmark invites Jews of Amsterdam to settle in Glückstadt, where, among other privileges, the free exercise of their religion would be assured to them.

Álvaro Caminha, in Cape Verde islands, who received the land as a grant from the crown, established a colony with Jews forced to stay on the island of São Tomé. Príncipe island was settled in 1500 under a similar arrangement. Attracting settlers proved difficult, however, the Jewish settlement was a success and their descendants settled many parts of Brazil. In 1579 Luis de Carvajal y de la Cueva a Portuguese-born Converso, Spanish-Crown officer, was awarded a large swath of territory in New Spain, known as Nuevo Reino de León. He founded settlements with other conversos that would later become Monterrey.

In particular, Jews established relations between the Dutch and South America. They contributed to the establishment of the Dutch West Indies Company in 1621, and some were members of the directorate. The ambitious schemes of the Dutch for the conquest of Brazil were carried into effect through Francisco Ribeiro, a Portuguese captain, who is said to have had Jewish relations in the Netherlands. Some years afterward, when the Dutch in Brazil appealed to the Netherlands for craftsmen of all kinds, many Jews went to Brazil. About 600 Jews left Amsterdam in 1642, accompanied by two distinguished scholars—Isaac Aboab da Fonseca and Moses Raphael de Aguilar. Jews supported the Dutch in the struggle between the Netherlands and Portugal for possession of Brazil.

In 1642, Aboab da Fonseca was appointed rabbi at Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue in the Dutch colony of Pernambuco (Recife), Brazil. Most of the white inhabitants of the town were Sephardic Jews from Portugal who had been banned by the Portuguese Inquisition to this town at the other side of the Atlantic Ocean. In 1624, the colony had been occupied by the Dutch. By becoming the rabbi of the community, Aboab da Fonseca was the first appointed rabbi of the Americas. The name of his congregation was Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue and the community had a synagogue, a mikveh and a yeshiva as well. However, during the time he was a rabbi in Pernambuco, the Portuguese re-occupied the place again in 1654, after a struggle of nine years. Aboab da Fonseca managed to return to Amsterdam after the occupation of the Portuguese. Members of his community immigrated to North America and were among the founders of New York City, but some Jews took refuge in Seridó.

The Sephardic kehilla in Zamość in the 16th and 17th centuries was one of its kind in all of Poland at that time. It was an autonomous institution, and until the mid-17th century it was not under the authority of the highest organ of the Jewish self-government in the Republic of Poland - the Council of Four Lands.

Besides merchants, a great number of physicians were among the Spanish Jews in Amsterdam: Samuel Abravanel, David Nieto, Elijah Montalto, and the Bueno family; Joseph Bueno was consulted in the illness of Prince Maurice (April 1623). Jews were admitted as students at the university, where they studied medicine as the only branch of the science of practical use to them, for they were not permitted to practice law, and the oath they would be compelled to take excluded them from the professorships. Neither were Jews taken into the trade-guilds: a resolution passed by the city of Amsterdam in 1632 (the cities being autonomous) excluded them. Exceptions, however, were made in the case of trades that related to their religion: printing, bookselling, and the selling of meat, poultry, groceries, and drugs. In 1655 a Jew was, exceptionally, permitted to establish a sugar-refinery.

Jonathan Ray, a professor of Jewish theological studies, has argued that the community of Sephardim was formed more during the 1600s than the medieval period. He explains that prior to expulsion Spanish Jewish communities did not have a shared identity in the sense that developed in diaspora. They did not carry any particular Hispano-Jewish identity into exile with them, but certain shared cultural traits contributed to the formation of the diaspora community from what had historically been independent communities.

=== The Holocaust ===
The Holocaust that devastated European Jewry and virtually destroyed its centuries-old culture also wiped out the great European population centers of Sephardic Jewry and led to the almost complete destruction of its unique language and traditions. Sephardi Jewish communities from France and the Netherlands in the northwest to Yugoslavia and Greece in the southeast almost disappeared.

On the eve of World War II, the European Sephardi community was concentrated in Southeastern Europe countries of Greece, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria. Its leading centers were in Salonika, Sarajevo, Belgrade, and Sofia. The experience of Jewish communities in those countries during the war varied greatly and depended on the type of regime under which they fell.

The Jewish communities of Yugoslavia and northern Greece, including the 50,000 Jews of Salonika, fell under direct German occupation in April 1941 and bore the full weight and intensity of Nazi repressive measures from dispossession, humiliation, and forced labor to hostage-taking, and finally deportation to the Auschwitz concentration camp and extermination.

The Jewish population of southern Greece fell under the jurisdiction of the Italians who eschewed the enactment of anti-Jewish legislation and resisted whenever possible German efforts to transfer them to occupied Poland, until the surrender of Italy on 8 September 1943 brought the Jews under German control.

Sephardi Jews in Bosnia and Croatia were ruled by a German-created Independent State of Croatia state from April 1941, which subjected them to pogrom-like actions before herding them into local camps where they were murdered side by side with Serbs and Roma (see Porajmos). The Jews of Macedonia and Thrace were controlled by Bulgarian occupation forces, which after rendering them stateless, rounded them up and turned them over to the Germans for deportation.

Finally, the Jews of Bulgaria proper were under the rule of a Nazi ally that subjected them to ruinous anti-Jewish legislation, but ultimately yielded to pressure from Bulgarian parliamentarians, clerics, and intellectuals not to deport them. More than 50,000 Bulgarian Jews were thus saved.

The Jews in North Africa identified themselves only as Jews or European Jews, having been westernized by French and Italian colonization. During World War II and until Operation Torch, the Jews of Morocco, Algeria, and Tunesia, governed by pro-Nazi Vichy France, suffered the same antisemitic legislation that Jews suffered in France mainland. They did not, however, directly suffer the more extreme Nazi Germany antisemitic policies, and nor did the Jews in Italian Libya. The Jewish communities in those European North Africa countries, in Bulgaria, and in Denmark were the only ones who were spared the mass deportation and mass murder that afflicted other Jewish communities. Operation Torch therefore saved more than 400,000 Jews in European North Africa.

=== Later history and culture ===
The Jews in French Algeria were awarded French citizenship by 1870 Crémieux Decree. They were therefore considered part of the European pieds noirs community in spite of having been established in North Africa for many centuries, rather than subject to the Indigénat status imposed on their Muslim former neighbors. Most consequently moved to France in the late 1950s and early 1960s after Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria became independent, and they now make up a majority of the French Jewish community.

Today, the Sephardim have preserved the romances and the ancient melodies and songs of Spain and Portugal, as well as a large number of old Portuguese and Spanish proverbs. A number of children&#x27;s plays, like, for example, &quot;El Castillo&quot;, are still popular among them, and they still manifest a fondness for the dishes peculiar to Iberia, such as the &quot;pastel&quot;, or &quot;pastelico&quot;, a sort of meat-pie, and the &quot;pan de España&quot;, or &quot;pan de León&quot;. At their festivals, they follow the Spanish custom of distributing &quot;dulces&quot;, or &quot;dolces&quot;, a confection wrapped in paper bearing a picture of the &quot;magen David&quot; (six-pointed star).

In Mexico, the Sephardic community originates mainly from Syria, Turkey, Greece, and Bulgaria. In 1942 the &quot;Colegio Hebreo Tarbut&quot; was founded in collaboration with the Ashkenazi family and instruction was in Yiddish. In 1944 the Sephardim community established a separate &quot;Colegio Hebreo Sefaradí&quot; with 90 students where instruction was in Hebrew and complemented with classes on Jewish customs. By 1950 there were 500 students. In 1968 a group of young Sephardim created the group &quot;Tnuat Noar Jinujit Dor Jadash&quot; in support of the creation of the state of Israel. In 1972 the &quot;Majazike Tora&quot; institute is created aiming to prepare young male Jews for their Bar Mitzvah.

While the majority of American Jews today are Ashkenazim, in Colonial times Sephardim made up the majority of the Jewish population. For example, the 1654 Jews who arrived in New Amsterdam fled from the colony of Recife, Brazil after the Portuguese seized it from the Dutch. Through most of the 18th century, American synagogues conducted and recorded their business in Portuguese, even if their daily language was English. It was not until widespread German immigration to the United States in the 19th century that the tables turned and Ashkenazim (initially from Germany but by the 20th century from Eastern Europe) began to dominate the American Jewish landscape.

The Sephardim usually have followed the general rules for Spanish and Portuguese names. Many used to bear Portuguese and Spanish names; however, it is noteworthy that a large number of Sephardic names are of Hebrew and Arabic roots and are totally absent in Iberian patronyms and are therefore often seen as typically Jewish. Many of the names are associated with non-Jewish (Christian) families and individuals and are by no means exclusive to Jews. After 1492, many marranos changed their names to hide their Jewish origins and avoid persecution, adopting professions and even translating such patronyms to local languages like Arabic and even German. It was common to choose the name of the Parish Church where they have been baptized into the Christian faith, such as Santa Cruz or the common name of the word &quot;Messiah&quot; (Savior/Salvador) or adopted the name of their Christian godparents. Dr. Mark Hilton&#x27;s research demonstrated in IPS DNA testing that the last name of Marranos linked with the location of the local parish was correlated 89.3%

In contrast to Ashkenazic Jews, who do not name newborn children after living relatives, Sephardic Jews often name their children after the children&#x27;s grandparents, even if they are still alive. The first son and daughter are traditionally named after the paternal grandparents, then the maternal parents&#x27; names are next in line for the remaining children. After that, additional children&#x27;s names are &quot;free&quot;, so to speak, meaning that one can choose whatever name, without any more &quot;naming obligations.&quot; The only instance in which Sephardic Jews will not name after their own parents is when one of the spouses shares a common first name with a mother/father-in-law (since Jews will not name their children after themselves.) There are times though when the &quot;free&quot; names are used to honor the memory of a deceased relative who died young or childless. These conflicting naming conventions can be troublesome when children are born into mixed Ashkenazic-Sephardic households.

A notable exception to the distinct Ashkenazi and Sephardi naming traditions is found among Dutch Jews, where Ashkenazim have for centuries followed the tradition otherwise attributed to Sephardim. See Chuts.

===Citizenship laws in Spain and Portugal===
Since April 2013, Sephardim who are descendants of those expelled in the inquisition are entitled to claim Portuguese citizenship provided that they &quot;belong to a Sephardic community of Portuguese origin with ties to Portugal&quot;. The amendment to Portugal&#x27;s &quot;Law on Nationality&quot; was approved unanimously on 11 April 2013, and remains open to applications .

A similar law was approved in Spain in 2014 and passed in 2015. By the expiry date on 30 September 2019, Spain had received 127,000 applications, mostly from Latin America.

=== Sephardic pedigrees ===
:&quot;See also Jewish surname#Sephardic and Mizrahi Jewish communities, Spanish and Portuguese names, List of Sephardic Jews, List of Iberian Jews&quot;
== Divisions ==
The divisions among Sephardim and their descendants today are largely a result of the consequences of the royal edicts of expulsion. Both the Spanish and Portuguese crowns ordered their respective Jewish subjects to choose one of two options:
# to convert to Catholicism and be allowed to remain within the kingdom, or
# to remain Jewish and leave or be expelled by the stipulated deadline.

In the case of the Alhambra Decree of 1492, the primary purpose was to eliminate Jewish influence on Spain&#x27;s large converso population, and ensure they did not revert to Judaism. Over half of Spain&#x27;s Jews had converted in the 14th century as a result of the religious persecution and pogroms which occurred in 1391. They and their Catholic descendants were not subject to the decree or to expulsion, yet were surveilled by the Spanish Inquisition. British scholar Henry Kamen has said that 
&quot;the real purpose of the 1492 edict likely was not expulsion, but compulsory conversion and assimilation of all Spanish Jews, a process which had been underway for a number of centuries. Indeed, a further number of those Jews who had not yet joined the converso community finally chose to convert and avoid expulsion as a result of the edict. As a result of the Alhambra decree and persecution during the prior century, between 200,000 and 250,000 Jews converted to Catholicism and between one third and one half of Spain&#x27;s remaining 100,000 non-converted Jews chose exile, with an indeterminate number returning to Spain in the years following the expulsion.&quot;

The Portuguese king John II welcomed the Jewish refugees from Spain with the purpose of obtaining specialized artisans, which the Portuguese population lacked, imposing over them, however, a hefty fee for the right to stay in the country. His successor King Manuel I proved, at first, to also tolerate the Jewish population. However, King Manuel I issued his own expulsion decree four years later, presumably to satisfy a precondition that the Spanish monarchs had set for him in order to allow him to marry their daughter Isabella. While the stipulations were similar in the Portuguese decree, King Manuel largely prevented Portugal&#x27;s Jews from leaving, by blocking Portugal&#x27;s ports of exit, foreseeing a negative economic effect of a similar Jewish flight from Portugal. He decided that the Jews who stayed accepted Catholicism by default, proclaiming them New Christians by royal decree. Physical forced conversions, however, were also suffered by Jews throughout Portugal. These persecutions led to several recently converted families to flee Portugal, such as the family of Francisco Sanches who fled to Bordeaux.

Sephardi Jews encompass Jews descended from those Jews who left the Iberian Peninsula as Jews by the expiration of the respective decreed deadlines. This group is further divided between those who fled south to North Africa, as opposed to those who fled eastwards to the Balkans, West Asia and beyond. Others fled east into Europe, with many settling in northern Italy and the Low Countries. Also included among Sephardi Jews are those who descend from &quot;New Christian&quot; conversos, but returned to Judaism after leaving Iberia, largely after reaching Southern and Western Europe.

From these regions, many later migrated again, this time to the non-Iberian territories of the Americas. Additional to all these Sephardic Jewish groups are the descendants of those New Christian conversos who either remained in Iberia, or moved from Iberia directly to the Iberian colonial possessions in what are today the various Latin American countries. For historical reasons and circumstances, most of the descendants of this group of conversos never formally returned to the Jewish religion.

All these sub-groups are defined by a combination of geography, identity, religious evolution, language evolution, and the timeframe of their reversion (for those who had in the interim undergone a temporary nominal conversion to Catholicism) or non-reversion back to Judaism.

These Sephardic sub-groups are separate from any pre-existing local Jewish communities they encountered in their new areas of settlement. From the perspective of the present day, the first three sub-groups appeared to have developed as separate branches, each with its own traditions. 

In earlier centuries, and as late as the editing of the &quot;Jewish Encyclopedia&quot; at the beginning of the 20th century, the Sephardim were usually regarded as together forming a continuum. The Jewish community of Livorno, Italy acted as the clearing-house of personnel and traditions among the first three sub-groups; it also developed as the chief publishing centre.

=== Eastern Sephardim ===

Eastern Sephardim comprise the descendants of the expellees from Spain who left as Jews in 1492 or earlier. This sub-group of Sephardim settled mostly in various parts of the Ottoman Empire, which then included areas in West Asia&#x27;s Near East such as Anatolia, the Levant and Egypt; in Southeastern Europe, some of the Dodecanese islands and the Balkans. They settled particularly in European cities ruled by the Ottoman Empire, including Salonica in present-day Greece; Constantinople, which today is known as Istanbul on the European portion of modern Turkey; and Sarajevo, in what is today Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sephardic Jews also lived in Bulgaria, where they absorbed into their community the Romaniote Jews they found already living there. They had a presence as well in Walachia in what is today southern Romania, where there is still a functioning Sephardic Synagogue. Their traditional language is referred to as &quot;Judezmo&quot; (&quot;Jewish [language]&quot;). It is Judaeo-Spanish, also known as Ladino, which consisted of the medieval Spanish and Portuguese they spoke in Iberia, with admixtures of Hebrew, and the languages around them, especially Turkish. It was often written in Rashi script.

Regarding the Middle East, some Sephardim went further east into the West Asian territories of the Ottoman Empire, settling among the long-established Arabic-speaking Jewish communities in Damascus and Aleppo in Syria, as well as in the Land of Israel, and as far as Baghdad in Iraq. Although technically Egypt was a North African Ottoman region, those Jews who settled in Alexandria are included in this group, due to Egypt&#x27;s cultural proximity to the other West Asian provinces under Ottoman rule.

For the most part, Eastern Sephardim did not maintain their own separate Sephardic religious and cultural institutions from pre-existing Jews. Instead the local Jews came to adopt the liturgical customs of the recent Sephardic arrivals. Eastern Sephardim in European areas of the Ottoman Empire, as well as in Palestine, retained their culture and language, but those in the other parts of the West Asian portion gave up their language and adopted the local Judeo-Arabic dialect. This latter phenomenon is just one of the factors which have today led to the broader and eclectic religious definition of Sephardi Jews.

Thus, the Jewish communities in Palestine, Lebanon, Syria, and Egypt are partly of Spanish Jewish origin and they are counted as Sephardim proper. The great majority of the Jewish communities in Iraq, and all of those in Iran, Eastern Syria, Yemen, and Eastern Turkey, are descendants of pre-existing indigenous Jewish populations. They adopted the Sephardic rites and traditions through cultural diffusion, and are properly termed Mizrahi Jews.

Going even further into South Asia, a few of the Eastern Sephardim followed the spice trade routes as far as the Malabar coast of southern India, where they settled among the established Cochin Jewish community. Their culture and customs were absorbed by the local Jews. . Additionally, there was a large community of Jews and crypto-Jews of Portuguese origin in the Portuguese colony of Goa. Gaspar Jorge de Leão Pereira, the first archbishop of Goa, wanted to suppress or expel that community, calling for the initiation of the Goa Inquisition against the Sephardic Jews in India.

In recent times, principally after 1948, most Eastern Sephardim have since relocated to Israel, and others to the US and Latin America.

Eastern Sephardim still often carry common Spanish surnames, as well as other specifically Sephardic surnames from 15th-century Spain with Arabic or Hebrew language origins (such as Azoulay, Abulafia, Abravanel) which have since disappeared from Spain when those that stayed behind as conversos adopted surnames that were solely Spanish in origin. Other Eastern Sephardim have since also translated their Hispanic surnames into the languages of the regions they settled in, or have modified them to make them sound more local.

=== North African Sephardim ===

North African Sephardim consists of the descendants of the expellees from Spain who also left as Jews in 1492. This branch settled in North Africa (except Egypt, see Eastern Sephardim above). Settling mostly in Morocco and Algeria, they spoke a variant of Judaeo-Spanish known as Haketia. They also spoke Judeo-Arabic in a majority of cases. They settled in the areas with already established Arabic-speaking Jewish communities in North Africa and eventually merged with them to form new communities based solely on Sephardic customs.

Several of the Moroccan Jews emigrated back to the Iberian Peninsula to form the core of the Gibraltar Jews.

In the 19th century, modern Spanish, French and Italian gradually replaced Haketia and Judeo-Arabic as the mother tongue among most Moroccan Sephardim and other North African Sephardim.

In recent times, with the Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries, principally after the creation of Israel in 1948, most North African Sephardim have relocated to Israel (total pop. est. 1,400,000 in 2015), and most others to France (361,000) and the US (300,000), as well as other countries. As of 2015 there was a significant community still in Morocco (10,000). In 2021, among Arab countries, the largest Jewish community now exists in Morocco with about 2,000 Jews and in Tunisia with about 1,000.

North African Sephardim still also often carry common Spanish surnames, as well as other specifically Sephardic surnames from 15th century Spain with Arabic or Hebrew language origins (such as Azoulay, Abulafia, Abravanel) which have since disappeared from Spain when those that stayed behind as conversos adopted surnames that were solely Spanish in origin. Other North African Sephardim have since also translated their Hispanic surnames into local languages or have modified them to sound local.

=== Western Sephardim ===


Western Sephardim (also known more ambiguously as &quot;Spanish and Portuguese Jews&quot;, &quot;Spanish Jews&quot;, &quot;Portuguese Jews&quot; and &quot;Jews of the Portuguese Nation&quot;) are the community of Jewish ex-&quot;conversos&quot; whose families initially remained in Spain and Portugal as ostensible New Christians, that is, as Anusim or &quot;forced [converts]&quot;. Western Sephardim are further sub-divided into an Old World branch and a New World branch.

Henry Kamen and Joseph Perez estimate that of the total Jewish origin population of Spain at the time of the issuance of the Alhambra Decree, those who chose to remain in Spain represented the majority, up to 300,000 of a total Jewish origin population of 350,000. Furthermore, a significant number returned to Spain in the years following the expulsion, on condition of converting to Catholicism, the Crown guaranteeing they could recover their property at the same price at which it was sold.

Discrimination against this large community of &quot;conversos&quot; nevertheless remained, and those who secretly practiced the Jewish faith specifically suffered severe episodes of persecution by the Inquisition. The last such episode of persecution occurred in the mid-18th century. External migrations out of the Iberian peninsula coincided with these episodes of increased persecution by the Inquisition.

As a result of this discrimination and persecution, a small number of &quot;marranos&quot; (&quot;conversos&quot; who secretly still practiced Judaism) later emigrated to more religiously tolerant Old World countries outside the Iberian cultural sphere, such as the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Italy, Germany and England. In these lands &quot;conversos&quot; reverted to Judaism, rejoining the Jewish community sometimes up to the third or even fourth generations after the initial decrees stipulating conversion, expulsion, or death. It is these returnees to Judaism that represent Old World Western Sephardim. Among this community of Sephardic Jews, the philosopher Baruch de Spinoza was born from a Portuguese Jewish family. He was also, famously, expelled from said community over his religious and philosophical views.

New World Western Sephardim, on the other hand, are the descendants of those Jewish-origin New Christian &quot;conversos&quot; who accompanied the millions of Old Christian Spaniards and Portuguese that emigrated to the Americas. More specifically, New World Western Sephardim are those Western Sephardim whose &quot;converso&quot; ancestors migrated to various of the non-Iberian colonies in the Americas in whose jurisdictions they could return to Judaism.

New World Western Sephardim are juxtaposed to yet another group of descendants of &quot;conversos&quot; who settled in the Iberian colonies of the Americas who could not revert to Judaism. These comprise the related but distinct group known as Sephardic Bnei Anusim (see the section below).

Due to the presence of the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisition in the Iberian American territories, initially, &quot;converso&quot; immigration was barred throughout much of Ibero-America. Because of this, very few &quot;converso&quot; immigrants in Iberian American colonies ever reverted to Judaism. Of those &quot;conversos&quot; in the New World who did return to Judaism, it was principally those who had come via an initial respite of refuge in the Netherlands or who were settling the New World Dutch colonies such as Curaçao and the area then known as New Holland (also called Dutch Brazil). Dutch Brazil was the northern portion of the colony of Brazil ruled by the Dutch for under a quarter of a century before it also fell to the Portuguese who ruled the remainder of Brazil. Jews who had only recently reverted in Dutch Brazil then again had to flee to other Dutch-ruled colonies in the Americas, including joining brethren in Curaçao, but also migrating to New Amsterdam, in what is today Lower Manhattan in New York City.

The oldest congregations in the non-Iberian colonial possessions in the Americas were founded by Western Sephardim, many who arrived in the then Dutch-ruled New Amsterdam, with their synagogues being in the tradition of &quot;Spanish and Portuguese Jews&quot;.

In the United States in particular, Congregation Shearith Israel, established in 1654, in what is now New York City, is the oldest Jewish congregation in the United States. Its present building dates from 1897. Congregation Jeshuat Israel in Newport, Rhode Island, is dated to sometime after the arrival of Western Sephardim there in 1658 and prior to the 1677 purchase of a communal cemetery, now known as Touro Cemetery. See also &quot;List of the oldest synagogues in the United States&quot;.

The intermittent period of residence in Portugal (after the initial fleeing from Spain) for the ancestors of many Western Sephardim (whether Old World or New World) is a reason why the surnames of many Western Sephardim tend to be Portuguese variations of common Spanish surnames, though some are still Spanish.

Among a few notable figures with roots in Western Sephardim are the current president of Venezuela, Nicolás Maduro, and former Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, Benjamin N. Cardozo. Both descend from Western Sephardim who left Portugal for the Netherlands, and in the case of Maduro, from the Netherlands to Curaçao, and ultimately Venezuela.

=== Sephardic Bnei Anusim ===
The Sephardic Bnei Anusim consists of the contemporary and largely nominal Christian descendants of assimilated 15th century Sephardic anusim. These descendants of Spanish and Portuguese Jews forced or coerced to convert to Catholicism remained, as conversos, in Iberia or moved to the Iberian colonial possessions across various Latin American countries during the Spanish colonization of the Americas.

Due to historical reasons and circumstances, Sephardic Bnei Anusim had not been able to return to the Jewish faith over the last five centuries, although increasing numbers have begun emerging publicly in modern times, especially over the last two decades. Except for varying degrees of putatively rudimentary Jewish customs and traditions which had been retained as family traditions among individual families, Sephardic Bnei Anusim became a fully assimilated sub-group within the Iberian-descended Christian populations of Spain, Portugal, Hispanic America and Brazil. In the last 5 to 10 years, however, &quot;organized groups of [Sephardic] Benei Anusim in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Dominican Republic and in Sefarad [Iberia] itself&quot; have now been established, some of whose members have formally reverted to Judaism, leading to the emergence of Neo-Western Sephardim (see group below).

The Jewish Agency for Israel estimates the Sephardic Bnei Anusim population to number in the millions. Their population size is several times larger than the three Jewish-integrated Sephardi descendant sub-groups combined, consisting of Eastern Sephardim, North African Sephardim, and the ex-converso Western Sephardim (both New World and Old World branches).

Although numerically superior, Sephardic Bnei Anusim is, however, the least prominent or known sub-group of Sephardi descendants. Sephardic Bnei Anusim are also more than twice the size of the total world Jewish population as a whole, which itself also encompasses Ashkenazi Jews, Mizrahi Jews and various other smaller groups.

Unlike the Anusim (&quot;forced [converts]&quot;) who were the conversos up to the third, fourth or fifth generation (depending on the Jewish responsa) who later reverted to Judaism, the Bnei Anusim (&quot;[later] sons/children/descendants [of the] forced [converts]&quot;) were the subsequent generations of descendants of the Anusim who remained hidden ever since the Inquisition in the Iberian Peninsula and its New World franchises. At least some Sephardic Anusim in the Hispanosphere (in Iberia, but especially in their colonies in Ibero-America) had also initially tried to revert to Judaism, or at least maintain crypto-Jewish practices in privacy. This, however, was not feasible long-term in that environment, as Judaizing conversos in Iberia and Ibero-America remained persecuted, prosecuted, and liable to conviction and execution. The Inquisition itself was only finally formally disbanded in the 19th century.

Historical documentation shedding new light on the diversity in the ethnic composition of the Iberian immigrants to the Spanish colonies of the Americas during the conquest era suggests that the number of New Christians of Sephardi origin that actively participated in the conquest and settlement was more significant than previously estimated. A number of Spanish conquerors, administrators, settlers, have now been confirmed to have been of Sephardi origin. Recent revelations have only come about as a result of modern DNA evidence and newly discovered records in Spain, which had been either lost or hidden, relating to conversions, marriages, baptisms, and Inquisition trials of the parents, grandparents and great-grandparents of the Sephardi-origin Iberian immigrants.

Overall, it is now estimated that up to 20% of modern-day Spaniards and 10% of colonial Latin America&#x27;s Iberian settlers may have been of Sephardic origin, although the regional distribution of their settlement was uneven throughout the colonies. Thus, Iberian settlers of New Christian Sephardi-origin ranged anywhere from none in most areas to as high as 1 in every 3 (approx. 30%) Iberian settlers in other areas. With Latin America&#x27;s current population standing at close to 590 million people, the bulk of which consists of persons of full or partial Iberian ancestry (both New World Hispanics and Brazilians, whether they&#x27;re criollos, mestizos or mulattos), it is estimated that up to 50 million of these possess Sephardic Jewish ancestry to some degree.

In Iberia, settlements of known and attested populations of Bnei Anusim include those in Belmonte, in Portugal, and the Xuetes of Palma de Mallorca, in Spain. In 2011 Rabbi Nissim Karelitz, a leading rabbi and Halachic authority and chairman of the Beit Din Tzedek rabbinical court in Bnei Brak, Israel, recognized the entire Xuete community of Bnei Anusim in Palma de Mallorca, as Jews. That population alone represented approximately 18,000 to 20,000 people, or just over 2% of the entire population of the island. The proclamation of the Jews&#x27; default acceptance of Catholicism by the Portuguese king actually resulted in a high percentage being assimilated into the Portuguese population. Besides the Xuetas, the same is true of Spain. Many of their descendants observe a syncretist form of Christian worship known as Xueta Christianity.

Almost all Sephardic Bnei Anusim carry surnames which are known to have been used by Sephardim during the 15th century. However, almost all of these surnames are not specifically Sephardic &quot;per se&quot;, and most are in fact surnames of gentile Spanish or gentile Portuguese origin which only became common among Bnei Anusim because they deliberately adopted them during their conversions to Catholicism, in an attempt to obscure their Jewish heritage.
Given that conversion made New Christians subject to Inquisitorial prosecution as Catholics, crypto-Jews formally recorded Christian names and gentile surnames to be publicly used as their aliases in notarial documents, government relations and commercial activities, while keeping their given Hebrew names and Jewish surnames secret. As a result, very few Sephardic Bnei Anusim carry surnames that are specifically Sephardic in origin, or that are exclusively found among Bnei Anusim.

== Distribution ==

===Pre-1492===

Prior to 1492, substantial Jewish populations existed in most Spanish and Portuguese provinces. Among the larger Jewish populations were the Jewish communities in cities like Lisbon, Toledo, Córdoba, Seville, Málaga and Granada. In these cities, however, Jews constituted only substantial minorities of the overall population. In several smaller towns, however, Jews composed majorities or , as the towns were founded or inhabited principally by Jews. Among these towns were Ocaña, Guadalajara, Buitrago del Lozoya, Lucena, Ribadavia, Hervás, Llerena, and Almazán.

In Castile, Aranda de Duero, Ávila, Alba de Tormes, Arévalo, Burgos, Calahorra, Carrión de los Condes, Cuéllar, Herrera del Duque, León, Medina del Campo, Ourense, Salamanca, Segovia, Soria, and Villalón were home to large Jewish communities or &quot;aljamas&quot;. Aragon had substantial Jewish communities in the Calls of Girona, Barcelona, Tarragona, Valencia and Palma (Majorca), with the Girona Synagogue serving as the centre of Catalonian Jewry

The first Jews to leave Spain settled in what is today Algeria after the various persecutions that took place in 1391.
=== Post-1492 ===
The Alhambra Decree (also known as the Edict of Expulsion) was an edict issued on 31 March 1492, by the joint Catholic Monarchs of Spain (Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon) ordering the expulsion of practicing Jews from the Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon and its territories and possessions by 31 July, of that year. The primary purpose was to eliminate their influence on Spain&#x27;s large converso population and ensure they did not revert to Judaism. Over half of Spain&#x27;s Jews had converted as a result of the religious persecution and pogroms which occurred in 1391, and as such were not subject to the Decree or to expulsion. A further number of those remaining chose to avoid expulsion as a result of the edict. As a result of the Alhambra decree and persecution in prior years, over 200,000 Jews converted to Catholicism, and between 40,000 and 100,000 were expelled, an indeterminate number returning to Spain in the years following the expulsion.

The Spanish Jews who chose to leave Spain instead of converting dispersed throughout the region of North Africa known as the Maghreb. In those regions, they often intermingled with the already existing Mizrahi Arabic-speaking communities, becoming the ancestors of the Moroccan, Algerian, Tunisian, and Libyan Jewish communities.

Many Spanish Jews fled to the Ottoman Empire where they had been given refuge. Sultan Bayezid II of the Ottoman Empire, learning about the expulsion of Jews from Spain, dispatched the Ottoman Navy to bring the Jews safely to Ottoman lands, mainly to the cities of Salonika (currently Thessaloniki, now in Greece) and Smyrna (now known in English as İzmir, currently in Turkey). Some believe that Persian Jewry (Iranian Jews), as the only community of Jews living under the Shiites, probably suffered more than any Sephardic community (Persian Jews are not Sephardic in descent). Many of these Jews also settled in other parts of the Balkans ruled by the Ottomans such as the areas that are now Bulgaria, Serbia, and Bosnia.

Throughout history, scholars have given widely differing numbers of Jews expelled from Spain. However, the figure is likely preferred by minimalist scholars to be below the 100,000 Jews - while others suggest larger numbers - who had not yet converted to Christianity by 1492, possibly as low as 40,000 and as high as 200,000 (while Don Isaac Abarbanel stated he led 300,000 Jews out of Spain) dubbed &quot;Megorashim&quot; (&quot;Expelled Ones&quot;, in contrast to the local Jews they met whom they called &quot;Toshavim&quot; - &quot;Citizens&quot;) in the Hebrew they had spoken. Many went to Portugal, gaining only a few years of respite from persecution. The Jewish community in Portugal (perhaps then some 10% of that country&#x27;s population) were then declared Christians by Royal decree unless they left.

Such figures exclude the significant number of Jews who returned to Spain due to the hostile reception they received in their countries of refuge, notably Fez. The situation of returnees was legalized with the Ordinance of 10 November 1492 which established that civil and church authorities should be witness to baptism and, in the case that they were baptized before arrival, proof and witnesses of baptism were required. Furthermore, all property could be recovered by returnees at the same price at which it was sold. Returnees are documented as late as 1499. On the other hand, the Provision of the Royal Council of 24 October 1493 set harsh sanctions for those who slandered these New Christians with insulting terms such as &quot;tornados&quot;.

As a result of the more recent Jewish exodus from Arab lands, many of the Sephardim Tehorim from Western Asia and North Africa relocated to either Israel or France, where they form a significant portion of the Jewish communities today. Other significant communities of Sephardim Tehorim also migrated in more recent times from the Near East to New York City, Argentina, Costa Rica, Mexico, Montreal, Gibraltar, Puerto Rico, and Dominican Republic. Because of poverty and turmoil in Latin America, another wave of Sephardic Jews joined other Latin Americans who migrated to the United States, Canada, Spain, and other countries of Europe.

====Permanence of Sephardim in Spain====
According to the genetic study &quot;The Genetic Legacy of Religious Diversity and Intolerance: Paternal Lineages of Christians, Jews, and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula&quot; at the University Pompeu Fabra of Barcelona and the University of Leicester, led by Briton Mark Jobling, Francesc Calafell, and Elena Bosch, published by the &quot;American Journal of Human Genetics,&quot; genetic markers show that nearly 20% of Spaniards have Sephardic Jewish markers (direct male descent male for Y, equivalent weight for female mitochondria); residents of Catalonia have approximately 6%. This shows that there was historic intermarriage between ethnic Jews and other Spaniards, and essentially, that some Jews remained in Spain. Similarly, the study showed that some 11% of the population has DNA associated with the Moors.

===Sephardim in modern Iberia===
Today, around 50,000 recognized Jews live in Spain, according to the Federation of Jewish Communities in Spain. The tiny Jewish community in Portugal is estimated between 1,740 and 3,000 people. Although some are of Ashkenazi origin, the majority are Sephardic Jews who returned to Spain after the end of the protectorate over northern Morocco. A community of 600 Sephardic Jews live in Gibraltar.

In 2011 Rabbi Nissim Karelitz, a leading rabbi and Halachic authority and chairman of the Beit Din Tzedek rabbinical court in Bnei Brak, Israel, recognized the entire community of Sephardi descendants in Palma de Mallorca, the Chuetas, as Jewish. They number approximately 18,000 people or just over 2% of the entire population of the island.

Of the Bnei Anusim community in Belmonte, Portugal, some officially returned to Judaism in the 1970s. They opened a synagogue, &quot;Bet Eliahu&quot;, in 1996. The Belmonte community of Bnei Anusim as a whole, however, have not yet been granted the same recognition as Jews that the Chuetas of Palma de Majorca achieved in 2011.

==== Spanish citizenship by Iberian Sephardic descent ====
In 1924, the Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera approved a decree to enable Sephardi Jews to obtain Spanish nationality. Although the deadline was originally the end of 1930, diplomat Ángel Sanz Briz used this decree as the basis for giving Spanish citizenship papers to Hungarian Jews in the Second World War to try to save them from the Nazis.

Today, Spanish nationality law generally requires a period of residency in Spain before citizenship can be applied for. This had long been relaxed from ten to two years for Sephardi Jews, Hispanic Americans, and others with historical ties to Spain. In that context, Sephardi Jews were considered to be the descendants of Spanish Jews who were expelled or fled from the country five centuries ago following the expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 1492.

In 2015 the Government of Spain passed Law 12/2015 of 24 June, whereby Sephardi Jews with a connection to Spain could obtain Spanish nationality by naturalization, without the usual residency requirement. Applicants must provide evidence of their Sephardi origin and some connection with Spain, and pass examinations on the language, government, and culture of Spain.

The Law establishes the right to Spanish nationality of Sephardi Jews with a connection to Spain who apply within three years from 1 October 2015. The law defines Sephardic as Jews who lived in the Iberian Peninsula until their expulsion in the late fifteenth century, and their descendants. The law provides for the deadline to be extended by one year, to 1 October 2019; it was extended in March 2018. It was modified in 2015 to remove a provision that required persons acquiring Spanish nationality by law 12/2015 must renounce any other nationality held. Most applicants must pass tests of knowledge of the Spanish language and Spanish culture, but those who are under 18, or handicapped, are exempted. A Resolution in May 2017 also exempted those aged over 70.

The Sephardic citizenship law was set to expire in October 2018 but was extended for an additional year by the Spanish government.

The Law states that Spanish citizenship will be granted to &quot;those Sephardic foreign nationals who prove that [Sephardic] condition and their special relationship with our country, even if they do not have legal residence in Spain, whatever their [current] ideology, religion or beliefs.&quot;

Eligibility criteria for proving Sephardic descent include: a certificate issued by the Federation of Jewish Communities of Spain, or the production of a certificate from the competent rabbinic authority, legally recognized in the country of habitual residence of the applicant, or other documentation which might be considered appropriate for this purpose; or by justifying one&#x27;s inclusion as a Sephardic descendant, or a direct descendant of persons included in the list of protected Sephardic families in Spain referred to in the Decree-Law of 29 December 1948, or descendants of those who obtained naturalization by way of the Royal Decree of 20 December 1924; or by the combination of other factors including surnames of the applicant, spoken family language (Spanish, Ladino, Haketia), and other evidence attesting descent from Sephardic Jews and a relationship to Spain. Surnames alone, language alone, or other evidence alone will not be determinative in the granting of Spanish nationality.

The connection with Spain can be established, if kinship with a family on a list of Sephardic families in Spain is not available, by proving that Spanish history or culture have been studied, proof of charitable, cultural, or economic activities associated with Spanish people, or organizations, or Sephardic culture.

The path to Spanish citizenship for Sephardic applicants remained costly and arduous. The Spanish government takes about 8–10 months to decide on each case. By March 2018, some 6,432 people had been granted Spanish citizenship under the law. A total of about 132,000 applications were received, 67,000 of them in the month before the 30 September 2019 deadline. Applications for Portuguese citizenship for Sephardis remained open. The deadline for completing the requirements was extended until September 2021 due to delays due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but only for those who had made a preliminary application by 1 October 2019.

In what appeared to be a reciprocal gesture, Natan Sharansky, chairman of the quasi-governmental Jewish Agency for Israel, said &quot;the state of Israel must ease the way for their return&quot;, referring to the millions of descendants of conversos around Latin America and Iberia. Some hundreds of thousands maybe exploring ways to return to the Jewish people.

==== Portuguese citizenship by Portuguese Sephardic descent ====
In April 2013 Portugal amended its Law on Nationality to confer citizenship to descendants of Portuguese Sephardic Jews who were expelled from the country five centuries ago following the Portuguese Inquisition.

The amended law gave descendants of Portuguese Sephardic Jews the right to become Portuguese citizens, wherever they lived, if they &quot;belong to a Sephardic community of Portuguese origin with ties to Portugal.&quot; Portugal thus became the first country after Israel to enact a Jewish Law of Return.

On 29 January 2015, the Portuguese Parliament ratified the legislation offering dual citizenship to descendants of Portuguese Sephardic Jews. Like the law later passed in Spain, the newly established legal rights in Portugal apply to all descendants of Portugal&#x27;s Sephardic Jews, regardless of the current religion of the descendant, so long as the descendant can demonstrate &quot;a traditional connection&quot; to Portuguese Sephardic Jews. This may be through &quot;family names, family language, and direct or collateral ancestry.&quot; Portuguese nationality law was amended to this effect by Decree-Law n.º 43/2013, and further amended by Decree-Law n.º 30-A/2015, which came into effect on 1 March 2015. «Applicants for Portuguese citizenship via this route are assessed by experts at one of Portugal&#x27;s Jewish communities in either Lisbon or Porto».

In a reciprocal response to the Portuguese legislation, Michael Freund, Chairman of Shavei Israel told news agencies in 2015 that he &quot;call[s] on the Israeli government to embark on a new strategic approach and to reach out to the [Sephardic] Bnei Anousim, people whose Spanish and Portuguese Jewish ancestors were compelled to convert to Catholicism more than five centuries ago.&quot;

By July 2017 the Portuguese government had received about 5,000 applications, mostly from Brazil, Israel, and Turkey. 400 had been granted, with a period between application and resolution of about two years. In 2017 a total of 1,800 applicants had been granted Portuguese citizenship. By February 2018, 12,000 applications were in process.

== Language ==

The most typical traditional language of Sephardim is Judeo-Spanish, also called &quot;Judezmo&quot; or &quot;Ladino&quot;. It is a Romance language derived mainly from Old Castilian (Spanish), with many borrowings from Turkish, and to a lesser extent from Greek, Arabic, Hebrew, and French.
Until recently, two different dialects of Judeo-Spanish were spoken in the Mediterranean region: Eastern Judeo-Spanish (in various distinctive regional variations) and Western or North African Judeo-Spanish (also known as Ḥakitía). The latter was once spoken, with little regional distinction, in six towns in Northern Morocco. Because of later emigration, it was also spoken by Sephardim in Ceuta and Melilla (Spanish cities in North Africa), Gibraltar, Casablanca (Morocco), and Oran (Algeria).

The Eastern Sephardic dialect is typified by its greater conservatism, its retention of numerous Old Spanish features in phonology, morphology, and lexicon, and its numerous borrowings from Turkish and, to a lesser extent, also from Greek and South Slavic. Both dialects have (or had) numerous borrowings from Hebrew, especially in reference to religious matters. But the number of Hebraisms in everyday speech or writing is in no way comparable to that found in Yiddish, the first language for some time among Ashkenazi Jews in Europe.

On the other hand, the North African Sephardic dialect was, until the early 20th century, also highly conservative; its abundant Colloquial Arabic loan words retained most of the Arabic phonemes as functional components of a new, enriched Hispano-Semitic phonological system. During the Spanish colonial occupation of Northern Morocco (1912–1956), Ḥakitía was subjected to pervasive, massive influence from Modern Standard Spanish. Most Moroccan Jews now speak a colloquial, Andalusian form of Spanish, with only occasional use of the old language as a sign of in-group solidarity. Similarly, American Jews may now use an occasional Yiddishism in colloquial speech. Except for certain younger individuals, who continue to practice Ḥakitía as a matter of cultural pride, this dialect, probably the most Arabized of the Romance languages apart from Mozarabic, has essentially ceased to exist.

By contrast, Eastern Judeo-Spanish has fared somewhat better, especially in Israel, where newspapers, radio broadcasts, and elementary school and university programs strive to keep the language alive. But the old regional variations (i.e. Bosnia, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, and Turkey for instance) are already either extinct or doomed to extinction. Only time will tell whether Judeo-Spanish koiné, now evolving in Israel—similar to that which developed among Sephardic immigrants to the United States early in the 20th century- will prevail and survive into the next generation.

Judæo-Portuguese was used by Sephardim — especially among the Spanish and Portuguese Jews. The pidgin forms of Portuguese spoken among slaves and their Sephardic owners were an influence in the development of Papiamento and the Creole languages of Suriname. A Jewish ethnolect of Papiamentu, documented in the work of the author May Henriquez, once developed in Curaçao. Jewish Papiamentu has largely disappeared; very few speakers (mostly elderly) are still aware of its existence.

Judeo-Catalan has also been proposed as the main language used by the Jewish communities in Catalonia, Balearic Isles and the Valencian region, although its nature or even existence is debated.

Other languages associated with Sephardic Jews are mostly extinct, e. g. Corfiot Italkian, formerly spoken by some Sephardic communities in Italy. Judeo-Arabic and its dialects have been a large vernacular language for Sephardim who settled in North African kingdoms and Arabic-speaking parts of the Ottoman Empire. Low German (Low Saxon), formerly used as the vernacular by Sephardim around Hamburg and Altona in Northern Germany, is no longer in use as a specifically Jewish vernacular.

Through their diaspora, Sephardim have been a polyglot population, often learning or exchanging words with the language of their host population, most commonly Italian, Arabic, Greek, Turkish, and Dutch. They were easily integrated with the societies that hosted them. Within the last centuries and, more particularly the 19th and 20th centuries, two languages have become dominant in the Sephardic diaspora: French, introduced first by the Alliance Israélite Universelle, and then by absorption of new immigrants to France after Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria became independent, and Hebrew in the state of Israel. 

==Literature==

The doctrine of &quot;galut&quot; is considered by scholars to be one of the most important concepts in Jewish history, if not the most important. In Jewish literature &quot;glut&quot;, the Hebrew word for diaspora, invoked common motifs of oppression, martyrdom, and suffering in discussing the collective experience of exile in diaspora that has been uniquely formative in Jewish culture. This literature was shaped for centuries by the expulsions from Spain and Portugal and thus featured prominently in a wide range of medieval Jewish literature from rabbinic writings to profane poetry. Even so, the treatment of &quot;glut&quot; diverges in Sephardic sources, which scholar David A. Wacks says &quot;occasionally belie the relatively comfortable circumstances of the Jewish community of Sefarad.&quot;

== Relations with Ashkenazim ==
During the medieval period, a considerable number of Ashkenazi Jews from historic &quot;Ashkenaz&quot; (Germany and France) had moved to study Kabbalah and Torah under the guidance of Sephardic Jewish Rabbis in Iberia. These Ashkenazi Jews who assimilated into the Sephardic society eventually gained the surnames &quot;Ashkenazi&quot; if they came from Germany and &quot;Zarfati&quot; if they came from France.

Sephardi-Ashkenazi relations have at times been strained by racial tension, with both sides claiming the inferiority of the other, based upon such features as physical traits and culture.

In some instances, Sephardi Jews have joined Ashkenazi communities, and have intermarried.

== Leading Sephardic rabbis ==

:; Islamic Iberia
* Isaac Alfasi
* Joseph ibn Migash
* Judah al-Bargeloni
* Solomon ibn Gabirol
* Abraham ibn Ezra
* Moses ibn Ezra
* Yehuda Halevi
* Samuel ibn Naghrela
* Bahya ibn Paquda
* Maimonides
* Isaac ibn Ghiyyat
:; Christian Iberia
* Nahmanides
* Shlomo ben Aderet
* Yom Tob of Seville (the &quot;Ritba&quot;)
* Nissim of Gerona
* Asher ben Jehiel (Ashkenazi by birth, became Chief Rabbi of Toledo)
* Jacob ben Asher
* Moses de Leon
* Abraham Senior
*Abraham Saba
* David Abudirham
* Isaac Campanton
* Isaac Aboab I
* Isaac Aboab of Castile
* Don Isaac Abravanel
* Profiat Duran
* Menachem Meiri
* Vidal of Tolosa
:; After the expulsion
* David ben Solomon ibn Abi Zimra
* Jacob Berab
* Levi ibn Ḥabib
* Yosef Karo
* Yaakov de Castro
* Bezalel Ashkenazi
* Moses ben Jacob Cordovero
* Ḥayim Vital
* Moses Alshech
* Abraham Cohen Pimentel
* Solomon Nissim Algazi
* Yaakov Culi
* Hayim Palaggi
* Chaim Yosef David Azulai
* David Pardo
* Azaria Piccio
* Jacob Rakkah
* Mas&#x27;ud Hai Rakkah
:; Recent Sephardi rabbis
* Israel Abuhatzeira
* Amram Aburbeh
* Shlomo Amar
* Elijah Benamozegh
* David de Sola Pool
* Mordechai Eliyahu
* Shem Tob Gaguine
* Solomon Gaon
* Yosef Hayyim
* Yitzhak Kaduri
* Ovadiah Yosef
* Pinchas Toledano

== Genetics ==

Genetically, Sephardic Jews are closely related to their Ashkenazi Jewish counterparts and studies have revealed that they mainly have a mixed Middle Eastern (Levantine) and Southern European ancestry. Due to their origin in the Mediterranean basin and strict practice of endogamy, there is a higher incidence of certain hereditary diseases and inherited disorders in Sephardi Jews. However, there are no specifically Sephardic genetic diseases, since the diseases in this group are not necessarily common to Sephardic Jews specifically, but are instead common in the particular country of birth, and sometimes among many other Jewish groups generally. The most important ones are:
* Beta-thalassemia
* Familial Mediterranean fever
* Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and Gilbert&#x27;s syndrome
* Glycogen storage disease type III
* Machado-Joseph disease

== List of Nobel laureates ==
* 1906 – Henri Moissan, Chemistry
* 1911 - Tobias Asser, Peace
* 1959 – Emilio G. Segrè, Physics
* 1968 – René Cassin, Peace
* 1969 – Salvador Luria, Medicine
* 1980 – Baruj Benacerraf, Medicine
* 1981 – Elias Canetti, Literature
* 1985 – Franco Modigliani, Economics
* 1997 – Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, Physics
* 2012 – Serge Haroche, Physics
* 2014 – Patrick Modiano, Literature

== See also ==

* Adeni Jews
* Arab Jews
* Ashkenazi Jews
* Berber Jews
* Eastern Sephardim
* Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites
* Hebrews
* History of Sephardic Jews in the Pacific Northwest
* History of the Jews in Jamaica
* Israelites
* Jewish culture
* Jewish diaspora
* Jewish ethnic divisions
* Jewish history
* Jews of Catalonia
* Judaeo-Portuguese
* Judaeo-Spanish
* List of Sephardic Jews
*&quot;Ma&#x27;amad&quot;, a Council of Elders of Sephardic communities
* Maghrebi Jews
* Mizrahi Jews
* North African Sephardim
* Sephardic law and customs
* Spanish and Portuguese Jews
* Ten Lost Tribes
* Yemenite Jews
* and :Category:Sephardic yeshivas
==Notes==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* Ashtor, Eliyahu, &quot;The Jews of Moslem Spain, Vol. 2&quot;, Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America (1979)
* Assis, Yom Tov, &quot;The Jews of Spain: From Settlement to Expulsion&quot;, Jerusalem: Hebrew University of Jerusalem|The Hebrew University of Jerusalem (1988)
* Baer, Yitzhak. &quot;A History of the Jews of Christian Spain&quot;. 2 vols. Jewish Publication Society of America (1966).
* Bowers, W. P. &quot;Jewish Communities in Spain in the Time of Paul the Apostle&quot; in &quot;Journal of Theological Studies&quot; Vol. 26 Part 2, October 1975, pp. 395–402
* Carasso, Lucienne. &quot;Growing Up Jewish in Alexandria: The Story of a Sephardic Family&#x27;s Exodus from Egypt&quot;. New York, 2014. .
* Dan, Joseph, &quot;The Epic of a Millennium: Judeo-Spanish Culture&#x27;s Confrontation&quot; in &quot;Judaism&quot; Vol. 41, No. 2, Spring 1992.
* Gampel, Benjamin R., &quot;Jews, Christians, and Muslims in Medieval Iberia: &quot;Convivencia&quot; through the Eyes of Sephardic Jews,&quot; in &quot;Convivencia: Jews, Muslims, and Christians in Medieval Spain&quot;, ed. Vivian B. Mann, Thomas F. Glick, and Jerrilynn D. Dodds, New York: George Braziller, Inc. (1992)
* Groh, Arnold A. &quot;Searching for Sephardic History in Berlin&quot;, in &quot;Semana Sepharad: The Lectures. Studies on Sephardic History&quot;, ed. Serels, M. Mitchell, New York: Jacob E. Safra Institute of Sephardic Studies (2001). 
* Kaplan, Yosef, &quot;An Alternative Path to Modernity: The Sephardi Diaspora in Western Europe&quot;. Brill Publishers (2000). 
* Katz, Solomon, &quot;Monographs of the Mediaeval Academy of America No. 12: The Jews in the Visigothic and Frankish Kingdoms of Spain and Gaul&quot;, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Mediaeval Society of America (1937)
* Kedourie, Elie, editor. &quot;Spain and the Jews: The Sephardi Experience 1492 and After&quot;. Thames &amp; Hudson (1992).
* Levie, Tirtsah, &quot;Poverty and Welfare Among the Portuguese Jews in Early Modern Amsterdam&quot;, Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2012.
* Raphael, Chaim, The Sephardi Story: A Celebration of Jewish History London: Valentine Mitchell &amp; Co. Ltd. (1991)
*Rauschenbach, Sina, &quot;The Sephardic Atlantic. Colonial Histories and Postcolonial Perspectives.&quot; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019.
*Rauschenbach, Sina, &quot;Sephardim and Ashkenazim. Jewish-Jewish Encounters in History and Literature.&quot; Berlin: De Gruyter, 2020 (forthcoming).
* Sarna, Nahum M., &quot;Hebrew and Bible Studies in Medieval Spain&quot; in Sephardi Heritage, Vol. 1 ed. R. D. Barnett, New York: Ktav Publishing House, Inc. (1971)
* Sassoon, Solomon David, &quot;The Spiritual Heritage of the Sephardim,&quot; in The Sephardi Heritage, Vol. 1 ed. R. D. Barnett, New York: Ktav Publishing House Inc. (1971)
* Free Online – UC Press E-Books Collection
* Stein, Gloria Sananes, &quot;Marguerite: Journey of a Sephardic Woman&quot;, Morgantown, PA : Masthof Press, 1997.
* Stillman, Norman, &quot;Aspects of Jewish Life in Islamic Spain&quot; in Aspects of Jewish Culture in the Middle Ages ed. Paul E. Szarmach, Albany: State University of New York Press (1979)
* Swetschinski, Daniel. &quot;Reluctant Cosmopolitans: The Portuguese Jews of Seventeenth-Century Amsterdam&quot;. Litmann Library of Jewish Civilization, (2000)
* Wexler, Paul. &quot;The Non-Jewish Origins of the Sephardic Jews&quot;. Albany: SUNY Press, 1996. 
* Zolitor, Jeff, &quot;The Jews of Sepharad&quot; Philadelphia: Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations (CSJO) (1997) (&quot;The Jews of Sepharad&quot; reprinted with permission on CSJO website.)
*&quot;The Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue, Recife, Brazil&quot;. Database of Jewish communities. Archived from the original on 24 November 2007. Retrieved 2008-06-28.
*&quot;History of the Jewish community of Recife&quot;. Database of Jewish communities. Archived from the original on 2008-01-04. Retrieved 2008-06-28.
*&quot;Synagogue in Brazilian town Recife considered oldest in the Americas&quot;. Reuters. 2008-11-12. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 2008-06-29. Oldest synagogue in Americas draws tourists to Brazil

== External links ==
Genealogy:
* Sefardies.org Sephardic Genealogy and official web in Spain
* Sephardic Genealogy
* Multiple searchable databases for Sephardic genealogy
* Consolidated Index of Sephardic Surnames
* Extensive bibliography for Sephardim and Sephardic Genealogy
* Sephardic names translated into English
Genetics:
History and community:
* European Sephardic Institute
* International Sephardic Education Foundation 
* International Sephardic Journal
* Sephardic educational materials for children
* International Sephardic Leadership Council
* Radio Sefarad an internet radio broadcasting from Madrid; includes Huellas, a weekly program for those looking for the origins of their Sephardic surnames
* Turkish Sephardi Şalom Newspaper
* Sephardic Dating Project
* From Andalusian Orangeries to Anatolia
* (American Sephardi Federation)
* Pascua Marrana. Surname Rojas/Shajor/black sefardim
* American Jewish Historical Society, New England Archives
* Sefarad, Journal on Hebraic, Sephardim and Middle East Studies, ILC , CSIC (scientific articles in Spanish, English and other languages)
* Hebrew Synagogue, (Hebrew Synagogue is seen as an advisory body on matters pertaining to religious practice and is widely consulted by many agencies)
Philosophical:
* Sepharadim in the Nineteenth Century: New Directions and Old Values by José Faur, outlining the positive yet traditionalist responses to modernity typical of the Sepharadi Jewish community
* Sepharadi Thought in the Presence of the European Enlightenment by José Faur, identifying the difference in reaction to the European Enlightenment among Sepharadi and Ashkenazi communities
* Anti-Semitism in the Sepharadi Mind by José Faur, describing the cultural response of Sepharadim to anti-Semitism
* Can Sephardic Judaism be Reconstructed?
* The Special Character of Sephardic Tolerance
Music and liturgy:
* Folk Literature of the Sephardic Jews Searchable archive of audio recordings of Sephardic ballads and other oral literature collected from informants from around the world, from 1950s until the 1990s, by Professor Samuel Armistead and his colleagues, maintained by Professor Bruce Rosenstock.
* Sephardic Pizmonim Project- Music of the Middle Eastern Sephardic Community.
* Daniel Halfon website of a British-born cantor and leading exponent of the liturgical tradition of Spanish and Portuguese Jews
* Liturgy of the Spanish Synagogue in Rome performed by Rev. Alberto Funaro
* Isaac Azose website of a cantor from Seattle, WA, USA, instrumental in preservation of the Sephardic liturgical tradition of Rhodes
* Songs of the Sephardic Jewish Women of Morocco Internet Radio Show featuring field recordings of Sephardic Jewish Women in Tangier &amp; Tetuan, 1954 w/ song texts translated into English.
* A Guide to Jewish Bulgaria, published by Vagabond Media, Sofia, 2011
* Diaspora Sefardi – Jordi Savall, Hespèrion XXI – Alia Vox AV9809
* Katalanim songs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="0" end="14" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="30" end="43" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="47" end="56" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="72" end="95" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Iberian Peninsular Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="103" end="118" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="150" end="167" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="169" end="174" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="179" end="187" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305343" start="239" end="247" title="Sepharad" label="Sepharad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="292" end="303" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="308" end="320" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410157" start="358" end="383" title="Sephardic law and customs" label="Sephardic law and customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="610" end="616" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="707" end="719" title="Hispania" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="786" end="795" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="859" end="869" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="884" end="900" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="921" end="931" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="991" end="1002" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="1023" end="1038" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="1046" end="1063" title="Catholic Monarchs of Spain" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="1108" end="1128" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="1299" end="1307" title="Expulsion of Jews from Spain" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="1329" end="1341" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="1343" end="1355" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="1357" end="1365" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="1370" end="1389" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="1485" end="1494" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1618" end="1628" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="1633" end="1640" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="1883" end="1896" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="1907" end="1921" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Judaeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56982" start="1926" end="1943" title="Judaeo-Portuguese" label="Judaeo-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="1982" end="1998" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088025" start="2012" end="2023" title="Old Spanish" label="Old Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="2028" end="2042" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Old Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="2108" end="2129" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569973" start="2172" end="2179" title="Haketia" label="Haketia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738294" start="2201" end="2215" title="Tetuani Ladino" label="Tetuani Ladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2238" end="2244" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="2761" end="2778" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305343" start="3344" end="3352" title="Sepharad" label="Sepharad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="3493" end="3502" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="3594" end="3606" title="Solomon" label="King Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3838" end="3840" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="3850" end="3865" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525400" start="3903" end="3917" title="Pe (Semitic letter)" label="&amp;quot;pe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q912265" start="3934" end="3940" title="dagesh" label="dagesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="3980" end="3987" title="Digraph (orthography)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="4055" end="4062" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="4403" end="4420" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="4488" end="4503" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="4528" end="4545" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138579" start="4564" end="4578" title="Expulsion of the Jews from Portugal" label="decree of 1496"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="4582" end="4590" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="4608" end="4616" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="5681" end="5691" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="6120" end="6135" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castilian crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="6206" end="6221" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711179" start="6223" end="6236" title="Judaeo-Catalan" label="Judeo-Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6285" end="6306" title="Hebrew language#Modern Hebrew" label="modern Israeli Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="6340" end="6347" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="broader"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="6955" end="6967" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469047" start="7060" end="7066" title="Nusach (Jewish custom)" label="nusach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="7074" end="7089" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q471894" start="7157" end="7163" title="Siddur" label="Siddur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628649" start="7383" end="7389" title="Minhag" label="Minhag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909536" start="7421" end="7434" title="Nusach Sefard" label="Nusach Sefard"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="7642" end="7649" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="7659" end="7668" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="7685" end="7699" title="Beta Israel" label="Ethiopian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686977" start="7747" end="7755" title="Haymanot" label="Haymanot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="7837" end="7848" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="7989" end="8001" title="Hispania" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q52631" start="8077" end="8082" title="Ibiza" label="Ibiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="8161" end="8167" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="8176" end="8185" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="8226" end="8247" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="8256" end="8260" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q632081" start="8448" end="8467" title="Lugdunum Convenarum" label="Lugdunum Convenarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q474035" start="8509" end="8520" title="Amoraim" label="Amoraic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278538" start="8620" end="8634" title="Rabbi Berekhiah" label="Rabbi Berekiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q557405" start="8639" end="8662" title="Shimon bar Yochai" label="Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai"/>
<link wikidata="Q975574" start="8693" end="8698" title="Tannaim" label="tanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621623" start="8705" end="8715" title="Rabbi Meir" label="Rabbi Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="8841" end="8845" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="8958" end="8977" title="First Temple period" label="First Temple period"/>
<link wikidata="Q44826" start="9014" end="9022" title="Tarshish" label="Tarshish"/>
<link wikidata="Q320416" start="9028" end="9037" title="Tartessos" label="Tartessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577600" start="9115" end="9127" title="Carthaginian Iberia" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47483" start="9210" end="9219" title="Murviedro" label="Murviedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057937" start="9232" end="9240" title="Adoniram" label="Adoniram"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="9262" end="9269" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377811" start="9625" end="9653" title="Jewish deicide" label="charge often leveled at them"/>
<link wikidata="Q330821" start="9693" end="9709" title="Abraham ibn Daud" label="Abraham ibn Daud"/>
<link wikidata="Q913564" start="9860" end="9865" title="Tribe of Judah" label="Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812965" start="9870" end="9878" title="Tribe of Benjamin" label="Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="10115" end="10120" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="10121" end="10145" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)" label="prevailed over Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="10182" end="10190" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="10472" end="10478" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="10759" end="10765" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="10767" end="10773" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="10775" end="10782" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="10788" end="10797" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10509" start="10888" end="10893" title="Elche" label="Elche"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812" start="10895" end="10902" title="Tortosa" label="Tortosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49562" start="10904" end="10908" title="Adra, Spain" label="Adra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262455" start="10956" end="10971" title="Synod of Elvira" label="Synod of Elvira"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="11558" end="11576" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="11686" end="11706" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="11733" end="11742" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="11753" end="11761" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="11914" end="11923" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q943866" start="12029" end="12047" title="Breviary of Alaric" label="Breviary of Alaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12224" end="12235" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q313057" start="12247" end="12255" title="Reccared I" label="Reccared"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12532" end="12546" title="ecclesiastical" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="13014" end="13033" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="13067" end="13095" title="Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula" label="successful military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="13238" end="13248" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="13564" end="13570" title="dhimmi" label="dhimmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="13702" end="13713" title="Jizya" label="special tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="13729" end="13734" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="14177" end="14184" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="14186" end="14192" title="Málaga" label="Malaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="14194" end="14201" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="14207" end="14213" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="14391" end="14420" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="Golden Age of Sephardic Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="15098" end="15105" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q29000" start="15114" end="15129" title="Abd-ar-rahman I" label="Abd al-Rahman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="15254" end="15261" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="15510" end="15519" title="scripture" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="15555" end="15563" title="polemics" label="polemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="15582" end="15593" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="15615" end="15624" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="15637" end="15645" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="15764" end="15785" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greek culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="15983" end="15995" title="philology" label="philological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="16159" end="16165" title="geonim" label="geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="16507" end="16520" title="Proselytism" label="proselytizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741992" start="16595" end="16607" title="Bishop Bodo" label="Bodo Eleazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="16628" end="16634" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="16690" end="16697" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893707" start="16698" end="16712" title="Álvaro of Córdoba (Mozarab)" label="Paulus Albarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="16783" end="16791" title="epithets" label="epithets"/>
<link wikidata="Q190418" start="16959" end="16976" title="Abd al-Rahman III" label="Abd al-Rahman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="17010" end="17027" title="Caliph of Cordoba" label="Caliph of Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q182498" start="17088" end="17106" title="Hasdai ibn Shaprut" label="Hasdai ibn Shaprut"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="17150" end="17159" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17434" end="17443" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631107" start="17444" end="17459" title="Helena Lekapene" label="Princess Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q239355" start="17736" end="17747" title="Ibn Gabirol" label="Ibn Gabirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="17755" end="17767" title="Neo-Platonism" label="neo-Platonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69199" start="18224" end="18230" title="Toledo School of Translators" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="18483" end="18494" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="18622" end="18628" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q217177" start="18712" end="18717" title="taifa" label="taifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q963251" start="18763" end="18771" title="Muwallad" label="Muwallad"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="18790" end="18798" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467161" start="19159" end="19174" title="Samuel ha-Nagid" label="Samuel ha-Nagid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="19208" end="19215" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250132" start="19245" end="19264" title="Joseph ibn Naghrela" label="Joseph ibn Naghrela"/>
<link wikidata="Q504598" start="19358" end="19364" title="Lucena, Córdoba" label="Lucena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250132" start="19436" end="19457" title="1066 Granada massacre" label="1066 Granada massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="19536" end="19543" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="19545" end="19554" title="crucifixion" label="crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="19555" end="19558" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="19562" end="19568" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250132" start="19569" end="19588" title="Joseph ibn Naghrela" label="Joseph ibn Naghrela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878706" start="19742" end="19757" title="Badis ibn Habus" label="Badis ibn Habus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="20119" end="20130" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="20180" end="20191" title="Almoravides" label="Almoravides"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="20206" end="20213" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="20547" end="20557" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="22501" end="22509" title="Marranos" label="Marranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="22851" end="22861" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="22868" end="22881" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118100" start="23416" end="23432" title="Samuel Abravanel" label="Samuel Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="23497" end="23503" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q69791715" start="23508" end="23520" title="Moses Curiel" label="Moses Curiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="23610" end="23626" title="United Provinces (Low Countries)" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q472202" start="23680" end="23684" title="Joseph Nasi" label="Nasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q365989" start="23686" end="23703" title="Francisco Pacheco" label="Francisco Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160037" start="23711" end="23727" title="Pedro de Herrera" label="Pedro de Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457569" start="23729" end="23736" title="Palache" label="Palache"/>
<link wikidata="Q16881234" start="23738" end="23746" title="Pimentel (surname)" label="Pimentel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21491394" start="23748" end="23755" title="Azevedo" label="Azevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286804" start="23766" end="23774" title="Joseph Salvador" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23776" end="23785" title="Sasportas" label="Sasportas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671589" start="23787" end="23792" title="Costa (surname)" label="Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q72927737" start="23794" end="23800" title="Curiel family" label="Curiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033487" start="23802" end="23809" title="Cansino" label="Cansino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876972" start="23811" end="23822" title="Schönenberg (surname)" label="Schönenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="23845" end="23851" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105845570" start="23862" end="23870" title="Toledano" label="Toledano"/>
<link wikidata="Q21450564" start="23872" end="23879" title="Pereira (surname)" label="Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379116" start="23885" end="23893" title="Teixeira" label="Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="24443" end="24448" title="historical era" label="times"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="24469" end="24491" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="European Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q238499" start="24548" end="24566" title="Spanish literature" label="Spanish literature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25436" end="25451" title="Yahia Ben Yahia" label="Yahia Ben Yahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="25564" end="25566" title="Don (honorific)" label="D."/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="25567" end="25583" title="Afonso Henriques" label="Afonso Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="25807" end="25827" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="25853" end="25870" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="26090" end="26104" title="New Christians" label="New Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q740564" start="26158" end="26179" title="Assembly of the Republic (Portugal)" label="Portuguese Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="26200" end="26205" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="26309" end="26323" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165983" start="26354" end="26364" title="Bayezid II" label="Bayezid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="26606" end="26618" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="26641" end="26655" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="26660" end="26665" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26690" end="26727" title="Marrano#Massacre at Lisbon" label="great massacre of Jews in the city of"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="26728" end="26734" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="26772" end="26794" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="26988" end="26997" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="27409" end="27415" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="27460" end="27475" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="27510" end="27516" title="Synagogue" label="Esnoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853707" start="27586" end="27602" title="Amsterdam Esnoga" label="Amsterdam Esnoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628649" start="27699" end="27705" title="minhag" label="minhag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="27753" end="27760" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="27771" end="27787" title="North Africa" label="Northern African"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="28133" end="28140" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="28324" end="28338" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502485" start="28532" end="28560" title="History of the Jews in Portugal" label="Jewish community in Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="29063" end="29086" title="Christian IV of Denmark" label="Christian IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q377277" start="29126" end="29136" title="Glückstadt" label="Glückstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024123" start="29232" end="29246" title="Álvaro Caminha" label="Álvaro Caminha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="29251" end="29261" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="29383" end="29391" title="São Tomé" label="São Tomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="29393" end="29401" title="Príncipe" label="Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133620" start="29601" end="29631" title="Luis de Carvajal y de la Cueva" label="Luis de Carvajal y de la Cueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="29650" end="29658" title="Converso" label="Converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="29745" end="29764" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo Reino de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="29834" end="29843" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="30231" end="30242" title="Dutch Republic" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q935621" start="30454" end="30476" title="Isaac Aboab da Fonseca" label="Isaac Aboab da Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q94166707" start="30481" end="30505" title="Moses Raphael de Aguilar" label="Moses Raphael de Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q600198" start="30661" end="30687" title="Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue" label="Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="30711" end="30721" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="30723" end="30729" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="30843" end="30865" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q600198" start="31109" end="31135" title="Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue" label="Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q211351" start="31173" end="31179" title="mikveh" label="mikveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="31186" end="31193" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31514" end="31527" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008358" start="31558" end="31564" title="Seridó" label="Seridó"/>
<link wikidata="Q778305" start="31581" end="31588" title="Qahal" label="kehilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q145972" start="31592" end="31598" title="Zamość" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="31660" end="31666" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431729" start="31860" end="31881" title="Council of Four Lands" label="Council of Four Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="33318" end="33327" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="33816" end="33822" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="33824" end="33834" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="33840" end="33848" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="33878" end="33886" title="Salonika" label="Salonika"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="33888" end="33896" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="33898" end="33906" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="33912" end="33917" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703550" start="34179" end="34210" title="Axis occupation of Greece" label="German occupation in April 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="34378" end="34406" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="34503" end="34511" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="34805" end="34833" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="35001" end="35009" title="Porajmos" label="Porajmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q583420" start="35461" end="35475" title="Bulgarian Jews" label="Bulgarian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="35662" end="35677" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="35691" end="35698" title="French protectorate in Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="35700" end="35707" title="French Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017684" start="35713" end="35720" title="French protectorate of Tunisia" label="Tunesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="35743" end="35755" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="35953" end="35966" title="Italian Libya" label="Italian Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="36174" end="36189" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q281348" start="36357" end="36372" title="Crémieux Decree" label="Crémieux Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="36426" end="36437" title="pieds noirs" label="pieds noirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q579391" start="36547" end="36556" title="Indigénat" label="Indigénat"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="36680" end="36687" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="36689" end="36696" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="36701" end="36708" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16389874" start="36934" end="36944" title="Portuguese proverbs" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q626407" start="36949" end="36965" title="Spanish proverbs" label="Spanish proverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150958" start="36979" end="36999" title="children&amp;#x27;s play" label="children&amp;#x27;s play"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="37458" end="37469" title="magen David" label="magen David"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="37555" end="37560" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="37582" end="37590" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965300" start="37610" end="37631" title="Colegio Hebreo Tarbut" label="Colegio Hebreo Tarbut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="37676" end="37685" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="37716" end="37723" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965296" start="37786" end="37809" title="Colegio Hebreo Sefaradí" label="Colegio Hebreo Sefaradí"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="38196" end="38207" title="Bar and Bat Mitzvah" label="Bar Mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="38232" end="38245" title="American Jews" label="American Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="38385" end="38398" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="38423" end="38429" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q259614" start="38937" end="38944" title="Spanish naming customs" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502033" start="38949" end="38964" title="Portuguese name" label="Portuguese name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="39087" end="39093" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="39098" end="39104" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="39347" end="39355" title="marranos" label="marranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099287" start="41057" end="41067" title="History of the Jews in the Netherlands" label="Dutch Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118387" start="41167" end="41172" title="Chuts" label="Chuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="41758" end="41771" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41818" end="41873" title="Jewish surname#Sephardic and Mizrahi Jewish communities" label="Jewish surname#Sephardic and Mizrahi Jewish communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q259614" start="41875" end="41882" title="Spanish naming customs" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502033" start="41887" end="41902" title="Portuguese name" label="Portuguese name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596726" start="41905" end="41927" title="List of Sephardic Jews" label="List of Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573828" start="41929" end="41949" title="List of Iberian Jews" label="List of Iberian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="42383" end="42398" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679" start="42402" end="42406" title="1492" label="1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="42484" end="42492" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890987" start="42672" end="42688" title="Massacre of 1391" label="occurred in 1391"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="43562" end="43569" title="John II of Portugal" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="43795" end="43808" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="King Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="43876" end="43889" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="King Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q466305" start="44065" end="44073" title="Isabella of Aragon, Queen of Portugal" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="44411" end="44424" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="44452" end="44469" title="forced conversion" label="forced conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q973196" start="44631" end="44648" title="Francisco Sanches" label="Francisco Sanches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="44661" end="44669" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="44883" end="44895" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="44943" end="44950" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="44952" end="44961" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="45049" end="45062" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="45131" end="45144" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="45594" end="45607" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="45978" end="45988" title="religious conversion" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q653922" start="46389" end="46408" title="Jewish Encyclopedia" label="Jewish Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131005" start="46526" end="46553" title="Jewish community of Livorno" label="Jewish community of Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q560816" start="46880" end="46918" title="History of the Jews in Turkey" label="in various parts of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="46966" end="46975" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="46984" end="46992" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="46998" end="47004" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="47052" end="47062" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="47079" end="47086" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632945" start="47172" end="47180" title="History of the Jews of Thessaloniki" label="Salonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="47204" end="47218" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="47244" end="47252" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="47299" end="47307" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="47326" end="47348" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="47379" end="47387" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265699" start="47434" end="47448" title="Romaniote Jews" label="Romaniote Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="47513" end="47521" title="Walachia" label="Walachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="47664" end="47671" title="Judezmo" label="Judezmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="47717" end="47731" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Judaeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276667" start="47934" end="47946" title="Rashi script" label="Rashi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="47963" end="47974" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="48048" end="48062" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120206" start="48138" end="48146" title="History of the Jews in Syria" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120206" start="48151" end="48157" title="History of the Jews in Syria" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="48186" end="48200" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="48216" end="48223" title="History of the Jews in Iraq" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600128" start="48322" end="48332" title="History of the Jews in Egypt" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="49506" end="49518" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="49634" end="49647" title="Malabar coast" label="Malabar coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105126" start="49708" end="49721" title="Cochin Jews" label="Cochin Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="49909" end="49912" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526545" start="49914" end="49942" title="Gaspar Jorge de Leão Pereira" label="Gaspar Jorge de Leão Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="50051" end="50066" title="Goa Inquisition" label="Goa Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451870" start="50079" end="50102" title="Sephardic Jews in India" label="Sephardic Jews in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q21453918" start="50424" end="50431" title="Azoulay" label="Azoulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590462" start="50433" end="50441" title="Abulafia (surname)" label="Abulafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821898" start="50443" end="50452" title="Abravanel" label="Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="50937" end="50949" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="51014" end="51021" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076740" start="51026" end="51033" title="History of the Jews in Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="51059" end="51073" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Judaeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569973" start="51083" end="51090" title="Haketia" label="Haketia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37733" start="51108" end="51120" title="Judeo-Arabic" label="Judeo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="51354" end="51367" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456071" start="51432" end="51446" title="History of the Jews in Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="51662" end="51706" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="52081" end="52088" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21453918" start="52338" end="52345" title="Azoulay" label="Azoulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590462" start="52347" end="52355" title="Abulafia (surname)" label="Abulafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821898" start="52357" end="52366" title="Abravanel" label="Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="52673" end="52690" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Western Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="52988" end="53002" title="New Christians" label="New Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q612845" start="53016" end="53022" title="Anusim" label="Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="53107" end="53116" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="53130" end="53139" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="54132" end="54140" title="marranos" label="marranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="54285" end="54308" title="Hispanosphere" label="Iberian cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="54726" end="54743" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch de Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q806853" start="54809" end="54837" title="Herem (censure)" label="expelled from said community"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988743" start="55587" end="55608" title="Sephardic Bnei Anusim" label="Sephardic Bnei Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="56159" end="56166" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q221357" start="56219" end="56231" title="Dutch Brazil" label="Dutch Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="56604" end="56617" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="56636" end="56651" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="56828" end="56841" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435187" start="56969" end="56997" title="Congregation Shearith Israel" label="Congregation Shearith Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355822" start="57157" end="57171" title="Jeshuat Israel" label="Jeshuat Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026937" start="57340" end="57354" title="Touro Cemetery" label="Touro Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643195" start="57371" end="57421" title="List of the oldest synagogues in the United States" label="List of the oldest synagogues in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q58132" start="57843" end="57857" title="Nicolás Maduro" label="Nicolás Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="57870" end="57929" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q817637" start="57931" end="57950" title="Benjamin N. Cardozo" label="Benjamin N. Cardozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="58078" end="58085" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988743" start="58148" end="58169" title="Sephardic Bnei Anusim" label="Sephardic Bnei Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="58219" end="58228" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q612845" start="58279" end="58285" title="anusim" label="anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="58331" end="58334" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="58368" end="58379" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="58393" end="58402" title="conversos" label="conversos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="58407" end="58413" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q377916" start="58430" end="58458" title="Ibero-America" label="Iberian colonial possessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="58474" end="58487" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="58510" end="58546" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="58651" end="58663" title="Judaism" label="Jewish faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433392" start="58916" end="58933" title="family traditions" label="family traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="59091" end="59107" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="59218" end="59226" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="59228" end="59238" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="59240" end="59245" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="59247" end="59254" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="59264" end="59275" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="59277" end="59286" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="59288" end="59306" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="59314" end="59321" title="Iberia" label="Sefarad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="59419" end="59426" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="59502" end="59526" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59735" end="59752" title="#Eastern Sephardim" label="Eastern Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59754" end="59777" title="#North African Sephardim" label="North African Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="59799" end="59816" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Western Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="60124" end="60138" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="60140" end="60152" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="60157" end="60185" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="various other smaller groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q612845" start="60375" end="60386" title="Bnei Anusim" label="Bnei Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="60663" end="60676" title="Hispanosphere" label="Hispanosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="61317" end="61330" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="62477" end="62496" title="Hispanic America" label="New World Hispanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="62501" end="62511" title="Brazilians" label="Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="62534" end="62542" title="Criollo people" label="criollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="62544" end="62552" title="mestizos" label="mestizos"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="62556" end="62564" title="mulattos" label="mulattos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916153" start="62754" end="62762" title="Belmonte Jews" label="Belmonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695850" start="62785" end="62791" title="Xuetes" label="Xuetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="62795" end="62812" title="Palma, Majorca" label="Palma de Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903929" start="62838" end="62853" title="Nissim Karelitz" label="Nissim Karelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="62875" end="62883" title="Halachic" label="Halachic"/>
<link wikidata="Q831124" start="62930" end="62946" title="Beit Din" label="rabbinical court"/>
<link wikidata="Q152467" start="62950" end="62959" title="Bnei Brak" label="Bnei Brak"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="63446" end="63456" title="Syncretism" label="syncretist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045234" start="63492" end="63510" title="Xueta Christianity" label="Xueta Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="64669" end="64675" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="64677" end="64683" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="64685" end="64692" title="Córdoba, Andalusia" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="64694" end="64701" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="64703" end="64709" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="64714" end="64721" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="64783" end="64793" title="Minority group" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="64870" end="64880" title="majority" label="majorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q957767" start="64969" end="64974" title="Ocaña, Spain" label="Ocaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q11953" start="64976" end="64987" title="Guadalajara, Castile-La Mancha" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648730" start="64989" end="65008" title="Buitrago del Lozoya" label="Buitrago del Lozoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q504598" start="65010" end="65016" title="Lucena, Córdoba" label="Lucena"/>
<link wikidata="Q917180" start="65018" end="65027" title="Ribadavia" label="Ribadavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628817" start="65029" end="65035" title="Hervás" label="Hervás"/>
<link wikidata="Q686184" start="65037" end="65044" title="Llerena, Badajoz" label="Llerena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202" start="65050" end="65057" title="Almazán" label="Almazán"/>
<link wikidata="Q173063" start="65063" end="65070" title="Castile (historical region)" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q495380" start="65072" end="65087" title="Aranda de Duero" label="Aranda de Duero"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="65089" end="65094" title="Ávila, Spain" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q946344" start="65096" end="65110" title="Alba de Tormes" label="Alba de Tormes"/>
<link wikidata="Q476793" start="65112" end="65119" title="Arévalo" label="Arévalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9580" start="65121" end="65127" title="Burgos" label="Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q642046" start="65129" end="65138" title="Calahorra" label="Calahorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q986557" start="65140" end="65161" title="Carrión de los Condes" label="Carrión de los Condes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631311" start="65163" end="65170" title="Cuéllar" label="Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407162" start="65172" end="65189" title="Herrera del Duque" label="Herrera del Duque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118661" start="65191" end="65195" title="León (historical region)" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q693913" start="65197" end="65213" title="Medina del Campo" label="Medina del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q99151" start="65215" end="65222" title="Ourense" label="Ourense"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="65224" end="65233" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="65235" end="65242" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12155" start="65244" end="65249" title="Soria" label="Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657074" start="65255" end="65263" title="Villalón de Campos" label="Villalón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636673" start="65311" end="65317" title="aljama" label="aljama"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="65326" end="65332" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038" start="65384" end="65390" title="Girona" label="Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="65392" end="65401" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="65403" end="65412" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="65414" end="65422" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="65427" end="65432" title="Palma, Majorca" label="Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="65434" end="65441" title="Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830155" start="65453" end="65469" title="Girona Synagogue" label="Girona Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q66735851" start="65495" end="65511" title="Jews of Catalonia" label="Catalonian Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="65568" end="65575" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65586" end="65606" title="History of the Jews in Spain#Massacres and mass conversions of 1391" label="various persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="65654" end="65669" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="65760" end="65777" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="65788" end="65809" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="65814" end="65836" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="65889" end="65908" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Kingdoms of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="65913" end="65919" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="66057" end="66065" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890987" start="66184" end="66240" title="Massacre of 1391" label="religious persecution and pogroms which occurred in 1391"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="66692" end="66701" title="Jewish diaspora" label="dispersed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="66753" end="66760" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="66830" end="66837" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="66989" end="67003" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165983" start="67045" end="67055" title="Bayezid II" label="Bayezid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="67063" end="67077" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="67143" end="67155" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="67243" end="67255" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="67276" end="67282" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="67308" end="67313" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309935" start="67355" end="67366" title="Persian Jew" label="Persian Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="67370" end="67374" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="68017" end="68020" title="Don (honorific)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q319902" start="68021" end="68036" title="Isaac Abarbanel" label="Isaac Abarbanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304446" start="68091" end="68101" title="Megorashim" label="Megorashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530203" start="68198" end="68206" title="Toshavim" label="Toshavim"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="68281" end="68289" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138579" start="68299" end="68343" title="Expulsion of the Jews from Portugal" label="only a few years of respite from persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="68656" end="68659" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="69286" end="69315" title="Jewish exodus from Arab lands" label="Jewish exodus from Arab lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="69599" end="69612" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="69645" end="69653" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="69655" end="69664" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="69666" end="69677" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="69683" end="69701" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="71179" end="71188" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903929" start="71205" end="71220" title="Nissim Karelitz" label="Nissim Karelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152467" start="71317" end="71326" title="Bnei Brak" label="Bnei Brak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="71395" end="71412" title="Palma, Majorca" label="Palma de Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695850" start="71418" end="71425" title="Chuetas" label="Chuetas"/>
<link wikidata="Q816115" start="71567" end="71585" title="Belmonte Municipality" label="Belmonte, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="71615" end="71622" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="71651" end="71660" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916153" start="71699" end="71732" title="History of the Jews in Belmonte" label="Belmonte community of Bnei Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744988" start="71937" end="71968" title="Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera" label="Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q251912" start="72105" end="72120" title="Ángel Sanz Briz" label="Ángel Sanz Briz"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="72456" end="72472" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424558" start="72679" end="72711" title="expulsion of the Jews from Spain" label="expulsion of the Jews from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q779351" start="73899" end="73905" title="Sunset provision" label="expire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65160451" start="74377" end="74418" title="Federation of Jewish Communities of Spain" label="Federation of Jewish Communities of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="76149" end="76166" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q360961" start="76291" end="76306" title="Natan Sharansky" label="Natan Sharansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="76343" end="76367" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232784" start="76710" end="76728" title="Portuguese nationality law" label="Law on Nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q950320" start="77171" end="77191" title="Law of Return" label="Jewish Law of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q740564" start="77218" end="77239" title="Assembly of the Republic (Portugal)" label="Portuguese Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898888" start="78146" end="78159" title="Shavei Israel" label="Shavei Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q612845" start="78309" end="78321" title="Bnei Anusim" label="Bnei Anousim"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="78866" end="78879" title="Judeo-Spanish" label="Judeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="78944" end="78960" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088025" start="78981" end="78994" title="Old Castilian" label="Old Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569973" start="79326" end="79333" title="Haketia" label="Ḥakitía"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="79496" end="79501" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="79506" end="79513" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="79548" end="79557" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="79559" end="79569" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="79585" end="79589" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q847964" start="79984" end="79992" title="Hebraism" label="Hebraism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="80065" end="80072" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194795" start="80269" end="80286" title="Maghrebi Arabic" label="Colloquial Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="80427" end="80474" title="Spanish Morocco" label="Spanish colonial occupation of Northern Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q489811" start="80615" end="80641" title="Andalusian Spanish" label="Andalusian form of Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053530" start="80773" end="80783" title="Yinglish" label="Yiddishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q317044" start="80987" end="80996" title="Mozarabic language" label="Mozarabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56982" start="81625" end="81641" title="Judæo-Portuguese" label="Judæo-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="81687" end="81714" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Spanish and Portuguese Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507109" start="81720" end="81746" title="Portuguese Pidgin" label="pidgin forms of Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="81834" end="81844" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81860" end="81881" title="Suriname#Demographics" label="languages of Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q951873" start="81892" end="81901" title="ethnolect" label="ethnolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297977" start="81954" end="81967" title="May Henriquez" label="May Henriquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q119438064" start="81996" end="82013" title="Judaeo-Papiamento" label="Jewish Papiamentu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711179" start="82109" end="82122" title="Judeo-Catalan" label="Judeo-Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="82201" end="82210" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="82212" end="82226" title="Balearic Isles" label="Balearic Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="82235" end="82243" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145414" start="82377" end="82393" title="Corfiot Italkian" label="Corfiot Italkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37733" start="82451" end="82463" title="Judeo-Arabic" label="Judeo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="82604" end="82618" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="82620" end="82630" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="82696" end="82703" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="82708" end="82714" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="82781" end="82791" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="82954" end="82961" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="82963" end="82969" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="82971" end="82976" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="82978" end="82985" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="82991" end="82996" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="83203" end="83209" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316546" start="83235" end="83265" title="Alliance Israélite Universelle" label="Alliance Israélite Universelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="83377" end="83383" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="83448" end="83453" title="galut" label="galut"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="83616" end="83622" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="83632" end="83640" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="83756" end="83764" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642350" start="83958" end="83975" title="Jewish literature" label="Jewish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="84278" end="84293" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="84320" end="84334" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="84410" end="84418" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q722780" start="84587" end="84596" title="Ashkenazi (surname)" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272390" start="84639" end="84646" title="Sarfati" label="Zarfati"/>
<link wikidata="Q523491" start="85013" end="85025" title="Isaac Alfasi" label="Isaac Alfasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q958361" start="85028" end="85045" title="Joseph ibn Migash" label="Joseph ibn Migash"/>
<link wikidata="Q534312" start="85048" end="85066" title="Judah ben Barzillai" label="Judah al-Bargeloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q239355" start="85069" end="85088" title="Solomon ibn Gabirol" label="Solomon ibn Gabirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q270670" start="85091" end="85107" title="Abraham ibn Ezra" label="Abraham ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q719393" start="85110" end="85124" title="Moses ibn Ezra" label="Moses ibn Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q299200" start="85127" end="85140" title="Yehuda Halevi" label="Yehuda Halevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467161" start="85143" end="85162" title="Samuel ibn Naghrela" label="Samuel ibn Naghrela"/>
<link wikidata="Q762229" start="85165" end="85181" title="Bahya ibn Paquda" label="Bahya ibn Paquda"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="85184" end="85194" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909247" start="85197" end="85214" title="Isaac ibn Ghiyyat" label="Isaac ibn Ghiyyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="85237" end="85247" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q982170" start="85250" end="85267" title="Shlomo ben Aderet" label="Shlomo ben Aderet"/>
<link wikidata="Q460368" start="85270" end="85288" title="Yom Tov Asevilli" label="Yom Tob of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q723531" start="85315" end="85331" title="Nissim of Gerona" label="Nissim of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q722525" start="85334" end="85350" title="Asher ben Jehiel" label="Asher ben Jehiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376849" start="85404" end="85419" title="Jacob ben Asher" label="Jacob ben Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q456758" start="85422" end="85435" title="Moses de Leon" label="Moses de Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q330594" start="85438" end="85452" title="Abraham Senior" label="Abraham Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669161" start="85454" end="85466" title="Abraham Saba" label="Abraham Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q461507" start="85469" end="85484" title="David Abudirham" label="David Abudirham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908183" start="85487" end="85502" title="Isaac Campanton" label="Isaac Campanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673399" start="85505" end="85518" title="Isaac Aboab I" label="Isaac Aboab I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231100" start="85521" end="85543" title="Isaac Aboab of Castile" label="Isaac Aboab of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q319902" start="85546" end="85565" title="Don Isaac Abravanel" label="Don Isaac Abravanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q461521" start="85568" end="85581" title="Profiat Duran" label="Profiat Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920221" start="85584" end="85598" title="Menachem Meiri" label="Menachem Meiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927679" start="85601" end="85616" title="Vidal of Tolosa" label="Vidal of Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241455" start="85642" end="85673" title="David ben Solomon ibn Abi Zimra" label="David ben Solomon ibn Abi Zimra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909966" start="85676" end="85687" title="Jacob Berab" label="Jacob Berab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535573" start="85690" end="85704" title="Levi Ibn Chaviv" label="Levi ibn Ḥabib"/>
<link wikidata="Q467148" start="85707" end="85717" title="Yosef Karo" label="Yosef Karo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21931887" start="85720" end="85736" title="Yaakov de Castro" label="Yaakov de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q832201" start="85739" end="85756" title="Bezalel Ashkenazi" label="Bezalel Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733598" start="85759" end="85784" title="Moses ben Jacob Cordovero" label="Moses ben Jacob Cordovero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302424" start="85787" end="85798" title="Hayyim ben Joseph Vital" label="Ḥayim Vital"/>
<link wikidata="Q786391" start="85801" end="85814" title="Moses Alshech" label="Moses Alshech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668811" start="85817" end="85839" title="Abraham Cohen Pimentel" label="Abraham Cohen Pimentel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558717" start="85842" end="85863" title="Solomon Nissim Algazi" label="Solomon Nissim Algazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046291" start="85866" end="85877" title="Yaakov Culi" label="Yaakov Culi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903944" start="85880" end="85893" title="Hayim Palaggi" label="Hayim Palaggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058991" start="85896" end="85920" title="Chaim Yosef David Azulai" label="Chaim Yosef David Azulai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238372" start="85923" end="85934" title="David Pardo (Italian rabbi)" label="David Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832283" start="85937" end="85950" title="Azaria Piccio" label="Azaria Piccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121725" start="85953" end="85965" title="Jacob Rakkah" label="Jacob Rakkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668669" start="85968" end="85990" title="Mas&amp;#x27;ud Hai Rakkah" label="Mas&amp;#x27;ud Hai Rakkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q797542" start="86019" end="86037" title="Israel Abuhatzeira" label="Israel Abuhatzeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768063" start="86040" end="86053" title="Amram Aburbeh" label="Amram Aburbeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890508" start="86056" end="86067" title="Shlomo Amar" label="Shlomo Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q783344" start="86070" end="86087" title="Elijah Benamozegh" label="Elijah Benamozegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241478" start="86090" end="86108" title="David de Sola Pool" label="David de Sola Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q248943" start="86111" end="86128" title="Mordechai Eliyahu" label="Mordechai Eliyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494059" start="86131" end="86147" title="Shem Tob Gaguine" label="Shem Tob Gaguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558606" start="86150" end="86162" title="Solomon Gaon" label="Solomon Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q775996" start="86165" end="86177" title="Yosef Hayyim" label="Yosef Hayyim"/>
<link wikidata="Q733669" start="86180" end="86194" title="Yitzhak Kaduri" label="Yitzhak Kaduri"/>
<link wikidata="Q467172" start="86197" end="86210" title="Ovadiah Yosef" label="Ovadiah Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029070" start="86213" end="86229" title="Haham Pinchas Toledano" label="Pinchas Toledano"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="86304" end="86320" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="86406" end="86412" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="86519" end="86527" title="endogamy" label="endogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="86568" end="86586" title="hereditary disease" label="hereditary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="86592" end="86610" title="inherited disorder" label="inherited disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616632" start="86931" end="86947" title="Beta-thalassemia" label="Beta-thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144618" start="86950" end="86978" title="Familial Mediterranean fever" label="Familial Mediterranean fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="86981" end="87025" title="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q752216" start="87030" end="87053" title="Gilbert&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Gilbert&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q494922" start="87056" end="87089" title="Glycogen storage disease type III" label="Glycogen storage disease type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026441" start="87092" end="87114" title="Machado-Joseph disease" label="Machado-Joseph disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q102804" start="87155" end="87168" title="Henri Moissan" label="Henri Moissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216872" start="87189" end="87201" title="Tobias Asser" label="Tobias Asser"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="87218" end="87233" title="Emilio G. Segrè" label="Emilio G. Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q232873" start="87252" end="87263" title="René Cassin" label="René Cassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205667" start="87280" end="87294" title="Salvador Luria" label="Salvador Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q234701" start="87314" end="87330" title="Baruj Benacerraf" label="Baruj Benacerraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q80064" start="87350" end="87363" title="Elias Canetti" label="Elias Canetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q205850" start="87385" end="87402" title="Franco Modigliani" label="Franco Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q190697" start="87423" end="87445" title="Claude Cohen-Tannoudji" label="Claude Cohen-Tannoudji"/>
<link wikidata="Q109588" start="87464" end="87477" title="Serge Haroche" label="Serge Haroche"/>
<link wikidata="Q222944" start="87496" end="87511" title="Patrick Modiano" label="Patrick Modiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901522" start="87543" end="87553" title="Adeni Jews" label="Adeni Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637729" start="87556" end="87565" title="Arab Jews" label="Arab Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="87568" end="87582" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152757" start="87585" end="87596" title="Berber Jews" label="Berber Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906316" start="87599" end="87616" title="Eastern Sephardim" label="Eastern Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611319" start="87619" end="87662" title="Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites" label="Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="87665" end="87672" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q131452626" start="87675" end="87725" title="History of Sephardic Jews in the Pacific Northwest" label="History of Sephardic Jews in the Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869672" start="87728" end="87758" title="History of the Jews in Jamaica" label="History of the Jews in Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="87761" end="87771" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="87774" end="87788" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="87791" end="87806" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="87809" end="87832" title="Jewish ethnic divisions" label="Jewish ethnic divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="87835" end="87849" title="Jewish history" label="Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q66735851" start="87852" end="87869" title="Jews of Catalonia" label="Jews of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56982" start="87872" end="87889" title="Judaeo-Portuguese" label="Judaeo-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="87892" end="87906" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Judaeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596726" start="87909" end="87931" title="List of Sephardic Jews" label="List of Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581503" start="87939" end="87951" title="Ma&amp;#x27;amad" label="Ma&amp;#x27;amad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730438" start="88006" end="88019" title="Maghrebi Jews" label="Maghrebi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="88022" end="88034" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906313" start="88037" end="88060" title="North African Sephardim" label="North African Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410157" start="88063" end="88088" title="Sephardic law and customs" label="Sephardic law and customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707533" start="88091" end="88118" title="Spanish and Portuguese Jews" label="Spanish and Portuguese Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125226" start="88121" end="88136" title="Ten Lost Tribes" label="Ten Lost Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="88139" end="88152" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="" start="88159" end="88187" title=":Category:Sephardic yeshivas" label=":Category:Sephardic yeshivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q105623239" start="89381" end="89399" title="Jerrilynn D. Dodds" label="Jerrilynn D. Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024362" start="93445" end="93449" title="Spanish National Research Council" label="CSIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292165" start="93752" end="93761" title="José Faur" label="José Faur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94501" end="94517" title="Samuel Armistead" label="Samuel Armistead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150186" wikidata="Q55758" url="?curid=150186" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski">
<text>Aleksander Kwaśniewski (; born 15 November 1954) is a Polish politician and journalist. He served as the president of Poland from 1995 to 2005. His tenure as President was marked by modernization of Poland, rapid economic growth (Poland&#x27;s GDP has doubled in ten years), the drafting of a new Polish Constitution (1997), and the accession of Poland to NATO (1999) and the European Union (2004). In 2004, he brokered a pro-democratic agreement during the Orange Revolution in Ukraine. 

He was born in Białogard, attended the University of Gdańsk, and served as the Minister of Sport in the communist government during the 1980s. After the fall of Communism, he became a leader of the centre-left Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland, a successor to the former ruling Polish United Workers&#x27; Party, and a co-founder of the Democratic Left Alliance.

Kwaśniewski was elected to the presidency in 1995, defeating the incumbent, Lech Wałęsa. He was re-elected to a second and final term as President in 2000 in a decisive first-round victory. In line with a constitutional limit of two terms, his second term ended on 23 December 2005. According to a 2020 poll conducted by &quot;Rzeczpospolita&quot;, Kwaśniewski was considered the best president in post-1989 history of Poland.

==Early political career (1973–1995)==
From 1973 to 1977, Kwaśniewski studied Transport Economics and Foreign Trade at the University of Gdańsk, although he never graduated. He became politically active at this time, and joined the ruling Polish United Workers&#x27; Party (PZPR) in 1977, remaining a member until it was dissolved in 1990.

An activist in the communist student movement until 1982, he held, among other positions, the chairmanship of the University Council of the Socialist Union of Polish Students (SZSP) from 1976 to 1977 and the vice-chairmanship of the Gdańsk Voivodship Union from 1977 to 1979. Kwaśniewski was a member of the SZSP supreme authorities from 1977 to 1982.
From November 1981 to February 1984 he was the editor-in-chief of the communist-controlled student weekly &quot;ITD&quot;, then editor-in-chief of the daily communist youth &quot;Sztandar Młodych&quot; from 1984 to 1985. He was a co-founder of the first computer-science periodical in Poland, &quot;Bajtek&quot;, in 1985. From 1985 to 1987, Kwaśniewski was Minister for Youth Affairs in the Zbigniew Messner government, and then Chairman of the Committee for Youth and Physical Culture till 1990.

He joined the government of Mieczysław Rakowski, first as a Cabinet Minister and then as chairman of the government Social-Political Committee from October 1988 to September 1989. A participant in the Round-Table negotiations, he co-chaired the task group for trade-union pluralism with Tadeusz Mazowiecki and Romuald Sosnowski.

As the PZPR was wound up, he became a founding member of the post-communist Social Democratic Party of the Republic of Poland (SdRP) from January to February 1990, and its first chairman until he assumed the presidency in December 1995. He was also one of the founding members of the coalition Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) in 1991.

Kwaśniewski was an activist in the Student Sports Union from 1975 to 1979 and the Polish Olympic Committee (PKOL); he later served as PKOL president from 1988 to 1991. Running for the Sejm from the Warsaw constituency in 1991, he won the largest number of votes (148,533), although did not win an absolute majority. Kwaśniewski headed the parliamentary caucus of the Democratic Left Alliance in his first and second terms (1991–1995).

He was a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee and chairman of the Constitutional Committee of the National Assembly from November 1993 to November 1995.

==Presidency (1995–2005)==
In an often bitter campaign, Kwaśniewski won the presidential election in 1995, collecting 51.7 percent of votes in the run-off, against 48.3 percent for the incumbent, Lech Wałęsa, the former Solidarity leader. Kwaśniewski&#x27;s campaign slogans were &quot;Let&#x27;s choose the future&quot; (&quot;Wybierzmy przyszłość&quot;) and &quot;A Poland for all&quot; (&quot;Wspólna Polska&quot;).

Political opponents disputed his victory and produced evidence to show that he had lied about his education in registration documents and public presentations. There was also some mystery over his graduation from university. A law court confirmed that Kwaśniewski had lied about his record—and this did not come to light until after the election—but did not penalise him for it. Kwaśniewski took the presidential oath of office on 23 December 1995. Later the same day, he was sworn in as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces at the Warszawa First Fighter Wing, in Mińsk Mazowiecki.

His political course resembled that of Wałęsa&#x27;s in several key respects, such as the pursuit of closer ties to the European Union and NATO. Kwaśniewski also continued the transition to a market economy and the privatization of state-owned enterprises, although with less energy than his predecessor.

Hoping to be seen as &quot;the president of all Poles&quot;, including his political opponents, he resigned from the SLD after the election. Every Polish president since then has renounced formal ties with their party upon taking office. Later, he formed a coalition with the rightist government of Jerzy Buzek with few major conflicts and on several occasions, he stood against movements of the SLD government of Leszek Miller. At one moment, support for Kwaśniewski reached as high as 80% in popularity polls; most of the time it was over 50%.

In 1997, the Polish newspaper &quot;Zycie&quot; reported that Kwaśniewski had met former KGB officer Vladimir Alganov at the Baltic sea resort Cetniewo in 1994. First Kwaśniewski denied ever meeting Alganov and filed a libel suit against the newspaper. Eventually, Kwaśniewski admitted that he had met Alganov on official occasions, but denied meeting him in Cetniewo.

Kwaśniewski&#x27;s greatest achievement was his ability to bring about a new Constitution of Poland to replace the modified Stalinist document then still in use. The failure to create a new document had been a criticism often levelled at Wałęsa. Kwaśniewski actively campaigned for its approval in the subsequent referendum, and he signed it into law on 16 July 1997. He took an active part in the efforts to secure Polish membership of NATO.

He headed Poland&#x27;s delegation at the 1997 Madrid summit, where Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary were promised membership; and the Washington summit, where on 26 February 1999, during the Kosovo conflict, which he supported, he signed the instruments ratifying Poland&#x27;s membership of NATO. He also took an active part in promoting further enlargement of the alliance, speaking out in favor of membership for a further seven states and the open-door policy that leaves open the option of further members.

He was an author of the 2002 Riga Initiative, a forum for cooperation between Central European states, aimed towards further enlargement of NATO and the European Union.

An advocate of regional cooperation in Central and Eastern Europe, Kwaśniewski hosted a summit of the region&#x27;s leaders at Łańcut in 1996. Speaking out against the danger organized crime posed to the region, he submitted a draft of a convention on fighting organised crime to the UN in 1996. He was an active participant at meetings of regional leaders in Portorož in 1997, Levoča in 1998, and Lviv and Yalta in 1999.

After a history of sometimes acrimonious relations with Lithuania, Kwaśniewski was a driving force behind the presidential summit in Vilnius in 1997, at which the two countries&#x27; presidents signed a treaty of friendship. Poland subsequently became one of the strongest advocates of Lithuanian membership in NATO and the European Union and the strongest advocate of Ukraine in Europe. In 2000 he was re-elected in a single round, collecting 53.9 percent of the vote. His election campaign slogan was: &quot;A home for all—Poland&quot; (&quot;Dom wszystkich—Polska&quot;). To date, this is the only time since the end of Communism that a presidential election has been decided in a single round.

Following the 11 September 2001 attacks, Kwaśniewski organized an international conference in Warsaw, with the participation of leaders from Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe to strengthen regional activities in fighting international terrorism. Under Kwaśniewski&#x27;s leadership, Poland became a strong ally of the United States in the War on Terror and contributed troops in the Iraq War, a move that was highly controversial in Poland and Europe.

Poland was in charge of a sector of Iraq after the removal of Saddam Hussein. Polish membership of the European Union became a reality on 1 May 2004, during Kwaśniewski&#x27;s second term. Both he and his wife Jolanta had campaigned for approval of the EU accession treaty in June 2003. He strongly supported including mention of Europe&#x27;s Christian roots into the European Constitution. Thanks to his close relations with Leonid Kuchma, in late 2004 he became a mediator in a political conflict in Ukraine – the Orange Revolution, and according to some commentators, he played the major role in its peaceful solution.

After the release of the Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture in December 2014, Kwaśniewski admitted that he had agreed in 2003 to host a secret CIA black site in Poland, but that activities were to be carried out in accordance to Polish law. He said that a U.S. draft memorandum had stated that &quot;people held in Poland are to be treated as prisoners of war and will be afforded all the rights they are entitled to&quot;, but due to time constraints, the U.S. had not signed the memorandum. The U.S. had conducted activities in great secrecy at the site.

===Controversial pardons===
In December 2005, when his presidency was coming to an end, he granted clemency for a post-Communist deputy minister of Justice Zbigniew Sobotka, who had been sentenced for 3.5 years of prison for revealing a state secret (effectively, he warned gangsters about an operation against them). Kwaśniewski changed the prison sentence to probation.

Another case of Kwaśniewski&#x27;s controversial granting of pardons was the Peter Vogel case. The story goes back to 1971 when Piotr Filipczyński, a.k.a. Peter Vogel was sentenced to 25 years in jail for a brutal murder (shortened to 15 years in 1979). Surprisingly enough, in 1983 (during martial law in Poland) he was granted a passport and allowed to leave the country. He returned in 1990 soon earning the nickname &quot;the accountant of the Left&quot; as a former Swiss banker who took care of more than thirty accounts of Polish social democrats. Despite an arrest warrant issued in 1987, Vogel moved freely in Poland and was eventually arrested in 1998 in Switzerland. After Vogel&#x27;s extradition to Poland, in 1999 Kwaśniewski initiated the procedure of granting him amnesty. In December 2005 (a few days before leaving his office) Kwaśniewski pardoned Vogel despite the negative opinion of the procurer.

===Rywingate===
Kwaśniewski refused in 2003 to face a special parliamentary commission, which was set up to reveal all circumstances linked with Rywingate. Kwaśniewski argued, that the constitution did not allow parliamentary commissions to investigate the president, and there were no clear law opinions. The commission decided eventually not to summon Kwaśniewski.

For a second time Kwaśniewski refused as a witness to face the commission investigating the privatization of Orlen petrol concern, in March 2005. He argued that the actions of commission members, being in opposition to the leftist government supported by him, were directed against him. He sought to undermine the commission by releasing considerable amounts of information to journalists while only belatedly making it available to the commission members.

===Member of secret police allegations===
In 2007, the Institute of National Remembrance revealed that Kwaśniewski was registered during communist times as an agent &quot;Alek&quot; of the secret police, the Security Service (&quot;Służba Bezpieczeństwa&quot; – SB), from 1983 to 1989. Kwaśniewski himself denied having been an agent in a special statement, demanded from politicians by Polish law, and a court confirmed his statement.

==Post-presidency==
On 7 March 2006, Kwaśniewski was appointed Distinguished Scholar in the Practice of Global Leadership at Georgetown University, where he teaches students in the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service about contemporary European politics, the trans-Atlantic relationship, and democratization in Central and Eastern Europe. He also teaches a course on political leadership, convened by Professor Carol Lancaster, with former Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar. He is also Chairman of the supervisory board of the International Centre for Policy Studies in Kyiv, Ukraine and a member of the International Honorary Council of the European Academy of Diplomacy.

In 2008 Aleksander Kwaśniewski became Chairman of the European Council on Tolerance and Reconciliation, a not-for-profit organization established to monitor tolerance in Europe, prepare practical recommendations to governments and international organisations on improving interreligious and interethnic relations on the continent. The organization is co-chaired by European Jewish Fund President Viatcheslav Moshe Kantor.

Since June 2012 Kwaśniewski and Pat Cox lead a European Parliament monitoring mission in Ukraine to monitor the criminal cases against Yulia Tymoshenko, Yuriy Lutsenko and Valeriy Ivaschenko.

Since 2011, Kwaśniewski has served on the Leadership Council for Concordia, a nonpartisan, nonprofit based in New York City focused on promoting effective public-private collaboration to create a more prosperous and sustainable future.

Kwaśniewski was also involved with the EU talks with the Ukrainian government about the association agreement with the EU that the Ukrainian parliament failed to ratify in November 2013. After the Maidan unrest had installed the transitional government under Yatsenyuk, who signed the EU association agreement for Ukraine in 2014, Kwaśniewski took up in a director&#x27;s post in the gas company ″Burisma Holdings Limited″ which owns licenses for the major Ukrainian gas fields.

In 2019, he became a Member of the International Advisory Council (IAC) to Uzbekistan. In 2020, he assumed the position of Chair of the Eastern Europe and Central Asia Commission on Drugs.

===Possible illegal lobbying on behalf of Paul Manafort===
In a plea agreement filed in United States Federal court on 14 September 2018, former Donald Trump campaign chair Paul Manafort admitted to organizing a group of former European heads of state to illegally lobby, starting in 2011, on behalf of then-Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych. The plea agreement describes one of the heads of state involved in this secret lobbying as a &quot;former Polish President&quot; who &quot;was also a representative of the European Parliament with oversight responsibility for Ukraine.&quot; At least one press report claimed that Kwaśniewski was this former Polish President.

==Awards==


Aleksander Kwaśniewski has been honored to date with the following decorations:
* : Grand Master of the Order of the White Eagle (&quot;ex officio&quot;); Knight of the Order of Polonia Restituta First Class, Grand Master of the Order and President of the Chapter
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Vytautas the Great (1996), Grand Cross of the Order of the Lithuanian Grand Duke Gediminas (1999); Order of Vytautas the Great with Golden Chain (2005)
* : Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (March 1996); Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George (October 1996)
* : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic with Collar (1996)
* : Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour (1996)
* : Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Saint Olav (1996)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer (1996)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the White Rose with Collar (1997)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Three Stars (1997)
* : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion (1997)
* : Commander Grand Cross, with Collar, of the Order of the White Rose of Finland (1997)
* : Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (1997)
* : Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise, 1st class (1997); Order of Merit, 1st class (2005)
* : Order of Infant Henry with Grand Ribbon (1997)
* : Grand Cross (or 1st Class) of the Order of the White Double Cross (1997)
* : Grand Cross with Ribbon of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana (1998); Collar of the Order of the White Star (2002)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Star of Romania with Sash (1999)
* : Grand Chain of the Order of Merit (1999)
* : Grand Cordon of the Order of Leopold (1999)
* : First Class of the Order of the State of Republic of Turkey (2000)
* : Grand Order of King Tomislav with Sash and Great Star (April 2001)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic with Chain (2001)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary with Collar (2001)
* : Collar of the National Order of the Southern Cross (2002)
* : Special Grand Cross of the Order of Merit &quot;in recognition of the Special Merit&quot; (2002)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (2002)
* : Grand Cordon of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum (2002)
* : Collar of the Order of the White Lion (2004)
* : Collar of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum (2004)
*International: Order of the Smile (1993)
*International: Golden Olympic Order of the International Olympic Committee in (1998)
*International: Gold Order of Merit of the International Amateur Athletic Federation (1999)
*International: Medal of Merit of the European Olympic Committee (2000)
*Awarded doctor honoris causa by the Hebrew University in Jerusalem (2004), Kyiv-Mohyla Academy (2005) and the University of Vilnius (2005). In 2010, became an honorary citizen of Warsaw.
*Kwaśniewski was awarded the highest distinction of the Polish Orthodox Church, the Order of Saint Magdalena, first degree with decorations (1998). He received the television &quot;Wiktor&quot; prize three times (1993, 1995, and 2000). 
*Jan Karski Eagle Award (2010).
*Common Wealth Award of Distinguished Service (2007)
*Knight of Freedom Award (2009)
*Steiger Award (2009)

==Personal life==
In 1979, Kwaśniewski married lawyer Jolanta Konty in a civil ceremony. They have one child: a daughter, Aleksandra (born 1981).

He identifies as an atheist. In 2005, at the end of his second presidential term, the couple finalised their marriage in a low-key Catholic ceremony presided by Kwaśniewski&#x27;s former presidential chaplain, in the presidential chapel.

==See also==

* Presidents of Poland
* 2005 Polish presidential election

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Aleksander Kwaśniewski – official web page

|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55758" start="0" end="22" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski" label="Aleksander Kwaśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="105" end="124" title="president of Poland" label="president of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q961507" start="297" end="316" title="Constitution of Poland" label="Polish Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="356" end="360" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="376" end="390" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q836386" start="458" end="475" title="Orange Revolution" label="Orange Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q161919" start="505" end="514" title="Białogard" label="Białogard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758009" start="529" end="549" title="University of Gdańsk" label="University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294708" start="569" end="586" title="Ministry of Sport (Poland)" label="Minister of Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628291" start="700" end="742" title="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland" label="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="777" end="810" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q953174" start="836" end="860" title="Democratic Left Alliance (Poland)" label="Democratic Left Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="939" end="950" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164678" start="1184" end="1210" title="Rzeczpospolita (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Rzeczpospolita&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758009" start="1414" end="1434" title="University of Gdańsk" label="University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="1530" end="1563" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222000" start="1865" end="1882" title="Gdańsk Voivodeship (1975–1998)" label="Gdańsk Voivodship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9352246" start="2163" end="2179" title="Sztandar Młodych" label="Sztandar Młodych"/>
<link wikidata="Q168125" start="2375" end="2391" title="Zbigniew Messner" label="Zbigniew Messner"/>
<link wikidata="Q559771" start="2510" end="2529" title="Mieczysław Rakowski" label="Mieczysław Rakowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q927194" start="2683" end="2707" title="Polish Round Table Agreement" label="Round-Table negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55922" start="2769" end="2787" title="Tadeusz Mazowiecki" label="Tadeusz Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628291" start="2888" end="2911" title="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q953174" start="3106" end="3130" title="Democratic Left Alliance (Poland)" label="Democratic Left Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610864" start="3229" end="3253" title="Polish Olympic Committee" label="Polish Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="3331" end="3335" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3345" end="3351" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q374379" start="3816" end="3845" title="1995 Polish presidential election" label="presidential election in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="3887" end="3894" title="Two-round system" label="run-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="3936" end="3947" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="3960" end="3970" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q774482" start="4573" end="4587" title="oath of office" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q648071" start="4726" end="4742" title="Mińsk Mazowiecki" label="Mińsk Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4865" end="4879" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4884" end="4888" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="4937" end="4951" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="4960" end="4973" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q55910" start="5350" end="5361" title="Jerzy Buzek" label="Jerzy Buzek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782" start="5465" end="5478" title="Leszek Miller" label="Leszek Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938240" start="5699" end="5715" title="Vladimir Alganov" label="Vladimir Alganov"/>
<link wikidata="Q836965" start="5741" end="5749" title="Cetniewo" label="Cetniewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q961507" start="6045" end="6067" title="Constitution of Poland" label="Constitution of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="6092" end="6098" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="6405" end="6409" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="6492" end="6506" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6512" end="6519" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="6611" end="6626" title="Kosovo conflict" label="Kosovo conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q345331" start="7230" end="7236" title="Łańcut" label="Łańcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="7278" end="7293" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q564988" start="7463" end="7471" title="Portorož" label="Portorož"/>
<link wikidata="Q242478" start="7481" end="7487" title="Levoča" label="Levoča"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="7501" end="7505" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="7510" end="7515" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="7582" end="7591" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="7659" end="7666" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7837" end="7841" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7850" end="7864" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="7895" end="7902" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8239" end="8264" title="11 September 2001 attacks" label="11 September 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="8572" end="8585" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q727244" start="8590" end="8608" title="Polish involvement in the 2003 invasion of Iraq" label="contributed troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="8616" end="8624" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="8748" end="8762" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8789" end="8803" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55756" start="8896" end="8903" title="Jolanta Kwaśniewska" label="Jolanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="9055" end="9076" title="European Constitution" label="European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q629702" start="9113" end="9126" title="Leonid Kuchma" label="Leonid Kuchma"/>
<link wikidata="Q836386" start="9203" end="9220" title="Orange Revolution" label="Orange Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612127" start="9335" end="9386" title="Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture" label="Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="9470" end="9473" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q728934" start="9474" end="9484" title="black site" label="black site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4329339" start="9874" end="9882" title="Stare Kiejkuty (base)" label="the site"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="9984" end="9992" title="clemency" label="clemency"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="10246" end="10255" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="10319" end="10325" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177510" start="10335" end="10346" title="Peter Vogel (banker)" label="Peter Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="10549" end="10570" title="martial law in Poland" label="martial law in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q953174" start="10795" end="10811" title="Democratic Left Alliance (Poland)" label="social democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750071" start="11322" end="11331" title="Rywingate" label="Rywingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q971649" start="11654" end="11659" title="Orlen" label="Orlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="12058" end="12091" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647770" start="12235" end="12256" title="Służba Bezpieczeństwa" label="Służba Bezpieczeństwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="12565" end="12586" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128047" start="12621" end="12662" title="School of Foreign Service" label="Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="12909" end="12925" title="José María Aznar" label="José María Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049116" start="12979" end="13018" title="International Centre for Policy Studies" label="International Centre for Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173327" start="13180" end="13228" title="European Council on Tolerance and Reconciliation" label="European Council on Tolerance and Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="13283" end="13292" title="Toleration" label="tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="13357" end="13383" title="international organisation" label="international organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173302" start="13491" end="13511" title="European Jewish Fund" label="European Jewish Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212677" start="13522" end="13546" title="Viatcheslav Moshe Kantor" label="Viatcheslav Moshe Kantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q310225" start="13581" end="13588" title="Pat Cox" label="Pat Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="13596" end="13615" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="13638" end="13645" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540946" start="13661" end="13700" title="Criminal cases against Yulia Tymoshenko since 2010" label="criminal cases against Yulia Tymoshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q458282" start="13702" end="13716" title="Yuriy Lutsenko" label="Yuriy Lutsenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197099" start="13721" end="13739" title="Valeriy Ivaschenko" label="Valeriy Ivaschenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158989" start="13784" end="13816" title="Concordia Summit" label="Leadership Council for Concordia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224558" start="14176" end="14189" title="Euromaidan" label="Maidan unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q471730" start="14238" end="14247" title="Arseniy Yatsenyuk" label="Yatsenyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912790" start="14376" end="14392" title="Burisma Holdings" label="Burisma Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456515" start="14494" end="14524" title="International Advisory Council" label="International Advisory Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064508" start="14728" end="14764" title="Trials of Paul Manafort" label="filed in United States Federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371760" start="14822" end="14835" title="Paul Manafort" label="Paul Manafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459658" start="14977" end="14994" title="Viktor Yanukovych" label="Viktor Yanukovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q84020" start="15440" end="15464" title="Order of the White Eagle (Poland)" label="Order of the White Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q579688" start="15505" end="15531" title="Order of Polonia Restituta" label="Order of Polonia Restituta"/>
<link wikidata="Q768999" start="15623" end="15650" title="Order of Vytautas the Great" label="Order of Vytautas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002929" start="15678" end="15722" title="Order of the Lithuanian Grand Duke Gediminas" label="Order of the Lithuanian Grand Duke Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="15839" end="15856" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="15925" end="15958" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="16004" end="16042" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="16066" end="16101" title="Legion of Honour" label="Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="16132" end="16157" title="Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav" label="Royal Order of Saint Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q614661" start="16169" end="16209" title="Order of the Redeemer" label="Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q94437" start="16240" end="16263" title="Order of the White Rose" label="Order of the White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="16306" end="16330" title="Order of the Three Stars" label="Order of the Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="16368" end="16397" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q94437" start="16409" end="16486" title="Order of the White Rose of Finland" label="Commander Grand Cross, with Collar, of the Order of the White Rose of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q94405" start="16524" end="16555" title="Order of the Crown of the Realm" label="Order of the Crown of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379783" start="16567" end="16600" title="Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise" label="Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q431230" start="16620" end="16634" title="Order of Merit (Ukraine)" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q93488" start="16657" end="16696" title="Order of Prince Henry" label="Order of Infant Henry with Grand Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93724" start="16742" end="16773" title="Order of the White Double Cross" label="Order of the White Double Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476" start="16816" end="16851" title="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana" label="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633913" start="16874" end="16897" title="Order of the White Star" label="Order of the White Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="16928" end="16956" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Order of the Star of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q93988" start="16978" end="17011" title="Order of the Merit of Chile" label="Grand Chain of the Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26126" start="17043" end="17059" title="Order of Leopold (Belgium)" label="Order of Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077245" start="17090" end="17130" title="Order of the State of Republic of Turkey" label="Order of the State of Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q94121" start="17142" end="17170" title="Grand Order of King Tomislav" label="Grand Order of King Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="17232" end="17262" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113068" start="17304" end="17345" title="Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary" label="Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q93713" start="17392" end="17419" title="Order of the Southern Cross" label="Order of the Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17458" end="17472" title="Order of Merit (Peru)" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="17551" end="17600" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q696246" start="17640" end="17666" title="Order of the Chrysanthemum" label="Order of the Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q93728" start="17692" end="17715" title="Order of the White Lion" label="Order of the White Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696246" start="17749" end="17775" title="Order of the Chrysanthemum" label="Order of the Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55697" start="17799" end="17817" title="Order of the Smile" label="Order of the Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q634353" start="17848" end="17861" title="Olympic Order" label="Olympic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="17869" end="17900" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="17954" end="17995" title="International Amateur Athletic Federation" label="International Amateur Athletic Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q642949" start="18041" end="18067" title="European Olympic Committee" label="European Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="18084" end="18104" title="doctor honoris causa" label="doctor honoris causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="18112" end="18129" title="Hebrew University" label="Hebrew University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133013" start="18151" end="18170" title="Kyiv-Mohyla Academy" label="Kyiv-Mohyla Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="18186" end="18207" title="University of Vilnius" label="University of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q463406" start="18319" end="18341" title="Polish Orthodox Church" label="Polish Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60980306" start="18501" end="18523" title="Jan Karski Eagle Award" label="Jan Karski Eagle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089154" start="18586" end="18609" title="Knight of Freedom Award" label="Knight of Freedom Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q821717" start="18618" end="18631" title="Steiger Award" label="Steiger Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q55756" start="18694" end="18707" title="Jolanta Kwaśniewska" label="Jolanta Konty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="18807" end="18814" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="19042" end="19062" title="Presidents of Poland" label="Presidents of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586050" start="19065" end="19098" title="2005 Polish presidential election" label="2005 Polish presidential election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150189" wikidata="Q7337082" url="?curid=150189" title="River Ancholme">
<text>The River Ancholme is a river in Lincolnshire, England, and a tributary of the Humber. 
It rises at Ancholme Head, a spring just north of the village of Ingham and immediately west of the Roman Road, Ermine Street. It flows east and then north to Bishopbridge west of Market Rasen, where it is joined by the Rase. North of there it flows through the market town of Brigg before draining into the Humber at South Ferriby. It drains a large part of northern Lincolnshire between the Trent and the North Sea.

The river has been used by humans since at least 800 BC, seen by the excavation of a planked boat at Brigg. Letters patent for improvements to the river are known from 1287 onwards. Major change occurred in 1635, when a new straight channel was constructed from Bishopbridge to Ferriby. The new channel carries most of the water, the &quot;New River Ancholme&quot;, whereas the &quot;Old River Ancholme&quot; still meanders. The latter is mostly reduced to a ditch, save around Brigg&#x27;s central &#x27;Island Carr&#x27;. Further improvements were started by John Rennie (the Elder) in the early 1800s and completed by his son in the 1820s, with the reconstruction of Ferriby Sluice taking place around 1841.

From that time onwards the river was reasonably profitable. Receipts fell when railways arrived locally but trade picked up in the 1890s, and was boosted by cargoes of sugar beet in the 1930s. All commercial carrying ceased: above Brigg by the 1970s; altogether as of the 1980s. Upper reaches were in places part-blocked so were restored and dredged in 2004. The river is used for leisure, with boating, rowing, canoeing and fishing taking place. Responsibility or merely the name of the body for the river changed six times between 1930 and 1996, ending with the Environment Agency.

The Ancholme Internal Drainage Board maintains twelve pumping stations which can pump water from the surrounding low-lying land to prevent flooding. The river is used by Scunthorpe Steelworks, and Anglian Water supplying the South Humber bank industrial area. To meet these needs in many dry times water is transferred from Barlings Eau, near the Witham, by the Trent-Witham-Ancholme transfer scheme, commissioned in 1974.

Some bridges are private rights of way – remaining such as conscious of the risk of driver shortcutting and over-use – many such are listed (statutorily protected for architectural merit or age). Similarly, Ferriby Lock is a scheduled ancient monument. Local moorings host two historic boats owned by the Humber Keel &amp; Sloop Preservation Society. 
==History==
In its natural post-glacial state, the river&#x27;s valley was flat-bottomed: it had formed the bed of the glacial Lake Ancholme, on an outwash delta, as the ice retreated, and consequently was fenny. There is evidence that boats have used the river from early times, for there have been three significant archaeological finds of ancient boats. Logboats have been found at Brigg and Appleby, and a planked boat was found at Brigg in 1888. Professor McGrail conducted a re-excavation of the site in 1974, to discover the bottom of a flat-bottomed boat, made from oak planks, sewn together and caulked with moss. The boat was thus similar in construction to the Ferriby Boats found on the northern shore of the Humber, but was some 500 years younger, being carbon-dated to around 800 BC.

Further evidence of the local importance of the river in prehistory is evidenced by other finds or archaeology close to the river&#x27;s course. As an example, in the parish of Bishop Norton, which is situated just over 1 km north of Bishopbridge. In this parish the Lincolnshire Historical Environment Record (HER) records just under 90 sites, from different historic periods. The majority of the prehistorical sites, including settlements, are close to the Ancholme. Most of these range from the Neolithic (4000 BCE to 2351 BCE), through the Bronze Age to the Romano-British period. The oldest find in the parish was a Paleolithic handaxe discovered close to the site of the Harlam Hill Lock on a hummock of river gravels. This find dates anywhere from 500,000 BCE to 150,001 BCE. This axe, along with several Neolithic axes are now in Lincoln Museum.

The course of the old river acts as a boundary for Bishop Norton and all the other parishes that abut it. This being the eastern boundary; the western boundary is Ermine Street. The fact that the majority of archaeology in the parish, as recorded in the HER that dates from after the construction of the Roman Road, tends to the western end of the parish close to the Roman road, and that from earlier periods tends to be closer to the river is suggestive that the River was a primary communications route as well as the provider of physical and economic need which was supplanted by the new road.

Despite suffering from silting as a result of water from the Humber entering it, and passing through land which was often waterlogged on both sides, the Ancholme offered a route into the communities of northern Lincolnshire. Cargo was carried on it from an early date: in 1287 a patent was granted to allow improvements to be made from Bishopbridge to Ferriby, so that boats could more easily carry grain and other commodities on the river &quot;as they had done formerly&quot;. However, the major concern of the local landowners seems to have been that it should act as an effective drainage channel to prevent inundation of their lands, and between 1289 and 1418 the river was mentioned in the Patent Rolls thirteen times. The need to keep the channel scoured was always mentioned, but often, navigation was not.

The river was subject to a repeated cycle of concerns being raised, improvements being made, euphoria at the result, and decline through neglect. However, in 1635 Owersby-based local landowner Sir John Monson was granted powers to construct a new river for drainage purposes. He removed most of the meanders, to create a new straight channel from Bishopbridge to Ferriby. The patent under which the work was carried out was again chiefly concerned with drainage, although there was a requirement to make sure that any new works did not make the river less useful for the passage of boats than it had been for the previous seven years. At Ferriby, where there had been a bridge since 1312, a sluice was constructed, to control the deposition of silt from the Humber. It had three arches and 24 doors, but there is no mention of how boats could pass through it.


At Brigg, the new channel bypassed the town, but the old channel was also retained, which made the town less vulnerable to flooding. The draining of the Ancholme Level was a lesser project among the fenland &quot;improvements&quot; undertaken under contracts to patentees by the government of Charles I in the 1630s. It was somewhat less brutal than many such projects, for Kennedy states that &quot;... with the possible exception of the Ancholme Level the draining of the fens was executed and defended by a continuous and unscrupulous use of the power and authority of the royal government to manipulate local institutions and to overawe the local populace.&quot;

The antiquarian William Stukeley visited the river and in 1724 published a report in which he lamented the fact that the sluices below the stately bridge were &quot;broken down and lying in dismal ruins by the negligence of the undertakers.&quot; Conditions continued to deteriorate, so that in 1766, landowners in the Ancholme floodplain contracted Thomas Yeoman to survey the river. He pointed to the decay of Ferriby Sluice, which had resulted in silting of the navigation as far as Glanford, some above Ferriby. In places the width had been reduced from to 15 or 16 ft (about 4.8 m), which significantly reduced its capacity to cope with flood waters. Above Glanford, lugworm beds, weeds and sandbanks impeded progress, and the final to Bishopbridge was completely silted up. Yeoman produced his report on 17 September 1766, and an Act of Parliament to authorise improvements to both navigation and drainage was granted on 20 May 1767.

===Development===

The Act created commissioners, and John Bennett from Barton-upon-Humber was appointed clerk. The minutes of the commissioners show that their major concern was with drainage, rather than navigation, although the new sluice at Ferriby included a lock and a house for the lockkeeper. The sluice was built with three openings, but the sills were set at a level which was above the low water level of spring tides in the Humber, which was not low enough to ensure the drainage of the lowlands in times of flood. The work was completed in 1769.

The commissioners gradually realised that navigation might be beneficial, and on 7 April 1778 instructed their engineer, Dunderdale, to design a wharf for coal and general goods at Bishopbridge, and to construct a lock at Harlam Hill. No progress was made until 20 July 1785, when the commissioners met the proprietors to arrange the purchase of land for the wharf. By this time the engineer had been replaced by Thomas Bradley. The tolls had been leased to Jonathan and John Goodwin for a period of eleven years from 1781. They paid the commissioners £402 per year, and were expected to make good any damage by tides up to the value of £20, although the commissioners would pay for repairs where the cost exceeded £20. The lease expired on 2 July 1792, when the commissioners took back control, and appointed their own collector of tolls. They noticed a disparity in the tolls for coal, caused by the differing sizes of the wagons at various collieries. The collieries mentioned show that coal was arriving from the River Don Navigation and the Aire and Calder Navigation.

During the 1790s, the problems of effective drainage worsened, and the commissioners appointed Isaac Leatham, from Barton near Malton, to produce a comprehensive report with recommendations for the Ancholme Level. He addressed the issues of both drainage and navigation, and presented his plans on 29 August 1800, but commissioners thought the projected cost of £22,975 was excessive. They therefore approached John Rennie (the Elder) for a second opinion, and he produced a report on 9 November 1801. His proposals included constructing catchwater drains on either side of the main channel, enlarging the width and depth of the channel, building two new locks, and rebuilding the road bridge at Brigg. The cost was estimated to be £53,921, of which only 11 per cent was for improvements to navigation. Again, the commissioners were unhappy with the cost, and although Rennie suggested completing the work in stages, he later produced a modified plan which would only cost £25,413.

The commissioners decided to proceed with the revised plan, and a new Act of Parliament was obtained on 26 June 1802. The two locks were to be located at Harlam Hill and Kingerby, to improve navigation on the upper section. The Act stipulated that oak mooring posts should be provided at intervals, to indicate the distance from Ferriby. Although most of the materials were ordered promptly, the work was hampered by a shortage of finance, and progress was very slow. After the project engineer, Samuel Porter, died in July 1808, the work ground to a halt, and in 1824 Sir John Rennie (the Younger) was asked for advice. He stated that the work specified by his father should be completed. He also recommended that the Ferriby sluice should be reconstructed, with the sills lower, and that the capacity of the channel should be doubled, by making it wider and deeper. Finally, a new entrance lock should be built, capable of accommodating boats of 60 tons, and wide. Another Act of Parliament followed in 1825, and work began again in 1826. Progress was faster, although there were delays to the drainage works, caused by litigation over the rates that each district should pay towards the project.

Several of the existing bridges were constructed of wood, and had multiple openings, which restricted the flow of water through them. They were reconstructed in a variety of styles. Horkstow Bridge was planned as a cast iron bridge with an span, but was built as a suspension bridge with a span of . It is one of the earliest suspension bridges still standing, and the only suspension bridge known to have been designed by Rennie. The bridge at Yarborough Mills, in Brigg, has a single segmental arch build of stone, and was opened in 1827, although it has been widened subsequently. The bridge at Brandy Wharf, which was completed in the following year, is more typical of the structures built at that time, consisting of an iron span with stone abutments. Harlam Hill lock was reconstructed in 1827, but plans for a second lock at Kingerby were dropped. Discussions had taken place in 1823 about extending the navigation to Market Rasen. The plans were revised and expanded in 1829, by which time a link from Bishopbridge to Barlings Eau and the River Witham was suggested. It would have cost £90,000 to build the waterway, including the construction of seven locks. Although the scheme was dropped, Rennie was still championing it in 1841 and 1844.

Rennie also oversaw the reconstruction of Ferriby Sluice and lock. An initial meeting with the commissioners was held on 4 October 1841. Work began in March 1842, and the cost was estimated to be £16,533. The Earl of Yarborough and Miss Alice Corbett officially opened the new sluice on 22 May 1844. The Earl of Yarborough arranged for his brass band to attend, and he then sailed through the new lock in a schooner. The lock was spanned by a swing bridge, cast by the Butterley Company, which was in use for 90 years, but was badly damaged in 1934 when a large vessel ran into it. Head Wrightson built the replacement swing bridge in 1935.

===Operation===

The navigation became an important route for transporting cargo from the rural communities to the towns of Beverley and Hull in the East Riding of Yorkshire. William Colton had run a packet boat between Brigg and Hull since 1793, and in 1823 he began operating a steam packet boat. It left Brigg at 7 am each day, arriving in Hull 10:30. The return journey left Hull at 3 pm, and was timetabled to connect with a coach service from Brigg to Lincoln. From October 1856 the service was run by the Hull, Ferriby Sluice and Brigg Steam Packet Company, formed by a group of farmers who lived between Brigg and Ferriby Sluice.

For many years, the tolls on the navigation were leased, and the value of the lease steadily increased, from £402 in the 1780s to £950 in 1828, and had reached £1,857 per year for the period from 1843 to 1845. For the following three years it was £3,020, but it then declined, as railways arrived in the area. Brigg railway station opened on 1 November 1848, and the line from there to Gainsborough Central followed on 2 April 1849. Tolls reduced, falling to £949 in 1850, and to £700 by the late 1850s. After thirty years, trade revived a little, with the tolls reaching £1,000 in the 1890s. It was further boosted by the development of the sugar beet industry in the 1930s, with tolls averaging £1,294 in the late 1930s. Bishopbridge, where there was a basin, two corn mills and warehousing, acted as a distribution and collection centre for the farms and villages of that part of Lincolnshire, but by the 1970s commercial traffic had ceased except between Ferriby and Brigg, where there were factories along the river bank. All commercial traffic had ceased by the 1980s.

Some development continued, with Snitterby bridge reconstructed in 1872, Hibaldstow in 1889 and Cadney in 1892. In 1977, Ian Horsley formed the Rase-Ancholme Navigation Trust, and in 1978 proposed upgrading of the upper section to Bishopbridge. His grand plans included the construction of three new locks on the River Rase, to link to Middle Rasen and Market Rasen. By the early 1980s, the scheme had grown to include further links to Horncastle and the Foss Dyke, thus creating a northern Lincolnshire waterways network, but the area was too sparsely populated for such ambitious plans to succeed. The Trust was registered in 1979, and ceased to exist in 2009.

By the 1980s, the section above Harlam Hill lock was almost derelict. Rennie&#x27;s original lock had been reconstructed with a top guillotine gate at some point, and repairs to the lock were attempted in 1993. Although they were not successful, the Inland Waterways Association continued to campaign for the restoration of Harlam Hill lock, raising funds to assist this, and the Environment Agency completed dredging and restoration of the upper section in 2004. The restoration was funded by a grant of £100,000, the first successful bid for funds by the Lincolnshire Waterways Partnership. The work included the provision of new 48-hour visitor moorings at Bishopbridge, with portage points for canoeists nearby and at Harlam Hill lock.

The top gate of Harlam Hill lock was subsequently replaced by conventional mitre gates in 2010. Despite this successful restoration, the lock was again closed in 2012 by the Environment Agency on safety grounds, thus preventing access to the first two miles of the waterway. In 2017 there were no plans for its reopening.

The lock at South Ferriby, which allows boats to leave the river and enter the Humber, is a tide lock, with four sets of gates, two for use when the tidal Humber is at a higher level than the river, and two for when it is lower. From the Humber, a vessel can access many other major waterways leading to the larger towns of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, as well as to the North Sea. Because the river acts as a drainage channel for the Ancholme Level, water levels and flow rates are subject to rapid change, and all navigation can be suspended after heavy rain, when the sluices are opened to prevent flooding.

===Organisation===

Responsibility for the river and the flood defences of the surrounding countryside changed several times during the 20th century. Under the Land Drainage Act 1930, 47 catchment areas were defined, covering many of the river systems of England and Wales, including the Ancholme and Winterton Beck Catchment Area. A catchment board had been set up to manage the area by November 1931. The catchment board was replaced by the Lincolnshire River Board following the passing of the River Boards Act 1948, and the new board also had responsibility for the River Welland, the River Witham and the Steeping River. Land drainage functions became the responsibility of the Ancholme Internal Drainage Board from 1951. This was formed under the terms of the Land Drainage Act 1930, and manages an area of containing of maintained watercourses. Around half of the water falling on this area has to be pumped into the River Ancholme, because the land is too low-lying to allow gravity drainage. The IDB maintains 12 pumping stations on the banks of the river.

Responsibility for the river changed again with the passing of the Water Resources Act 1963: the river board was replaced by the Lincolnshire River Authority, although the geographical area which it managed was similar. This in turn became part of Anglian Water following the passing of the Water Act 1973. When the regional water authorities were privatised under the terms of the Water Act 1989, management of rivers, including the Ancholme, passed to the National Rivers Authority (NRA). Finally, the NRA was subsumed into the Environment Agency in 1996.

==Recreation==
In addition to its function as a land drainage channel and for water supply, the river is also used for recreation. The waterway is managed by the Environment Agency, which requires all vessels to be registered and in possession of an up-to-date licence. There are over 200 boats registered, and there are moorings at Ferriby, Brigg, Brandy Wharf and Bishopbridge. Access to and from the Humber is restricted by extensive mud banks to the north of Ferriby Sluice, which are exposed at low tide. Passage through South Ferriby lock is therefore limited to three hours either side of high tide. The river is large enough to support small barges and medium-sized cabin cruisers. South Ferriby lock is with a draught of . Harlam Hill lock is smaller, at but the effective maximum length of boats is , as there is nowhere above the lock to turn a longer boat. Small boats can be launched from a slipway at Brandy Wharf Leisure Park, on the western bank of the river.

The river is a popular venue for rowing, kayaking and canoeing.

===Ancholme Rowing Club===
Ancholme Rowing Club is based in Brigg, and caters for rowers of all abilities. It encourages junior membership, offers tuition, and organises two major events each year. The Ancholme Head race covers a course, with open, women&#x27;s, juniors, mixed and masters categories, and is affiliated to British Rowing. The Scrumpy Row has a more social orientation, and covers from Brigg to Brandy Wharf. The Environment Agency work with the club to support competitive and recreational rowing.

===BCU members use===
The Agency have an agreement with the British Canoe Union, allowing their members to use the river.

===Yachts and cruiser/estuary vessel marinas===
Some small sailing yachts use the river, and the slipway at Brandy Wharf has encouraged this kind of use.

The Ancholme has a marina at Brigg and another at South Ferriby, which has a chandlery and boat building facilities. Around three-quarters of the boats that use the river are sea-going vessels, as it provides easy access to the North Sea via the Humber.

===Angling===
The river is well stocked with fish, and provides high-class coarse fishing. There are organised competitions each year, including winter match angling, which attract anglers from Lincolnshire, South Yorkshire and nearby.

===Pedestrians===
The river is also popular with walkers, having a towpath along its entire length; other rights of way are associated with the river.

==Water supply==

During the late 1960s, there was increasing demand for water, particularly within the South Humber bank industrial area. Extractions from the underlying chalk aquifer could not be increased, and so the demand was met by building the Trent Witham Ancholme Transfer Scheme (TWA), which was commissioned in 1974. A pumping station at Short Ferry on Barlings Eau, near its junction with the River Witham, pumps water through of pipeline to a reservoir at Toft Newton, which covers an area of . During the summer months and other dry periods, water is released from the reservoir into the Ancholme to augment its flow and maintain its level. In the event of failure of the pumps at Short Ferry, the reservoir has enough capacity to maintain flows in the Ancholme for up to seven days. There is another pumping station at Torksey, on the River Trent, and in the event of low flows on the Witham, water is pumped from the Trent into the Foss Dyke, from where it flows eastwards to Lincoln and the River Witham system.

In 1996, removal of some per year from the river was covered by abstraction licences. Major holders of licences included British Steel plc, Centrica and Anglian Water. British Steel take water for the Scunthorpe Steelworks from a pumping station immediately to the north of Worlaby railway bridge. Centrica run the Glanford Brigg Power Station, located on the west bank of the river near Brigg. It is a gas-fired generating station, capable of producing 240 MW from six turbines. Water is taken from the river to supplement cooling water lost by evaporation, and some of the cooling water is discharged to the river to prevent a build up of suspended and dissolved solids. Water is also processed by a treatment plant, where it is filtered and ion-exchanged, to provide a clean supply for the boilers, which will not cause scaling or corrosion. Like the cooling water, the boiler feed water is also purged regularly, to prevent dissolved solids building up.

The largest abstractor is Anglian Water, who maintain a pumping station on the east bank of the river by Cadney bridge. They were licensed to remove per year in 1996, which is about 82 per cent of the total abstraction. After initial grit removal and chlorination, water is pumped for through twin diameter concrete pipelines to Cadney reservoir, which can hold , covers , and has a maximum depth of . After further chlorination, the water is pumped for another through a diameter steel pipeline to Elsham Water Treatment Works, which produces up to per day of potable water for public water supply.

In addition to supporting these abstractions, the use of water from the TWA scheme has other benefits. Because the flow is maintained even in dry weather, eutrophication, which is caused by a build up of nutrients in the water, is reduced, and the flow through Ferriby sluice also helps to prevent the ingress of salt water from the Humber into the river. The volume of water transferred via the TWA scheme depends on the weather conditions. In 1987 it was , while in 1979 it was .

==Course==
The Ancholme rises near Top Farm, West Firsby, close to the contour, from where it flows eastwards, gradually turning towards the north east. It passes through the site of the West Firsby deserted medieval village, which is a scheduled ancient monument, and then under Owmby Road, a minor road which connects the villages of Saxby and Spridlington. It soon drops below the contour and turns to the north as is flows past Toft Newton reservoir, which is used to augment the flow of the river, and is supplied with water by the Trent Witham Ancholme transfer scheme. The reservoir is a popular site for stillwater trout fishing, and in 1996 was stocked with rainbow trout and brown trout twice weekly. Contributions from a number of organisations and individuals resulted in the purchase of a &quot;wheelyboat&quot;, a flat-bottomed boat which allows wheelchair users to access the water. Passing under Pilford Bridge, near Toft next Newton, the river reaches Bishopbridge, where it is crossed by the A631 road.

The River Rase runs under an adjacent bridge, and the two rivers run parallel for the next . On the Ancholme, there is a sloping weir, which forms the head of navigation, beyond which is a large four-storey building which was formerly a warehouse for the navigation. The towpath starts on the western bank soon after the wharf area, and Harlam Hill lock is reached after . The bypass channel passes over a weir, and the water flows into the River Rase, which joins the Ancholme at Atterby weir, a little further below the lock. Rather than heavy wooden balance beams, the lock gates have slender metal poles to open them. Snitterby bridge, which is also known as Browns Bridge, is just below Atterby weir, and like most of the bridges over the river, is not part of a public roadway, so it is maintained by the Environment Agency, rather than the Highways Authority. Brandy Wharf bridge, at from the head of navigation, is one of the two bridges on a public road. Next to it is a brown-brick warehouse with three storeys and a slate hipped roof, which is a Grade II listed structure.
The towpath crosses from the west bank to the east bank at the bridge. A little further to the east is the Old Tollgate Bridge, a red brick single span with ashlar dressing dating from the late 1700s, which crosses the Old River Ancholme. Continuing northwards, the towpath crosses the entrance to the Caistor Canal, disused since 1877. A 20th century steel span is supported by stone abutments, built around 1785, when the canal opened. The bridge is Grade II listed as is the adjacent first lock, one of five that remain on the Caistor Canal. Hibaldstow Bridge was rebuilt in 1889 to a design by Alfred Atkinson, and the wrought-iron span, which rests on brick piers, was supplied by a company of ironfounders called Messrs Porter and Co of Lincoln. It replaced an earlier wooden swing bridge, dating from Rennie&#x27;s reconstruction, and the piers from that bridge were probably reused. Atkinson was also responsible for Cadney Bridge, rebuilt in 1882, for which the wrought iron span was supplied by Messrs Goodwin, Jardine and Co of Glasgow. Again, the piers from an earlier bridge were probably reused.

The Anglian Water pumping station, immediately to the north of the bridge, has an unusual wooden roof. Beyond, and slightly set back from the river, Newstead Priory Farm stands on slightly higher land. The house is Grade I listed, and incorporates parts of a 12th-century Gilbertine Priory. Kettleby Beck joins the river from the east, through a set of sluice gates, just before the channel splits in two, with the old river passing through the centre of Brigg and the new one bypassing it to the west, before rejoining to the north of Brigg. They form an island, which is known as Island Carr. There is a marina on the old branch, and the former Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway main line from Gainsborough to Grimsby, now part of the Sheffield to Lincoln Line, crosses both branches. The 
A18 road also crosses both branches. The bridge over the new branch was designed by John Rennie and built in 1827, with brick flanks and ashlar masonry. The bridge was widened in the 20th century, with the south face being reused once the widening had taken place. The road formerly crossed the old branch at County Bridge, a single span rusticated stone arch erected in 1828. The handrails were replaced in 1951, and the A18 was diverted over a new bridge to the north.
Below the point where the two branches rejoin, a new bridge carries the M180 motorway over the channel. Next come Castlethorpe bridge and Broughton bridge, both maintained by the Environment Agency. Broughton is an inverted suspension bridge, which replaced an earlier bridge in the mid- to late 19th century, but this reused the earlier abutments. The single span is supported by two wrought iron arched ribs, with vertical and diagonal suspension rods, supporting timber decking. Another railway bridge follows, this time linking to Grimsby, and now carrying trains run by South TransPennine. The intake formerly owned by British Steel plc is on the west bank by the bridge, supplying water to the steel industry in Scunthorpe.

Saxby Bridge is a wrought iron single span with timber decking, dating from the mid-19th century, which is virtually unaltered, apart from minor repairs to the decking. Horkstow Bridge is John Rennie&#x27;s only known suspension bridge, and is one of the earliest unaltered suspension bridges in Britain. It is Grade II* listed. As the river nears the Humber, a high-level conveyor belt carries material from South Ferriby quarry to the cement works at Ferriby Sluice. The conveyor is long, and is used to transfer around 3000 tonnes of crushed chalk and 1,000 tonnes of clay per day. This stretch of the river has numerous moorings, and the Humber Keel &amp; Sloop Preservation Society usually moor their keel &quot;Comrade&quot; and their sloop &quot;Amy Houson&quot; just above the final lock. The lock at Ferriby Sluice has two sets of gates: a low level set pointing upstream, and a set of much taller gates pointing downstream which prevent the river being inundated by tides, and allow vessels to leave when the Humber is at a higher level than the Ancholme. In order to minimise the ingress of brackish water into the Ancholme when the tide gates are used, the water is culverted into the West Drain when the lock is being emptied. The sluice consists of three sets of pointed doors, and two electrically operated vertical guillotine gates. Salinity in the river is further controlled by two bubble curtains, and is continuously measured at Saxby, with the information used to decide whether the flow should be supplemented by water from the Trent Witham Ancholme Transfer Scheme.

==See also==
*Hibaldstow Bridge
*Caistor Canal
*Rivers of the United Kingdom
*Tiddy Mun

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
===References===
==External links==
*Environment Agency : Navigation on the Ancholme
*Waterscape : The River Ancholme
*The Inland Waterways Association : River Ancholme
*Ancholme Rowing Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7337082" start="4" end="18" title="River Ancholme" label="River Ancholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="33" end="45" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="47" end="54" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="62" end="71" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="79" end="85" title="River Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11712504" start="153" end="159" title="Ingham, Lincolnshire" label="Ingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="200" end="213" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q608688" start="247" end="259" title="Bishopbridge" label="Bishopbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q779603" start="268" end="280" title="Market Rasen" label="Market Rasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899146" start="308" end="312" title="River Rase" label="Rase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058702" start="365" end="370" title="Brigg, North Lincolnshire" label="Brigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590505" start="406" end="419" title="South Ferriby" label="South Ferriby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="481" end="486" title="River Trent" label="Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="495" end="504" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="615" end="629" title="Letters patent" label="Letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q544521" start="1068" end="1091" title="John Rennie the Elder" label="John Rennie (the Elder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="1783" end="1801" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047836" start="1817" end="1840" title="internal drainage board" label="Internal Drainage Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q20680392" start="1974" end="1995" title="Scunthorpe Steelworks" label="Scunthorpe Steelworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763422" start="2001" end="2014" title="Anglian Water" label="Anglian Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861193" start="2128" end="2140" title="Barlings Eau" label="Barlings Eau"/>
<link wikidata="Q917000" start="2151" end="2157" title="River Witham" label="Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="2786" end="2789" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q596073" start="2937" end="2944" title="Logboat" label="Logboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274394" start="3252" end="3265" title="Ferriby Boats" label="Ferriby Boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917674" start="3556" end="3569" title="Bishop Norton, Lincolnshire" label="Bishop Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144483" start="5529" end="5541" title="Patent Rolls" label="Patent Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114781" start="5812" end="5819" title="Owersby" label="Owersby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527941" start="5842" end="5857" title="Sir John Monson, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir John Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="6710" end="6742" title="The Fens" label="fenland &amp;quot;improvements&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="6804" end="6813" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="7183" end="7194" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381018" start="7195" end="7211" title="William Stukeley" label="William Stukeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859598" start="7529" end="7542" title="Thomas Yeoman" label="Thomas Yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698466" start="7851" end="7858" title="lugworm" label="lugworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="8015" end="8032" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q809550" start="8192" end="8210" title="Barton-upon-Humber" label="Barton-upon-Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337350" start="9697" end="9717" title="River Don Navigation" label="River Don Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770078" start="9726" end="9752" title="Aire and Calder Navigation" label="Aire and Calder Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q544521" start="10166" end="10189" title="John Rennie the Elder" label="John Rennie (the Elder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254620" start="11307" end="11336" title="John Rennie the Younger" label="Sir John Rennie (the Younger)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903690" start="12120" end="12135" title="Horkstow Bridge" label="Horkstow Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="12153" end="12162" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="12203" end="12220" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452175" start="12685" end="12693" title="abutment" label="abutment"/>
<link wikidata="Q779603" start="12864" end="12876" title="Market Rasen" label="Market Rasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861193" start="12965" end="12977" title="Barlings Eau" label="Barlings Eau"/>
<link wikidata="Q917000" start="12986" end="12998" title="River Witham" label="River Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002992" start="13660" end="13677" title="Butterley Company" label="Butterley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689255" start="13773" end="13787" title="Head Wrightson" label="Head Wrightson"/>
<link wikidata="Q851718" start="13957" end="13965" title="Beverley" label="Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="13970" end="13974" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q23088" start="13982" end="14006" title="East Riding of Yorkshire" label="East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065452" start="14033" end="14044" title="packet boat" label="packet boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="14291" end="14298" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549335" start="14782" end="14803" title="Brigg railway station" label="Brigg railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841218" start="14858" end="14878" title="Gainsborough Central railway station" label="Gainsborough Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="15114" end="15124" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297846" start="15884" end="15896" title="Middle Rasen" label="Middle Rasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628403" start="15984" end="15994" title="Horncastle, Lincolnshire" label="Horncastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412149" start="16003" end="16012" title="Foss Dyke" label="Foss Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034832" start="16462" end="16490" title="Inland Waterways Association" label="Inland Waterways Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="17646" end="17655" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483891" start="18047" end="18069" title="Land Drainage Act 1930" label="Land Drainage Act 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q940223" start="18074" end="18088" title="catchment area" label="catchment area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483891" start="18221" end="18236" title="catchment board" label="catchment board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337992" start="18343" end="18354" title="river board" label="River Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113865" start="18384" end="18405" title="River Boards Act 1948" label="River Boards Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492233" start="18457" end="18470" title="River Welland" label="River Welland"/>
<link wikidata="Q917000" start="18476" end="18488" title="River Witham" label="River Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337609" start="18497" end="18511" title="Steeping River" label="Steeping River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047836" start="18579" end="18602" title="internal drainage board" label="Internal Drainage Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164286" start="19021" end="19045" title="Water Resources Act 1963" label="Water Resources Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763422" start="19202" end="19215" title="Anglian Water" label="Anglian Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973260" start="19245" end="19259" title="Water Act 1973" label="Water Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309187" start="19270" end="19296" title="regional water authority" label="regional water authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187572" start="19336" end="19350" title="Water Act 1989" label="Water Act 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978120" start="19412" end="19437" title="National Rivers Authority" label="National Rivers Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="19675" end="19693" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932313" start="20187" end="20200" title="cabin cruiser" label="cabin cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="21368" end="21374" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235104" start="21426" end="21435" title="Ship-chandler" label="chandlery"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="22164" end="22169" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="22170" end="22177" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480735" start="22342" end="22353" title="Short Ferry" label="Short Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861193" start="22357" end="22369" title="Barlings Eau" label="Barlings Eau"/>
<link wikidata="Q917000" start="22398" end="22410" title="River Witham" label="River Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q661906" start="22462" end="22473" title="Toft Newton" label="Toft Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q574397" start="22827" end="22834" title="Torksey" label="Torksey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412149" start="22941" end="22950" title="Foss Dyke" label="Foss Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="22985" end="22992" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q920223" start="23144" end="23161" title="British Steel plc" label="British Steel plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q259013" start="23163" end="23171" title="Centrica" label="Centrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763422" start="23176" end="23189" title="Anglian Water" label="Anglian Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q20680392" start="23224" end="23245" title="Scunthorpe Steelworks" label="Scunthorpe Steelworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566630" start="23338" end="23366" title="Glanford Brigg Power Station" label="Glanford Brigg Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367550" start="24481" end="24487" title="Elsham, Lincolnshire" label="Elsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="24738" end="24752" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329744" start="25111" end="25122" title="West Firsby" label="West Firsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428765" start="25402" end="25407" title="Saxby, Lincolnshire" label="Saxby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580327" start="25412" end="25424" title="Spridlington" label="Spridlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="25733" end="25746" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="25751" end="25762" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q661906" start="25999" end="26015" title="Toft Newton" label="Toft next Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649546" start="26076" end="26085" title="A631 road" label="A631 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="27145" end="27160" title="Grade II listed" label="Grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="28498" end="28512" title="Grade I listed" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q770486" start="28555" end="28565" title="Gilbertine Order" label="Gilbertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747236" start="28930" end="28976" title="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway" label="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841218" start="28992" end="29004" title="Gainsborough Central railway station" label="Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609334" start="29008" end="29015" title="Grimsby Town railway station" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492808" start="29033" end="29058" title="Sheffield to Lincoln Line" label="Sheffield to Lincoln Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247073" start="29088" end="29096" title="A18 road (England)" label="A18 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880860" start="29631" end="29644" title="M180 motorway" label="M180 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q119806220" start="30134" end="30152" title="South TransPennine" label="South TransPennine"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="30601" end="30617" title="Grade II* listed" label="Grade II* listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636782" start="30932" end="30943" title="Humber Keel" label="Humber Keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750590" start="31894" end="31911" title="Hibaldstow Bridge" label="Hibaldstow Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017849" start="31913" end="31926" title="Caistor Canal" label="Caistor Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573517" start="31928" end="31956" title="Rivers of the United Kingdom" label="Rivers of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800828" start="31958" end="31967" title="Tiddy Mun" label="Tiddy Mun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150196" wikidata="Q1967803" url="?curid=150196" title="Aller (Germany)">
<text>The Aller () is a river in the states of Saxony-Anhalt and Lower Saxony in Germany. It is a right-hand, and hence eastern, tributary of the Weser and is also its largest tributary. Its last form the Lower Aller federal waterway (). The Aller was extensively straightened, widened and, in places, dyked during the 1960s to provide flood control of the river. In a section near Gifhorn, the river meanders in its natural river bed.

== History ==

=== Meaning of the name ===
The river&#x27;s name, which was recorded in 781 as &quot;Alera&quot;, in 803 as &quot;Elera&quot;, in 1096 as &quot;Alara&quot;, has two possible derivations:

# A shortened form of &quot;*Eleraha&quot;, where &quot;*Eler&quot; in Old German &quot;*olisa&quot; or Old Slavic &quot;olsa&quot; (Polish: &quot;olsza&quot;) would mean &quot;Erle&quot; (&quot;alder&quot;) and &quot;aha&quot; (pronounced in German: &quot;Acha&quot;) is an old word frequently used in river names to mean &quot;water&quot; (c.f. the Latin &quot;aqua&quot;). The name of the tree passed into Low German as &quot;Eller&quot;, which is very close to the word &quot;Aller&quot;. &quot;Aller&quot; would therefore mean something like &quot;Erlenwasser&quot; i.e. &quot;alder water&quot;, which was probably due to the river banks being largely covered in alder trees that prefer wet locations.
# In Hans Krahe&#x27;s system of Old European hydronomy, the old name for the Aller, &quot;Alara&quot;, is an example of a group of river names with the root &quot;al-&quot;, which is very common over much of Europe and according to Krahe all go back to the Indo-European root &quot;*el-/*ol-&quot;, which means &quot;flowing&quot;. Similarly related would be rivers such as the Alster, Iller, Elz and Ilmenau. Krahe&#x27;s hypothesis is, however, hotly disputed in language circles. Theo Vennemann used a modified version of Krahe&#x27;s model in his Vasconic substratum theory.
== Course ==

=== Upper Aller ===
The Aller rises in the state of Saxony-Anhalt in the west of the region known as the Magdeburg Börde near Seehausen and north of Oschersleben (Bode). It has several source streams that run down the northeastern side of the Hohes Holz within the municipal boundaries of Wormsdorf (part of Gehringsdorf), Ovelgünne (part of Siegersleben) and Eggenstedt. The Eggenstedt tributary is the most southerly of the source streams. The nearest large centres of population in the source region are Helmstedt, about northwest, and Magdeburg around east.

Initially, the Aller flows rather like a canalised brook in a northwestern direction through low hills and intensively farmed arable fields. As it does, it passes the Flechtingen Hills to the east and another range of hills to the west that stretches from the Lappwald over the Hohes Holz as far as Oschersleben (Bode). The river passes the villages of Eilsleben and Weferlingen. After about , it reaches Oebisfelde and the southern edge of the Drömling. After crossing the state border between Saxony-Anhalt and Lower Saxony, the Aller bends sharply southwest near Grafhorst. Here, the terrain is already only about above sea level. Between here and its mouth, away, its elevation drops by only about , so that the speed of the current is considerably reduced in Lower Saxony. Near Grafhorst, the Aller meets the Breslau-Magdeburg-Bremen glacial valley and then, for the most part, follows it. From here on, the river mainly runs through grassland.

Near Wolfsburg-Wendschott, the Aller passes under the Mittelland Canal in a culvert where there is a barrier that is impassable to fish. The Aller swings northwest again from Wolfsburg. In the area of the town it crosses the Allerpark and flows past the Allersee before flowing past the Barnbruch.

South of Weyhausen, the Aller Canal branches off the Aller. The canal was built between 1860 and 1863 and is about long. It was supposed to drain the long-standing floods that were greatly feared at that time. The canal runs parallel to, and generally a few miles south of, the Aller, rejoining it near Brenneckenbrück (west of Gifhorn). The canal runs south past Gifhorn, whilst the Aller flows through the town. This section, which parallels the Aller Canal, is the only section of the Aller that meanders in its natural river channel. Elsewhere, the Aller has been straightened and widened along its entire length from source to mouth. East of Gifhorn near Osloß it crosses under the Elbe Lateral Canal, which is carried over it on an aqueduct. After that it runs via Gifhorn to Müden, where it merges with the Oker.

=== Middle Aller ===
The section of the Aller from the mouth of the Oker to Celle is referred to as the Middle Aller (). After passing Wienhausen, it is navigable as far as Celle. Here, the river has so much water that there are barrages and the water power is extracted from the river using weirs.
=== Lower Aller ===
The section of the river known as the Lower Aller (&quot;Unteraller&quot;) begins at Celle and runs for to the Weser. The Lower Aller is a designated federal waterway (&quot;Bundeswasserstraße&quot;). The river is navigable from here to Winsen. Near Eickeloh a reaction ferry crosses the Aller and it is here that the Leine flows into the Aller. Upstream and downstream of Rethem, there are two groups of impressive meanders. Below them it passes Verden. About northwest of the town, near Eißel, a village in the borough of Verden, the Aller finally discharges into the Weser. There are two &quot;Alte Allers&quot;, i. e. old branches of the Aller. One is on the left bank opposite Verden. The other is on the right bank and is the former lowest part of the course of the river.


== Aller glacial valley ==
After the Aller has passed through the hills of Saxony-Anhalt it enters the Wolfsburg area into the ice age drainage channel of the Aller glacial valley, part of the Breslau-Magdeburg-Bremen glacial valley. The valley is on average wide and was formed during the penultimate ice age, the Saale glaciation about 200,000 years ago, and drained meltwaters from the ice sheet into the North Sea. The present course of the Aller in the miles-wide glacial valley does not reflect the courses of numerous streams of earlier centuries and millennia. For a long time there was a system of interwoven water courses, which changed their location and size depending on the materials and quantities of water being carried. Today there is a large number of dry oxbow lakes, river beds and branches in the water meadows. Climatic conditions and erosion also changed the landscape around the streams of the glacial valley. For example the wind formed inland sand dunes parallel to the river, especially on the northern side of the valley, around which the river sometimes snaked in meanders.

Near Wolfsburg the level of the river bed scarcely dropped at all and during times of low water it became almost an area of standing water. The Wolfsburg Volkswagen Plant uses the river and also feeds waste water, after cleaning, into its own sewage works.

Today, the landscape of the Aller valley between Celle and Verden is mainly utilised as grassland. The Aller depression there comprises valley floors lying close to the watertable, so that fertile wet areas may be found here with rich habitats for flora and fauna. The landscape is characterised by oxbows, potholes, copses and rows of bushes. The valley floors are widened by the depressions of the tributaries flowing into the Aller, so that fens and bogs can form. Around the lower reaches crops are cultivated on the clay soils. Around the upper course of the river, many pine forests are managed on the sandy soils.

== Tributaries ==

=== Rivers ===
The most important tributaries to join the Aller from its left-hand, southern, side facing the Harz mountains, are the Oker near Müden (Aller), the Fuhse in Celle, and the Leine near Schwarmstedt. If the Leine is counted as a source stream for the Aller, it has a total length of .

From the right, the Aller is joined by smaller rivers that predominantly drain the Lüneburg Heath. Those worth mentioning include the Kleine Aller fairly near Weyhausen, the Ise in Gifhorn, the Lachte east of Celle (near Lachtehausen), the Örtze near Winsen (Aller), the Meiße near Hodenhagen and the Böhme near Rethem.

=== Streams of the Upper Aller ===
The Upper Aller has numerous tributary streams between its source and Müden:

=== Streams of the Aller Canal ===
The Aller Canal runs parallel to the Upper Aller between Wolfsburg and Gifhorn. The canal was built in the mid-19th century to reduce flooding. It has the following tributary streams:

=== Streams of the Lower Aller ===
From the left, the following small rivers and brooks feed the Aller: the Alpe and the Wölpe near Rethem, the Lehrde near Kirchlinteln-Hohenaverbergen, the Gohbach near Verden-Eitze and, just before its mouth, the Halse near Verden-Dauelsen.

== Castles and monasteries ==

*Bartensleben Castle, built as a water castle
*Oebisfelde Castle, built as a lowland castle (&quot;Niederungsburg&quot;) probably in the 10th century on a sand bank in the Aller in a swamp area of the Drömling
*Wolfsburg Castle, built as a tower house in the 14th century on the Aller and expanded into a water castle with fortifications
*Gifhorn Castle, completed in 1581 with fortifications
*Wienhausen Abbey, former Cistercian monastery from the 13th century
*Celle Castle, built in the 10th century as a fortified tower by a ford over the Aller
*Uhlenburg near Essel, built as a manor house in the 14th century
*Blankenburg Castle near Essel
*Ahlden House, built in 1549 as a water castle on the Aller; where the river bed became part of the Leine from 1618 when the Aller changed its course
*Bunkenburg, built as a circular rampart on the Aller in Ahlden (Aller) in the 13th century
* Hudemühlen Castle in the Hodenhagen sector of Hudemühlen, built in the 14th century as a castle, converted in the 16th century into a Renaissance &quot;schloss&quot; and demolished in the 19th century
*Bierde Castle near Bierde
*Hodenhagen Castle near Hodenhagen
*Blankenhagen Castle near Grethem
*Rethem Castle in Rethem (Aller), built in the 13th century and expanded into a bastioned site in the 17th century
*, built in the 12th century

== Culture and tourism ==
The Aller is one of the fewat least to all appearancesundisturbed larger rivers in Germany. From Celle as far as the Verden area it forms, together with the Leine, the attractive landscape of the Aller-Leine Valley. The Aller flows gently through relatively natural surroundings alongside meadows and woods, small villages and country towns. As a result, it is of great importance for those seeking relaxation in Lower Saxony with almost 4 million people in the conurbation of the Hanover-Brunswick-Göttingen-Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region. The Aller Cycle Way, which is around long and generally follows the course of the river at some distance, is just one of the leisure attractions in the area. There are attempts to make tourism along the river more compatible with nature through the &#x27;soft tourism&#x27; (&quot;Sanfte Tourismus&quot;) initiative, especially in the Aller-Leine Valley. Leisure options include canoeing or travelling by houseboat. Water skiing is allowed on short sections of the lower river.

== Hydrology ==
The river is the biggest tributary of the Weser. The catchment area of the Aller covers , about one third that of the Weser itself. The water flow gauge at Rethem below the Aller&#x27;s confluence with the Leine registers an average volumetric flow of per second.

The Aller receives via the Oker about half the run off from the Harz mountains (the other half drains into the Elbe via the Saale and other tributaries). Consequently, the Aller was and is frequently flooded by its tributaries. Since the commissioning of the dams in the Harz, it is now possible to limit the impact, especially of seasonal floods, e.g. by delaying and slowing down the release of meltwaters on the Oker and Ecker, the Innerste and the Grane in spring. As a result, the discharge of the Aller into the Weser can be largely controlled and, although the level varies, it can be kept within boundaries.

Very little of the Aller is shaded by woods (apart from the section along the Aller Canal). Direct sunlight on much of the river encourages the growth of aquatic plants and, in the absence of shady trees along its banks, the water becomes quite warm during the summer months.

=== Water velocity ===
The water velocity of the Aller is very slow in places. In its upper reaches, at the height of the Drömling, the water compares to a sluggish canal and, in some sections, it is almost like a stretch of still water. Its sluggishness is due to the very gradual slope of the channel, which in Lower Saxony averages a mere . Even in the upper course of the river, the flow across the whole of the stream bed is uniformly slow, due to the river having been widened and straightened. Here, the bed is covered by a mixture of sand and mud.

=== Sewage ===
Sewage from about half a million people is piped into the upper reaches of the Aller between its source and Müden/Aller, both directly and via its tributaries. The sewage is treated by 40 large sewage plants. Sewage from the town of Wolfsburg, the only city along the river, is not discharged into the river, but dispersed by sewage farms. The chemical composition of the Aller shows that the sewage discharged into it has generally been treated sufficiently well.

=== Heavy metal pollution ===
The pollution of the Aller by heavy metals has resulted from centuries of mining in the Harz mountains. Harz rivers, such as the Aller tributary of the Oker, picked up heavy metals from the mines and their spoil heaps. These were mainly cadmium, zinc and lead compounds that were concentrated into the suspended solids in the river. In this way, these chemicals were transported by the Oker into the Aller and Weser where they were deposited in the slacker-moving sections as sediments.

In 1999, investigations were carried out into the heavy metal content of the suspended material in the Aller near Verden. They showed that the Aller was polluting the Weser disproportionally with lead, cadmium, zinc and mercury.

=== Water quality ===
The Lower Saxon water quality report of 2004 assessed the chemical water pollution level of the Aller overall as moderately polluted (quality level II). Some individual indicators were rated as quality level I (unpolluted to very lightly polluted), some however showed heavy levels of pollution (quality levels III-IV). Heavy pollution is predominantly caused by nitrates. Pollution by ammonium in places is ascribed to the unsatisfactory operation of certain sewage works. Raised phosphate values were put down to intensive arable farming near the source of the river. Its salt content today is above the critical level for aquatic plants. Since 1990, the salt content has reduced considerably, which may be connected with lower discharges from the former East German area following the &quot;Wende&quot; in 1989. Biological water quality, based on the research into its saprobian systems, is generally rated as unpolluted to very lightly polluted. The only area that is critically contaminated is the region of Wolfsburg, where deposits of digested sludge in the river are responsible.

=== Flooding and historical flood protection ===
In former times, there were frequently spring floods in the Aller depression that stayed for a long time. This was mainly due to the very gentle slope of the river from its entry into the ice age glacial drainage channel of the Breslau-Magdeburg-Bremen glacial valley. The river had to accept large quantities of water from the rivers Leine and Oker following snowmelt in the Leine Uplands and the Harz. In the upper courses the Aller filled the flat, swampy basin of the Drömling from which the water drained only slowly. In addition the Ohre river flowed diffusely through the Drömling. Because the watershed between Weser and Elbe lay in the middle of the Drömling, the river could even change its course so that the waters of the Aller flowed into the Elbe. The Prussian king, Frederick the Great, had the Prussian-owned eastern part of the Drömling drained between 1780 and 1796 and cleared for settlers (&quot;Kolonisten&quot;). His neighbours in western Drömling, in the shape of the Duchy of Brunswick and Hanover did not join the drainage project and only began to drain and control the Aller from 1860 onwards. They built the Aller Canal from a place near Grafhorst to the area of Calvörde, through which the waters of the Aller could flow into the Ohre. Another canal built to prevent floods was theequally namedAller Canal, finished in 1863, which protected the Aller depression near Gifhorn. The construction of the Mittelland Canal in the 1930s enabled surplus water from the Aller to be drained off. That is achieved near Grafhorst by the Aller relief channel, a canal. In spite of these measures there were floods in the Aller valley even in the 20th century that led to heavy losses for agriculture in the region.

=== Current flood protection ===
In the years 1954–1962, there was increased flooding along the Aller, which caused considerable damage to its water meadows. The flooded areas in the Aller valley varied between wide, mainly due to the uneven flow of the river. In 1961, the Landtag of Lower Saxony decided to regulate the Aller by widening it. The aim was to protect settlements as well as the agricultural economy of the villages and towns along the course of the river which were generally poorly protected from flooding. Most of the measures to regulate the Aller were established in the 1960s. They were followed by the construction of a retention basin near Gifhorn in the 1970s. By contrast, plans for a retention basin on the bend in the Aller near Grafhorst were scrutinised between 1993 and 1996 on environmental grounds. The planned &quot;Fahle Heide&quot; basin west of Gifhorn was never built due to lack of funding. As part of the widening of the Aller the banks were reshaped along large stretches. The state purchased strips of land up to wide from those living along its banks. The banks were made flatter and lined with stones. Willows, alder and reed beds were planted. The Upper Aller was widened to , the Middle Aller to and the Lower Aller from its confluence with the Leine to . Flood embankments were built along the Lower Aller near Rethem (Aller), Westen and Häuslingen.

==== Flood protection in Celle region ====

As early as the 1980s the town of Celle had drawn up a &quot;Plan for Flood Protection of the Celle Region&quot;. This described a combination of widely varying measures, such as excavation of the river shore, flood basins and dykes. On 6 June 2005 the town received authority to start the first stage of the flood protection project. In 2006 work was begun. This first part of the work entailed excavation of the river shore between Boye and the confluence with the river Fuhse, which were intended to increase the cross-section of the Aller channel during high water periods. The flood basins have an area of about and are deep, requiring about of earth to be washed away. The cost of the project came to around . Only two years later, it was determined that these first interventions of the river system had resulted in sand being permanently deposited in the Aller producing shoals. In May 2009, the shipping channel was dredged for the first time in the vicinity of the new flood basins so that ships could once again pass through. Now, it is planned to redesign the basins and, in some cases to fill them in, in order to reduce the future dumping of sand.

=== Negotiability for fish ===
In straightening the Aller in the 1960s the slope increased as the shortest route was taken. Ledges (&quot;Sohlabstürze&quot;) were built on the river bed to reduce erosion; these have since been converted to rock ramps (&quot;Sohlgleiten&quot;) in order to enable water organisms to pass more easily. There is no longer a barrier to fish at the weir near Grafhorst—designed to raise the water level during summer droughts—since it has been given a fish ladder. The migration of fish is however prevented by weirs near Gifhorn and Müden (Aller) and the locks of the Mittelland Canal near Wolfsburg-Wendschott. The Elbe Lateral Canal near Osloß flows freely under the Aller, however.
== Shipping ==

=== History ===
Shipping has plied the Aller for hundreds of years. It contributed to the economic growth of Brunswick, because the control of river transport fell into the hands of Duke Henry the Lion. Metals from the Harz were transported from Brunswick to the North Sea initially down the Oker and then down the Aller and Weser. In the 14th century, Celle was the most important grain loading point in the region that is today Lower Saxony. Around 1500, the ships on the Aller already had a capacity of about . The section of the Lower Aller between Celle and Verden had a particular high economic significance for shipping. Nevertheless, maintenance, repairs and modifications were very expensive. Between 1908 and 1918 the Aller was widened to provide permanent navigability between Celle and Verden. Four barrages were built, with locks for ships. At the beginning of the 20th century, potash salt, that had been extracted near Celle, was transported in large quantities on the Aller. Today there are no commercial ships left.

=== Today ===
Today, the Aller is a federal waterway from its mouth on the Weser to Celle. This section has a length of and is known as the Lower Aller. The Verden Water and Shipping Office (&quot;Wasser- und Schifffahrtsamt Verden&quot;) is responsible for upgrades and new projects. With this authority, responsibility is further subdivided. The Oldau branch is responsible for the Aller from Celle to further downstream. In contrast, the Verden branch covers the river from Hülsen to its confluence with the Weser near Verden-Eissel downstream from Celle.

Since the mid-1960s, only pleasure cruisers and sports boats have been used on the river above Verden towards its source.

=== Permitted ship sizes ===
* Mouth–Verden: waterway class III (length × width: )
* Verden–Celle: waterway class II (length × width: )
* Above Celle: not navigable

=== Locks ===
In 1907, the Prussian state decided to canalise the Aller from above its confluence with the Leine near Schwarmstedt downstream to Celle. In the years 1908 to 1918, the river was regulated by four barrages with locks and thus made navigable for larger inland ships. In particular, the Aller locks in Bannetze and Oldau enabled the transportation of crude oil from the oilfields of Wietze to Celle. Likewise, grain was shipped to Celle for milling.

=== Timber rafting ===
Timber rafting was probably being used on the Aller by the 14th century. The logs thus transported were used for construction as well as fuel. An early centre of timber rafting and the wood trade was the princely &quot;Residenz&quot; town of Celle. At first the nobility had the wood transported as fuel to heat Celle Castle and other royal buildings. The timber was felled in the royal forests. The transportation of logs by raft was roughly 10 times more efficient than moving it by horse and cart.

A major rafting operation took place on the Aller in 1680 when a large quantity of construction wood was floated down to the Weser and its mouth. The wood came from the southern Lüneburg Heath and was used to build around 100 houses in the Swedish fort of Carlsburg on the site of present-day Bremerhaven.

From the 17th century, wood was also rafted down the Aller tributaries, such as the Ise and Örtze to Celle. In Celle, the logs collected at a needle dam in the Aller Land and were stored in a wood yard. Rafts also ran past Celle and down the Weser to Bremen. After the death of George William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg in 1705, timber rafting on the Upper Aller to Celle fell into decline. When the royal household moved to Hanover, Celle lost the baroque lustre of a Residenz town. Raft dealers took over the business. On the Lower Aller, timber rafting flourished again at the end of the 19th century during the &quot;Gründerzeit&quot;. There was a large demand for wood in Bremen, Bremerhaven and the Weser Marshes, where wood was used for the construction of houses and shipbuilding. In the years around 1895, about of wood were rafted down to the Weser. After the First World War, timber rafting on the Aller dwindled to nothing.

== Water power ==

In upgrading the Aller between Celle and the mouth of the Leine near Schwarmstedt between 1908 and 1918, hydropower stations were built at two of the four new barrages: Oldau and Marklendorf. They enabled the electrification of the Südheide. The Oldau station, with three Francis turbines, was taken over in 1929 by PreussenElektra. In 1972, the power stations were closed as they were unprofitable. Whilst the structure in Marklendorf was demolished, the power station in Oldau was declared a technological monument and escaped destruction. After being modernised in 1983, it rejoined the grid. It has largely been preserved in its original state. Here, the water power of the Aller, with the aid of Francis turbines with a nominal power of 650 kW, is used to generate 3 million kWh per year of electric current.

==See also==
*List of rivers of Saxony-Anhalt
*List of rivers of Lower Saxony

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
== External links ==
* Landscape fact file - Aller Valley
* Landscape fact file - Aller Flood Plain
* TV report &quot;Wassergeschichten: Die Aller&quot; on N3
* Water quality report on the Aller /Source 2004 from Lower Saxony state (pdf, 1 MB)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1967803" start="4" end="9" title="Aller (Germany)" label="Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="41" end="54" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="59" end="71" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="140" end="145" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="296" end="300" title="Levee" label="dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q14813" start="376" end="383" title="Gifhorn" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="395" end="402" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="706" end="716" title="Old German" label="Old German"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="739" end="749" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Old Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="986" end="991" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="1044" end="1054" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="1303" end="1308" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q77533" start="1347" end="1357" title="Hans Krahe" label="Hans Krahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1600" end="1613" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219" start="1721" end="1727" title="Alster" label="Alster"/>
<link wikidata="Q159467" start="1729" end="1734" title="Iller" label="Iller"/>
<link wikidata="Q253294" start="1736" end="1739" title="Elz (disambiguation)" label="Elz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346" start="1744" end="1751" title="Ilmenau (river)" label="Ilmenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q77723" start="1826" end="1840" title="Theo Vennemann" label="Theo Vennemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q202926" start="1894" end="1920" title="Vasconic substratum theory" label="Vasconic substratum theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q446478" start="2041" end="2056" title="Magdeburg Börde" label="Magdeburg Börde"/>
<link wikidata="Q699347" start="2062" end="2071" title="Seehausen (Börde)" label="Seehausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q525392" start="2085" end="2104" title="Oschersleben (Bode)" label="Oschersleben (Bode)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623973" start="2179" end="2189" title="Hohes Holz" label="Hohes Holz"/>
<link wikidata="Q701860" start="2225" end="2234" title="Wormsdorf" label="Wormsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q688007" start="2259" end="2268" title="Ovelgünne" label="Ovelgünne"/>
<link wikidata="Q338390" start="2296" end="2306" title="Eggenstedt" label="Eggenstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q486562" start="2443" end="2452" title="Helmstedt" label="Helmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="2475" end="2484" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181252" start="2666" end="2683" title="Flechtingen Hills" label="Flechtingen Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q896848" start="2759" end="2767" title="Lappwald" label="Lappwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q573458" start="2852" end="2861" title="Eilsleben" label="Eilsleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554197" start="2866" end="2877" title="Weferlingen" label="Weferlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014884" start="2904" end="2914" title="Oebisfelde" label="Oebisfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q884616" start="2944" end="2952" title="Drömling" label="Drömling"/>
<link wikidata="Q784041" start="3065" end="3074" title="Grafhorst" label="Grafhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q268449" start="3122" end="3131" title="Normalnull" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="3338" end="3352" title="glacial valley" label="glacial valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="3438" end="3447" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3455" end="3475" title="Wolfsburg-Wendschott" label="Wolfsburg-Wendschott"/>
<link wikidata="Q48480" start="3504" end="3520" title="Mittelland Canal" label="Mittelland Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="3526" end="3533" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014" start="3625" end="3634" title="Wolfsburg" label="Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648605" start="3675" end="3684" title="Allerpark" label="Allerpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q523628" start="3704" end="3712" title="Allersee" label="Allersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q808441" start="3737" end="3746" title="Barnbruch" label="Barnbruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q630716" start="3758" end="3767" title="Weyhausen" label="Weyhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648587" start="3773" end="3784" title="Aller Canal" label="Aller Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q633134" start="4409" end="4414" title="Osloß" label="Osloß"/>
<link wikidata="Q314162" start="4436" end="4454" title="Elbe Lateral Canal" label="Elbe Lateral Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030403" start="4487" end="4495" title="Navigable aqueduct" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q14813" start="4520" end="4527" title="Gifhorn" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q684029" start="4531" end="4536" title="Müden (Aller)" label="Müden"/>
<link wikidata="Q701512" start="4563" end="4567" title="Oker" label="Oker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933" start="4646" end="4651" title="Celle" label="Celle"/>
<link wikidata="Q566292" start="4705" end="4715" title="Wienhausen" label="Wienhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q350495" start="4799" end="4806" title="barrage (dam)" label="barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066997" start="4862" end="4866" title="weir" label="weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="5000" end="5005" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q622498" start="5126" end="5132" title="Winsen (Aller)" label="Winsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q583734" start="5139" end="5147" title="Eickeloh" label="Eickeloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q377966" start="5150" end="5164" title="reaction ferry" label="reaction ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="5207" end="5212" title="Leine (river)" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145741" start="5262" end="5268" title="Rethem (Aller)" label="Rethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q486551" start="5336" end="5342" title="Verden (Aller)" label="Verden"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="5797" end="5804" title="Last glacial period" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="5835" end="5849" title="glacial valley" label="glacial valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12777124" start="5985" end="6001" title="Saale glaciation" label="Saale glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q360925" start="6039" end="6048" title="meltwater" label="meltwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="6059" end="6068" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="6078" end="6087" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209333" start="6444" end="6454" title="oxbow lake" label="oxbow lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="6527" end="6534" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q878315" start="6918" end="6944" title="Wolfsburg Volkswagen Plant" label="Wolfsburg Volkswagen Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="7017" end="7029" title="sewage works" label="sewage works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="7120" end="7129" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="7707" end="7718" title="tributaries" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="7783" end="7797" title="Harz mountains" label="Harz mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q701512" start="7807" end="7811" title="Oker" label="Oker"/>
<link wikidata="Q684029" start="7817" end="7830" title="Müden (Aller)" label="Müden (Aller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q562329" start="7836" end="7841" title="Fuhse" label="Fuhse"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="7860" end="7865" title="Leine" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q664377" start="7871" end="7883" title="Schwarmstedt" label="Schwarmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="8054" end="8068" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746409" start="8105" end="8117" title="Kleine Aller" label="Kleine Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q630716" start="8130" end="8139" title="Weyhausen" label="Weyhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316186" start="8145" end="8148" title="Ise (river)" label="Ise"/>
<link wikidata="Q869537" start="8165" end="8171" title="Lachte" label="Lachte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933" start="8180" end="8185" title="Celle" label="Celle"/>
<link wikidata="Q298023" start="8211" end="8216" title="Örtze" label="Örtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q622498" start="8222" end="8236" title="Winsen (Aller)" label="Winsen (Aller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q828369" start="8242" end="8247" title="Meiße" label="Meiße"/>
<link wikidata="Q639047" start="8253" end="8263" title="Hodenhagen" label="Hodenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q562356" start="8272" end="8277" title="Böhme (river)" label="Böhme"/>
<link wikidata="Q145741" start="8283" end="8289" title="Rethem" label="Rethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q684029" start="8397" end="8402" title="Müden (Aller)" label="Müden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648587" start="8444" end="8455" title="Aller Canal" label="Aller Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q827271" start="8733" end="8737" title="Alpe (Aller)" label="Alpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q833011" start="8746" end="8751" title="Wölpe" label="Wölpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145741" start="8757" end="8763" title="Rethem" label="Rethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q875486" start="8769" end="8775" title="Lehrde" label="Lehrde"/>
<link wikidata="Q504134" start="8781" end="8793" title="Kirchlinteln" label="Kirchlinteln"/>
<link wikidata="Q239190" start="8815" end="8822" title="Gohbach" label="Gohbach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8835" end="8840" title="Eitze" label="Eitze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8934" end="8953" title="Bartensleben Castle" label="Bartensleben Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q615810" start="8966" end="8978" title="water castle" label="water castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8980" end="8997" title="Oebisfelde Castle" label="Oebisfelde Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970243" start="9010" end="9024" title="lowland castle" label="lowland castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q884616" start="9134" end="9142" title="Drömling" label="Drömling"/>
<link wikidata="Q882569" start="9144" end="9160" title="Wolfsburg Castle" label="Wolfsburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q91312" start="9173" end="9184" title="tower house" label="tower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241200" start="9272" end="9286" title="Gifhorn Castle" label="Gifhorn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776279" start="9327" end="9343" title="Wienhausen Abbey" label="Wienhausen Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="9352" end="9362" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q472403" start="9396" end="9408" title="Celle Castle" label="Celle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81917" start="9441" end="9456" title="fortified tower" label="fortified tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474142" start="9483" end="9492" title="Uhlenburg" label="Uhlenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q616243" start="9498" end="9503" title="Essel, Lower Saxony" label="Essel"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="9516" end="9527" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011057" start="9549" end="9567" title="Blankenburg Castle (Essel)" label="Blankenburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q567878" start="9580" end="9592" title="Ahlden House" label="Ahlden House"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="9679" end="9684" title="Leine" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182102" start="9730" end="9740" title="Bunkenburg" label="Bunkenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363360" start="9753" end="9769" title="circular rampart" label="circular rampart"/>
<link wikidata="Q400396" start="9786" end="9800" title="Ahlden (Aller)" label="Ahlden (Aller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q639047" start="9848" end="9858" title="Hodenhagen" label="Hodenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q585010" start="9957" end="9968" title="Weser Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823155" start="9975" end="9982" title="schloss" label="schloss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10025" end="10038" title="Bierde Castle" label="Bierde Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q857789" start="10044" end="10050" title="Bierde (Böhme)" label="Bierde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012378" start="10052" end="10069" title="Hodenhagen Castle" label="Hodenhagen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q639047" start="10075" end="10085" title="Hodenhagen" label="Hodenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011060" start="10087" end="10106" title="Blankenhagen Castle" label="Blankenhagen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q668539" start="10112" end="10119" title="Grethem" label="Grethem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10121" end="10134" title="Rethem Castle" label="Rethem Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="10448" end="10453" title="Leine" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667097" start="10487" end="10505" title="Aller-Leine Valley" label="Aller-Leine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10835" end="10850" title="Aller Cycle Way" label="Aller Cycle Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="11247" end="11259" title="Water skiing" label="Water skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="11330" end="11335" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="11379" end="11393" title="drainage basin" label="catchment area"/>
<link wikidata="Q701512" start="11618" end="11622" title="Oker" label="Oker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="11655" end="11669" title="Harz mountains" label="Harz mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678" start="11715" end="11720" title="Saale" label="Saale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="11850" end="11853" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281562" start="12015" end="12020" title="Ecker" label="Ecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q708857" start="12026" end="12034" title="Innerste" label="Innerste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543059" start="12043" end="12048" title="Grane (river)" label="Grane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648587" start="12286" end="12297" title="Aller Canal" label="Aller Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="12362" end="12375" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q884616" start="12607" end="12615" title="Drömling" label="Drömling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="13057" end="13063" title="Sewage" label="Sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="13251" end="13263" title="sewage plant" label="sewage plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351470" start="13383" end="13394" title="sewage farm" label="sewage farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="13583" end="13594" title="heavy metal (chemistry)" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q575827" start="13627" end="13655" title="Mining in the Upper Harz" label="mining in the Harz mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q701512" start="13705" end="13709" title="Oker" label="Oker"/>
<link wikidata="Q905309" start="13855" end="13871" title="suspended solids" label="suspended solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="14029" end="14037" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14237" end="14241" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="14243" end="14250" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="14252" end="14256" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="14261" end="14268" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="14360" end="14375" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="14656" end="14663" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="14679" end="14687" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="14774" end="14783" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="14867" end="14871" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="14918" end="14931" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="15050" end="15061" title="East German" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q682258" start="15087" end="15092" title="Die Wende" label="Wende"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503132" start="15119" end="15132" title="Freshwater environmental quality parameters" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="15165" end="15182" title="Saprobe" label="saprobian systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914993" start="15344" end="15350" title="sludge" label="sludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="15684" end="15698" title="glacial valley" label="glacial valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="15766" end="15771" title="Leine" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q701512" start="15776" end="15780" title="Oker" label="Oker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754697" start="15791" end="15799" title="snowmelt" label="snowmelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778062" start="15807" end="15820" title="Leine Uplands" label="Leine Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="15829" end="15833" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q884616" start="15903" end="15911" title="Drömling" label="Drömling"/>
<link wikidata="Q695628" start="15970" end="15974" title="Ohre" label="Ohre"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="16032" end="16041" title="Drainage divide" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="16050" end="16055" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="16060" end="16064" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="16197" end="16204" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="16212" end="16231" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q326029" start="16422" end="16440" title="Duchy of Brunswick" label="Duchy of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="16445" end="16452" title="Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q784041" start="16597" end="16606" title="Grafhorst" label="Grafhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q526417" start="16622" end="16630" title="Calvörde" label="Calvörde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648587" start="16754" end="16765" title="Aller Canal" label="Aller Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14813" start="16827" end="16834" title="Gifhorn" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q48480" start="16860" end="16876" title="Mittelland Canal" label="Mittelland Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q319994" start="17437" end="17460" title="Landtag of Lower Saxony" label="Landtag of Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413117" start="17805" end="17820" title="retention basin" label="retention basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q784041" start="17919" end="17928" title="Grafhorst" label="Grafhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q145741" start="18520" end="18534" title="Rethem (Aller)" label="Rethem (Aller)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18536" end="18542" title="Westen (Dörverden)" label="Westen"/>
<link wikidata="Q282639" start="18547" end="18557" title="Häuslingen" label="Häuslingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066997" start="20144" end="20148" title="weir" label="weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q784041" start="20154" end="20163" title="Grafhorst" label="Grafhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q606619" start="20247" end="20258" title="fish ladder" label="fish ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q684029" start="20329" end="20342" title="Müden (Aller)" label="Müden (Aller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48480" start="20364" end="20380" title="Mittelland Canal" label="Mittelland Canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20396" end="20406" title="Wendschott" label="Wendschott"/>
<link wikidata="Q314162" start="20412" end="20430" title="Elbe Lateral Canal" label="Elbe Lateral Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q633134" start="20436" end="20441" title="Osloß" label="Osloß"/>
<link wikidata="Q651658" start="20513" end="20521" title="Shipping" label="Shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="20606" end="20615" title="Braunschweig" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="20684" end="20698" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="20716" end="20720" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="20879" end="20898" title="grain" label="grain loading point"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="22407" end="22421" title="Prussia" label="Prussian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q664377" start="22498" end="22510" title="Schwarmstedt" label="Schwarmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="22762" end="22770" title="oilfield" label="oilfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q574367" start="22775" end="22781" title="Wietze" label="Wietze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180262" start="23085" end="23093" title="Residenz" label="Residenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q472403" start="23178" end="23190" title="Celle Castle" label="Celle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="23546" end="23560" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="23616" end="23620" title="fort" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706" start="23661" end="23672" title="Bremerhaven" label="Bremerhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q316186" start="23759" end="23762" title="Ise (river)" label="Ise"/>
<link wikidata="Q298023" start="23767" end="23772" title="Örtze" label="Örtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963239" start="23817" end="23827" title="needle dam" label="needle dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q61574" start="23953" end="23995" title="George William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="George William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="24125" end="24132" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q694519" start="24297" end="24308" title="Gründerzeit" label="Gründerzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="24353" end="24359" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948" start="24381" end="24394" title="Landkreis Wesermarsch" label="Weser Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="24546" end="24561" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q664377" start="24701" end="24713" title="Schwarmstedt" label="Schwarmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="24737" end="24755" title="hydropower station" label="hydropower station"/>
<link wikidata="Q350495" start="24791" end="24798" title="barrage (dam)" label="barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q371560" start="24801" end="24806" title="Hambühren" label="Oldau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076056" start="24841" end="24856" title="electrification" label="electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q317848" start="24864" end="24872" title="Südheide Nature Park" label="Südheide"/>
<link wikidata="Q217817" start="24904" end="24919" title="Francis turbine" label="Francis turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q878574" start="24948" end="24963" title="PreussenElektra" label="PreussenElektra"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740332" start="25357" end="25370" title="nominal power" label="nominal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="25412" end="25415" title="kilowatt-hour" label="kWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636703" start="25461" end="25492" title="List of rivers of Saxony-Anhalt" label="List of rivers of Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637610" start="25494" end="25524" title="List of rivers of Lower Saxony" label="List of rivers of Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q879451" start="25716" end="25718" title="NDR Fernsehen" label="N3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150197" wikidata="Q29590952" url="?curid=150197" title="River Stour">
<text>River Stour may refer to:
*River Stour, Dorset, a river in the English county of Dorset
*River Stour, Kent, a river in the English county of Kent, and its upper reaches and tributaries:
**River East Stour
**River Great Stour
**River Little Stour
*River Stour, Suffolk, a river in the English counties of Suffolk and Essex
*River Stour, Warwickshire, a river in the English county of Warwickshire
*River Stour, Worcestershire, a river in the English county of Worcestershire
*Stour Brook, in Suffolk and Essex, England
*Stour River, in New Zealand

==See also==
*Stour (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29590952" start="0" end="11" title="River Stour" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771580" start="27" end="46" title="River Stour, Dorset" label="River Stour, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="89" end="106" title="River Stour, Kent" label="River Stour, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q384672" start="188" end="204" title="River East Stour" label="River East Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="207" end="224" title="River Great Stour" label="River Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="227" end="245" title="River Little Stour" label="River Little Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941117" start="247" end="267" title="River Stour, Suffolk" label="River Stour, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337829" start="323" end="348" title="River Stour, Warwickshire" label="River Stour, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337832" start="397" end="424" title="River Stour, Worcestershire" label="River Stour, Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620565" start="475" end="486" title="Stour Brook" label="Stour Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620569" start="519" end="530" title="Stour River" label="Stour River"/>
<link wikidata="Q421258" start="562" end="584" title="Stour (disambiguation)" label="Stour (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150200" wikidata="Q732997" url="?curid=150200" title="British Academy Film Awards">
<text>The British Academy Film Awards, more commonly known as the BAFTA Awards, is an annual film award show hosted by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) to honour the best British and international contributions to film. The ceremony was first held at the flagship Odeon Cinema in Leicester Square in London, then the Royal Opera House from 2007 to 2016. The event was held at the Royal Albert Hall from 2017 to 2022, before moving to the Royal Festival Hall for 2023. The statue awarded to recipients depicts a theatrical mask.

The first BAFTA Awards ceremony was held in 1949, and the ceremony was first broadcast on the BBC in 1956 with Vivien Leigh as the host. The ceremony was initially held in April or May; since 2001, it typically takes place in February.

==History==

The British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) was founded in 1947 as The British Film Academy, by David Lean, Alexander Korda, Carol Reed, Charles Laughton, Roger Manvell, Laurence Olivier, Emeric Pressburger, Michael Powell, Michael Balcon, and other major figures of the British film industry. In 1958, the Academy merged with The Guild of Television Producers and Directors to form The Society of Film and Television, which eventually became The British Academy of Film and Television Arts in 1976.

The stated charitable purpose of BAFTA is to &quot;support, develop and promote the art forms of the moving image, by identifying and rewarding excellence, inspiring practitioners, and benefiting the public&quot;. In addition to high-profile awards ceremonies, BAFTA runs a year-round programme of educational events, including film screenings and tribute evenings. BAFTA is supported by a membership of about 6,000 people from the film, television, and video game industries.

The Academy&#x27;s awards are in the form of a theatrical mask designed by American sculptor Mitzi Cunliffe, in response to a commission from the Guild of Television Producers in 1955.

==Annual ceremony==

The ceremony previously took place in April or May, but since 2001 it has been held in February in order to precede the Academy Awards. Most of the awards are open to all nationalities, though there are awards for Outstanding British Film and Outstanding Debut by a British Writer, Producer or Director. Only UK films are eligible for the categories of The British Short Film and British Short Animation awards.

During each annual ceremony, BAFTA pauses &quot;&quot; to pay tribute to those in the industry who have died over the past 12 months, showcasing a montage of images accompanied by music.

===Broadcast===
The Awards ceremony has been historically delayed broadcast on British television the same evening, and across the world. The first broadcast was on the BBC in 1956, with Vivien Leigh (who would present an award to her ex husband Sir Laurence Olivier) as the host. It has been broadcast in colour since 1970. In the US it is broadcast on BBC America. In 2023, the BAFTA Film Awards included a live telecast for its major award categories during the culmination of the ceremony.

===Location===
The award ceremony is held in London. From 2000 to 2007, the ceremonies took place at the flagship Odeon Leicester cinema in Leicester Square. Between 2008 and 2016, the ceremonies took place at the Royal Opera House. The 70th Awards in 2017, and subsequent ceremonies up to the 75th Awards in 2022, were held at the Royal Albert Hall.

For the 76th British Academy Film Awards in 2023, it was announced that the ceremony would be moved to the Royal Festival Hall as part of a new multi-year deal between BAFTA and the Southbank Centre, bringing the Film Awards in-line with the British Academy Television Awards and British Academy Games Awards, which were already held there.

===Sponsorship===
Until 2012, the mobile telephone network Orange sponsored the awards. Orange&#x27;s parent company, EE, took over the sponsorship of the event from 2013.

==Award categories==
===Retired awards===
* BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles (awarded 1952–1984)
* BAFTA Award for Best British Screenplay (awarded 1955–1968)
* BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay (awarded 1969–1983)
* BAFTA Award for Best British Actor (awarded 1952–1967)
* BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actor (awarded 1952–1967)
* BAFTA Award for Best British Actress (awarded 1952–1967)
* BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actress (awarded 1952–1967)
* BAFTA Award for Best Original Song (awarded 1983–1985)
* BAFTA Award for Best Factual Film
* BAFTA Award for Best Fictional Film
* BAFTA Award for Best Short Factual Film
* BAFTA Award for Best Specialised Film
* BAFTA John Grierson Award
* BAFTA United Nations Award (awarded 1949–1976)

===Special awards===
* BAFTA Fellowship (since 1971)
* Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema Award (known as the Michael Balcon Award from 1979 to 2006)

==Superlatives==
===Acting===


====Actors nominated twice in the same category in the same year====

Nine actors have received dual nominations in the same category in a single year at the BAFTA Film Awards.

; Notes
* Michael Caine was the first actor to receive dual nominations in the same category in a single year.
* The only ceremony with multiple actors double nominated in the same category was the 57th, with Sean Penn and Scarlett Johansson. Penn became the first actor to win neither nomination, while Johansson became the first (and remains the only) to have neither performance nominated for the corresponding Oscar.
* Kate Winslet is the only actor to receive dual nominations twice.

====Actors nominated in two different categories for the same performance in the same year====
Nine actors have received two nominations for the same performance in a single year at the BAFTA Film Awards.
; Notes
* Albert Finney was the first actor to receive two nominations for one performance.
* Jodie Foster was the first actor to win both nominations.
* Brad Davis is the only actor to win neither nomination.
* The only ceremony with multiple actors to receive two nominations for one performance was the 37th, with Phyllis Logan and Julie Walters. Logan and Walters were nominated twice against each other, and both won, effectively splitting categories.

===Directing===
====Directors nominated for multiple films in the same year====
The only director to receive dual nominations in the same year at the BAFTA Film Awards was Steven Soderbergh for &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; and &quot;Traffic&quot; in 2000. Additionally, Sidney Lumet received one joint nomination for &quot;Murder on the Orient Express&quot; and &quot;Serpico&quot; in 1974. 

===Other===
* Most awards won by a single film
** &quot;Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid&quot; (1969), with 9 wins.
* Most nominations received by a single film
** &quot;Gandhi&quot; (1982), with 16 nominations.
* Most awards won by a non English-language film
** &quot;All Quiet on the Western Front&quot; (2022), with 7 wins.
* Most nominations received by a non English-language film
** &quot;Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon&quot; (2000) and &quot;All Quiet on the Western Front&quot; (2022), with 14 nominations each.
* Most nominations received by an animated film
** &quot;Shrek&quot; (2001), with 6 nominations.
* First non-English language film to win Best Film
** &quot;Bicycle Thieves&quot; in 1949.
* First non-English language films to be nominated for Best Film
** &quot;Four Steps in the Clouds&quot;, &quot;Monsieur Vincent&quot; and &quot;Paisan&quot; in 1948.
* First animated film to be nominated for Best Film
** &quot;Shrek&quot; (2001)
* First animated film to win any screenplay categories
** &quot;Shrek&quot; (2001), with Best Adapted Screenplay
* Largest sweep (winning awards in every nominated category)
** &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot; (1966), with 7 wins.
* Most nominations without winning an award
** &quot;Women in Love&quot; (1969) and &quot;Finding Neverland&quot; (2004), with 11 nominations each.
* Most total nominations and awards for a person
** Woody Allen received 24 nominations and won 10 awards.
* Most nominations and awards for a person in a single year
** Alfonso Cuarón received six nominations and won four awards in 2018.
* Most nominations for a woman in a single year
** Chloé Zhao received four nominations in 2020.
* Most total awards for a woman
** Judi Dench and Catherine Martin won six awards each.
* Most total nominations for a woman
** Sandy Powell received 16 nominations.
* Highest &quot;perfect score&quot;
** Composer Ennio Morricone has six nominations and six wins.
* Only person to receive every nomination in a category
** Jocelyn Rickards received both nominations for Best British Costume Design – Black and White in 1967, winning for &quot;Mademoiselle&quot;.
* Only actor to win a BAFTA for portraying a real BAFTA winner
** Cate Blanchett won Best Actress in a Supporting Role for portraying Katharine Hepburn in &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004).
***NOTE: Robert Downey Jr. won Best Actor in a Leading Role for portraying Charlie Chaplin in &quot;Chaplin&quot; (1992). Chaplin received the BAFTA Fellowship, an honorary award, but never nominated for a competitive BAFTA.
* Only actor to be nominated for a voice-only performance
** Eddie Murphy nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for voicing Donkey in &quot;Shrek&quot; (2001).
* Oldest person to win an award
** James Ivory, age 89 (Best Adapted Screenplay, &quot;Call Me by Your Name&quot;, 2017).
* Youngest person to win an award
** Jodie Foster, age 13 (Best Actress in a Supporting Role and Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles, &quot;Bugsy Malone&quot; / &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, 1976).

==Ceremonies==
==See also==
* British Academy of Film and Television Arts
* British Academy Television Awards

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* BAFTA Awards database
* Museum of Broadcast Communications: BAFTA
* IMDB: BAFTA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="4" end="31" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="60" end="72" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220917" start="87" end="97" title="film award" label="film award"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="117" end="160" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349144" start="272" end="286" title="Odeon Luxe Leicester Square" label="flagship Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="297" end="313" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="334" end="351" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="397" end="414" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q647390" start="455" end="474" title="Royal Festival Hall" label="Royal Festival Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601804" start="550" end="577" title="1st British Academy Film Awards" label="first BAFTA Awards ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="640" end="643" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="657" end="669" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="800" end="843" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="904" end="914" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q55221" start="916" end="931" title="Alexander Korda" label="Alexander Korda"/>
<link wikidata="Q95143" start="933" end="943" title="Carol Reed" label="Carol Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264" start="945" end="961" title="Charles Laughton" label="Charles Laughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q707628" start="963" end="976" title="Roger Manvell" label="Roger Manvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="978" end="994" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q55230" start="996" end="1014" title="Emeric Pressburger" label="Emeric Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="1016" end="1030" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362106" start="1032" end="1046" title="Michael Balcon" label="Michael Balcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560678" start="1880" end="1894" title="Mitzi Cunliffe" label="Mitzi Cunliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2114" end="2128" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2764" end="2767" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="2782" end="2794" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="2845" end="2861" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876747" start="2949" end="2960" title="BBC America" label="BBC America"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3135" end="3141" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="3230" end="3246" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q113407350" start="3450" end="3482" title="76th British Academy Film Awards" label="76th British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339207" start="3624" end="3640" title="Southbank Centre" label="Southbank Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="3684" end="3717" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="British Academy Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q546692" start="3722" end="3750" title="British Academy Games Awards" label="British Academy Games Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859717" start="3843" end="3849" title="Orange UK" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322942" start="3902" end="3904" title="EE Limited" label="EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834543" start="4001" end="4062" title="BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles" label="BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q787065" start="4085" end="4124" title="BAFTA Award for Best British Screenplay" label="BAFTA Award for Best British Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q787089" start="4147" end="4178" title="BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay" label="BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="4745" end="4761" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834546" start="4777" end="4825" title="BAFTA Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema Award" label="Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="5101" end="5114" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698121" start="5289" end="5293" title="57th British Academy Film Awards" label="57th"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="5300" end="5309" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="5314" end="5332" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="5487" end="5510" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="the corresponding Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="5514" end="5526" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219546" start="5796" end="5809" title="Albert Finney" label="Albert Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="5880" end="5892" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q374175" start="5940" end="5950" title="Brad Davis (actor)" label="Brad Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710777" start="6092" end="6096" title="37th British Academy Film Awards" label="37th"/>
<link wikidata="Q117995" start="6103" end="6116" title="Phyllis Logan" label="Phyllis Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="6121" end="6134" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="6416" end="6433" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="6444" end="6459" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="6476" end="6483" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="6513" end="6525" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241699" start="6566" end="6594" title="Murder on the Orient Express (1974 film)" label="Murder on the Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q657079" start="6611" end="6618" title="Serpico" label="Serpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q232000" start="6692" end="6726" title="Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" label="Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q202211" start="6808" end="6814" title="Gandhi (film)" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108837349" start="6908" end="6938" title="All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)" label="All Quiet on the Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q273978" start="7034" end="7064" title="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" label="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108837349" start="7088" end="7118" title="All Quiet on the Western Front (2022 film)" label="All Quiet on the Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="7216" end="7221" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q172837" start="7316" end="7331" title="Bicycle Thieves" label="Bicycle Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634966" start="7421" end="7445" title="Four Steps in the Clouds" label="Four Steps in the Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631673" start="7459" end="7475" title="Monsieur Vincent" label="Monsieur Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764086" start="7492" end="7498" title="Paisan" label="Paisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="7575" end="7580" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="7658" end="7663" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q739694" start="7683" end="7706" title="BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q218999" start="7777" end="7798" title="A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q630132" start="7879" end="7892" title="Women in Love (film)" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q208204" start="7916" end="7933" title="Finding Neverland (film)" label="Finding Neverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="8026" end="8037" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28028" start="8144" end="8158" title="Alfonso Cuarón" label="Alfonso Cuarón"/>
<link wikidata="Q59428009" start="8207" end="8211" title="72nd British Academy Film Awards" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078321" start="8264" end="8274" title="Chloé Zhao" label="Chloé Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q104832414" start="8304" end="8308" title="74th British Academy Film Awards" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="8345" end="8355" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q436031" start="8360" end="8376" title="Catherine Martin (designer)" label="Catherine Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q289952" start="8438" end="8450" title="Sandy Powell (costume designer)" label="Sandy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="8524" end="8539" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15821102" start="8633" end="8649" title="Jocelyn Rickards" label="Jocelyn Rickards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348434" start="8729" end="8733" title="21st British Academy Film Awards" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q488760" start="8753" end="8765" title="Mademoiselle (1966 film)" label="Mademoiselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="8839" end="8853" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="8907" end="8924" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="8934" end="8945" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="8969" end="8986" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="9035" end="9050" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q556967" start="9060" end="9067" title="Chaplin (film)" label="Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="9103" end="9119" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="9246" end="9258" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q748427" start="9317" end="9323" title="Donkey (Shrek)" label="Donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="9333" end="9338" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q51577" start="9388" end="9399" title="James Ivory" label="James Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136757" start="9440" end="9460" title="Call Me by Your Name (film)" label="Call Me by Your Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="9512" end="9524" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q851611" start="9625" end="9637" title="Bugsy Malone" label="Bugsy Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="9652" end="9663" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="9709" end="9752" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="9755" end="9788" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="British Academy Television Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150201" wikidata="Q1050470" url="?curid=150201" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra">
<text>The Chicago Symphony Orchestra (CSO) is an American symphony orchestra based in Chicago, Illinois. Founded by Theodore Thomas in 1891, the ensemble has been based in the Symphony Center since 1904 and plays a summer season at the Ravinia Festival. Klaus Mäkelä was named music director-designate in 2024, with his first contractual season to begin in 2027. The orchestra&#x27;s most recent music director is Riccardo Muti, whose tenure spanned the seasons from 2010 to 2023, and he continues to perform on occasion as director-emeritus. The CSO is one of the American orchestras commonly referred to as the &quot;Big Five&quot;.

==History==

In 1890, Charles Norman Fay, a Chicago businessman, invited Theodore Thomas to establish an orchestra in Chicago. Under the name &quot;Chicago Orchestra&quot;, the orchestra played its first concert October 16, 1891, at the Auditorium Theater. It is one of the oldest orchestras in the United States, along with the New York Philharmonic, the Boston Symphony Orchestra and the Saint Louis Symphony Orchestra.

Orchestra Hall, now a component of the Symphony Center complex, was designed by Chicago architect Daniel H. Burnham and completed in 1904. Thomas served as music director for thirteen years until his death shortly after Orchestra Hall was dedicated on December 14, 1904. The orchestra was renamed &quot;Theodore Thomas Orchestra&quot; in 1905, and today, Orchestra Hall still has &quot;Theodore Thomas Orchestra Hall&quot; inscribed on its façade.

In 1905, Frederick Stock became music director, a post he held until his death in 1942. The orchestra was renamed the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in 1913.

Subsequent music directors have included Désiré Defauw, Artur Rodziński, Rafael Kubelík, Fritz Reiner, Jean Martinon, Georg Solti, and Daniel Barenboim. Reiner&#x27;s work with the orchestra included a series of television appearances, the first in its history. He also planned but was unable to bring to fruition its first tour outside the United States. Later, Solti thought it was essential to raise the orchestra&#x27;s international profile. Solti led the Chicago Symphony in a European tour in 1971, playing in ten countries. It was the first time in its 80-year history that the orchestra had played outside of North America. The orchestra received plaudits from European critics, and was welcomed home at the end of the tour with a ticker-tape parade.

On May 5, 2008, the CSO announced the appointment of Riccardo Muti as its 10th music director, starting with the 2010–2011 season After extending his stay several times, the CSO confirmed that Muti would conclude his active directorship of the orchestra at end of the 2022–2023 season. In September 2023, the orchestra granted Muti the title of Music Director Emeritus for life.

In 2022, Klaus Mäkelä first guest-conducted the CSO, and returned for a guest-conducting appearance in February 2023. In April 2024, the CSO announced the appointment of Mäkelä as its next music director, effective with the 2027–2028 season, with an initial contract of five years.

The orchestra has also hosted many distinguished guest conductors, including Thomas Beecham, Leonard Bernstein, Aaron Copland, Edward Elgar, Morton Gould, Paul Hindemith, Erich Kunzel, Erich Leinsdorf, Charles Munch, Eugene Ormandy, André Previn, Sergei Prokofiev, Sergei Rachmaninoff, Maurice Ravel, Arnold Schoenberg, Leonard Slatkin, Leopold Stokowski, James Levine, Richard Strauss, George Szell, Klaus Tennstedt, Michael Tilson Thomas, Bruno Walter, and John Williams. Many of these guests have also recorded with the orchestra. Carlos Kleiber made his only symphonic guest appearances in America with the CSO in October 1978 and June 1983.

The three principal guest conductors of the orchestra have been Carlo Maria Giulini, Claudio Abbado, and Pierre Boulez.

The CSO holds an annual fundraiser, originally known as the Chicago Symphony Marathon, more recently as &quot;Radiothon&quot; and &quot;Symphonython&quot;, in conjunction with Chicago radio station WFMT. As part of the event, from 1986 through 2008, the orchestra released tracks from their broadcast archives on double LP/CD collections, as well as two larger sets of broadcasts and rarities (CSO: The First 100 Years, 12 CDs, 1991; CSO in the 20th Century: Collector&#x27;s Choice, 10 CDs, 2000).

==Ravinia Festival==
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra maintains a summer home at the Ravinia Festival in Ravinia Park, Highland Park, Illinois. The CSO first performed there on November 20, 1905, during Ravinia Park&#x27;s second year since its opening in 1904, and continued to appear there on and off through August 1931, after which Ravinia Park closed for four years due to the Great Depression. The year of Ravinia Park&#x27;s re-opening, the CSO helped to inaugurate the first season of the Ravinia Festival on July 3, 1936, and has been in residence at the Festival every summer since. The one exception to this is during the COVID-19 pandemic, when the orchestra did not perform any concerts due to Ravinia announcing that it had cancelled all concerts for the 2020 season.

Many conductors have made their debut with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra at Ravinia, and several have gone on to become music director for the festival, including Seiji Ozawa (1964–68), James Levine (1973–93), and Christoph Eschenbach (1995–2003). James Conlon held the title from 2005 until 2015. The Ravinia Festival created an honorific title for James Levine, &quot;Conductor Laureate&quot;, and signed him to a five-year renewable contract beginning in 2018. On December 4, 2017, after Levine was accused of sexual misconduct, the Ravinia Festival severed all ties with Levine, and terminated his five-year contract to lead the Chicago Symphony there. Marin Alsop served as the festival&#x27;s first artistic curator from 2018 until 2019. She became its chief conductor and curator in 2021.

==Recordings==
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra has amassed an extensive discography. Recordings by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and the Chicago Symphony Chorus have earned sixty-five Grammy Awards from the Recording Academy. These include several Classical Album of the Year awards, awards in Best Classical Performance in vocal soloist, choral, instrumental, engineering and orchestral categories.

On May 1, 1916, Frederick Stock and the orchestra recorded the Wedding March from Felix Mendelssohn&#x27;s music to &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; for Columbia Records. Stock and the CSO made numerous recordings for Columbia and the Victor Talking Machine Company/RCA Victor. The Chicago Symphony&#x27;s first electrical recordings were made for Victor in December 1925, including a performance of Karl Goldmark&#x27;s &quot;In Springtime&quot; overture. These early electrical recordings were made in Victor&#x27;s Chicago studios; within a couple of years Victor began recording the CSO in Orchestra Hall. Stock continued recording for Columbia and RCA Victor until his death in 1942.

In 1951, Rafael Kubelík made the first modern high fidelity recordings with the orchestra, in Orchestra Hall, for Mercury. Like the first electrical recordings, these performances were made with a single microphone. Philips has reissued these performances on compact disc with the original Mercury label and liner notes.
In March 1954, Fritz Reiner made the first stereophonic recordings with the CSO, again in Orchestra Hall, for RCA Victor, including performances of two symphonic poems by Richard Strauss: &quot;Ein Heldenleben&quot; and &quot;Also sprach Zarathustra&quot;. Reiner and the orchestra continued to record for RCA Victor through 1963. These were mostly recorded in RCA Victor&#x27;s triple-channel &quot;Living Stereo&quot; process. RCA has digitally remastered the recordings and released them on CD and SACD. Jean Martinon also recorded with the CSO for RCA Victor during the 1960s, producing performances that have been reissued on CD.

Sir Georg Solti recorded with the CSO primarily for Decca Records. These Solti recordings were issued in the U.S. on the London label and include a highly acclaimed Mahler series, recorded, in part, in the historic Medinah Temple—some installments were recorded in the Krannert Center for the Performing Arts at the University of Illinois (in Urbana), as well as in the Sofiensaal in Vienna, Austria. Many of the recordings with Daniel Barenboim were released on Teldec.

In 2007, the Chicago Symphony formed its own recording label, CSO Resound. After an agreement was reached with the Orchestra&#x27;s musicians, arrangements were made for new recordings to be released digitally at online outlets and on compact disc. The first CSO Resound CD, a recording of Haitink&#x27;s rendition of Mahler&#x27;s Third Symphony, was released in the spring of 2007. Releases that followed included Bruckner&#x27;s Seventh Symphony, Mahler&#x27;s Sixth Symphony, and Shostakovich&#x27;s Fourth Symphony (Grammy winner), all conducted by Haitink; Shostakovich&#x27;s Fifth Symphony led by Myung-Whun Chung; &quot;Traditions and Transformations: Sounds of Silk Road Chicago&quot; with the Orchestra&#x27;s Judson and Joyce Green Creative Consultant Yo-Yo Ma (Grammy winner); and recordings of Verdi&#x27;s Requiem (Grammy winner) and Otello, under the direction of Muti.

The Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus have recorded the music for two movies: &quot;Fantasia 2000&quot; conducted by James Levine and &quot;Lincoln&quot; conducted by John Williams. Selections from the Orchestra and Chorus&#x27;s recording of Johann Sebastian Bach&#x27;s &quot;St Matthew Passion&quot;, conducted by Sir Georg Solti, were used in the movie &quot;Casino&quot;.

==Broadcasts==
The Chicago Symphony first broadcast on the radio in 1925. Though often sporadic, there have been broadcasts ever since. With the 1965–1966 season, Chicago radio station WFMT began regular tape-delayed stereo broadcasts of CSO concerts, running through the 1968–1969 season. They resumed from 1976 through the 2000–2001 season before ceasing due to lack of sponsorship. In 2007, the broadcasts once again resumed with a 52-week series. The broadcasts were originally sponsored by BP and air on 98.7 WFMT in Chicago and the WFMT Radio Network. They consist of 39 weeks of recordings of live concerts, as well as highlights from the CSO&#x27;s vast discography.

The CSO appeared in a series of telecasts on WGN-TV, beginning in 1953. The early 1960s saw the videotaped telecast series &quot;Music from Chicago&quot;, conducted by Fritz Reiner and guest conductors including Arthur Fiedler, George Szell, Pierre Monteux, and Charles Munch. Many of these televised concerts, from 1953 to 1963, have since been released to DVD by Video Artists International.

Sir Georg Solti also conducted a series of concerts with the Chicago Symphony that were recorded for the European firm Unitel and were broadcast in the 1970s on PBS. They have subsequently been reissued by Decca Video on DVD.

== Civic Orchestra of Chicago ==
Frederick Stock founded the Civic Orchestra of Chicago, the first training orchestra in the United States affiliated with a major symphony orchestra, in 1919. Its goal is to recruit pre-professional musicians and train them as high-level orchestra players. Many alumni have gone on to play for the CSO or other major orchestras. It is currently the only training orchestra sponsored by a major orchestra in North America.

The Civic Orchestra performs half a dozen orchestral concerts and a chamber music series annually in Symphony Center and in other venues throughout the Chicago area free of charge to the public.

== Music directors and titled positions ==

===Music Directors===
* Theodore Thomas (1891–1905)
* Frederick Stock (1905–1942)
* Désiré Defauw (1943–1947)
* Artur Rodziński (1947–1948)
* Rafael Kubelík (1950–1953)
* Fritz Reiner (1953–1962; Musical Advisor, 1962–1963)
* Jean Martinon (1963–1968)
* Irwin Hoffman (1968–1969, Acting Music Director)
* Sir Georg Solti (1969–1991)
* Daniel Barenboim (1991–2006)
* Riccardo Muti (2010–2023)
* Klaus Mäkelä (designate, effective 2027)

===Principal Conductor===
* Bernard Haitink (2006–2010)

===Other Titled conductors===
* Carlo Maria Giulini – Principal Guest Conductor (1969–1972)
* Claudio Abbado – Principal Guest Conductor (1982–1985) 
* Sir Georg Solti – Music Director Laureate (1991–1997)
* Pierre Boulez – Principal Guest Conductor (1995–2006); Conductor Emeritus (2006–2016)
* Riccardo Muti – Music Director Emeritus for Life (2023–present)

===Composers-in-residence===
* John Corigliano (1987–1990)
* Shulamit Ran (1990–1997)
* Augusta Read Thomas (1997–2006)
* Osvaldo Golijov (2006–2010)
* Mark-Anthony Turnage (2006–2010)
* Anna Clyne (2010–2015)
* Mason Bates (2010–2015)
* Elizabeth Ogonek (2015–2018)
* Samuel Adams (2015–2018)
* Missy Mazzoli (2018–2021)
* Jessie Montgomery (2021–2024)

===Assistant / associate conductors===
* Arthur Mees – Assistant (1896–1898)
* Frederick Stock – Assistant (1899–1905)
* Eric DeLamarter – Assistant (1918–1933); Associate (1933–1936)
* Hans Lange – Associate, (1936–1943); Conductor (1943–1946)
* Tauno Hannikainen – Assistant (1947–1949); Associate (1949–1950)
* George Schick – Assistant (1950–1952); Associate (1952–1956)
* Walter Hendl – Associate (1958–1964)
* Irwin Hoffman – Assistant (1964–1965); Associate (1965–1968); Conductor (1969–1970)
* Henry Mazer – Associate (1970–1986)
* Kenneth Jean – Associate (1986–1993)
* Michael Morgan – Assistant (1986–1993)
* Yaron Traub – Assistant (1995–1998), Associate (1998–1999)
* William Eddins – Assistant (1995–1998); Associate (1998–1999); Resident (1999–2004)

===Ravinia Festival===
* Walter Hendl – Artistic Director (1959–1963)
* Seiji Ozawa – Music Director (1964–1968); Principal Conductor (1969)
* István Kertész – Principal Conductor (1970–1972)
* James Levine – Music Director (1973–1993)
* Christoph Eschenbach – Music Director (1995–2003)
* James Conlon – Music Director (2005–2015)
* Marin Alsop – Artistic Curator (2018–2019); Chief Conductor and Curator (2020–present)
==Honors and awards==

The Chicago Symphony Orchestra was voted the best orchestra in the United States and the fifth best orchestra in the world by editors of the British classical music magazine &quot;Gramophone&quot; in November 2008. The same was said by a panel of critics polled by the classical music website bachtrack in September 2015.

In 2011, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra was inducted into the American Classical Music Hall of Fame.

===Grammy Awards===
Recordings by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus have earned sixty-five Grammy Awards from the Recording Academy.

Riccardo Muti, former music director, has won two Grammy Awards, both with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus, for the recording of Verdi&#x27;s &quot;Messa da Requiem&quot; on the CSO Resound label. Duain Wolfe, chorus director, has won two Grammy Awards for his collaboration with the Chorus, also for Verdi&#x27;s &quot;Messa da Requiem&quot; on the CSO Resound label.

Bernard Haitink, former principal conductor, has won two Grammy Awards, including one with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra for the recording of Shostakovich&#x27;s Fourth Symphony on the CSO Resound label.

Pierre Boulez, former conductor emeritus and principal guest conductor, won twenty-six Grammy Awards including eight with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus. Boulez is the sixth all-time Grammy winner, behind Beyoncé (thirty-two), Sir Georg Solti (thirty-one), Quincy Jones (twenty-eight), Alison Krauss, and Chick Corea (twenty-seven each). Boulez also received the academy&#x27;s 2015 Lifetime Achievement Award.

Sir Georg Solti, former music director and music director laureate, won thirty-one Grammy Awards. He received seven awards in addition to his twenty-four awards with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus. In addition, Sir Georg Solti and producer John Culshaw received the first NARAS Trustees&#x27; Award in 1967 for their &quot;efforts, ingenuity, and artistic contributions&quot; in connection with the first complete recording of Richard Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot; with the Vienna Philharmonic. Solti also received the academy&#x27;s 1995 Lifetime Achievement Award.

Margaret Hillis, founder and longtime director of the Chicago Symphony Chorus, won nine Grammy Awards for her collaborations with the Orchestra and Chorus.
==Volunteer groups==
*African American Network
*Governing Members (established 1894)
*Latino Alliance
*League of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra Association (formerly the Women&#x27;s Association, established 1934)
*Overture Council (established 2009)
*Women&#x27;s Board 

==See also==
* List of museums and cultural institutions in Chicago
*Chicago Symphony Chorus

==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
== External links ==
* 
* Experience CSO
* &quot;From the Archives&quot; blog
* Chicago Symphony Chorus website
* Chicago Symphony Orchestra Sounds and Stories (archived)
* Silk Road website
* Interviews with Sir Georg Solti by Bruce Duffie, May &amp; October 1988
* Interview with Margaret Hillis, founder of the Chicago Symphony Chorus, by Bruce Duffie, July 1986</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="4" end="30" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="Chicago Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="32" end="35" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="CSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q62613" start="110" end="125" title="Theodore Thomas (conductor)" label="Theodore Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154167" start="170" end="185" title="Symphony Center" label="Symphony Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402561" start="230" end="246" title="Ravinia Festival" label="Ravinia Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q50806463" start="248" end="260" title="Klaus Mäkelä" label="Klaus Mäkelä"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="408" end="421" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q858862" start="613" end="621" title="Big Five (orchestras)" label="Big Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q62613" start="703" end="718" title="Theodore Thomas (conductor)" label="Theodore Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975731" start="867" end="885" title="Auditorium Theater" label="Auditorium Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="959" end="980" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="986" end="1011" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212932" start="1020" end="1050" title="Saint Louis Symphony Orchestra" label="Saint Louis Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154167" start="1053" end="1067" title="Symphony Center" label="Orchestra Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="1151" end="1168" title="Daniel H. Burnham" label="Daniel H. Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q481438" start="1511" end="1526" title="Frederick Stock" label="Frederick Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915399" start="1698" end="1711" title="Désiré Defauw" label="Désiré Defauw"/>
<link wikidata="Q554610" start="1713" end="1728" title="Artur Rodziński" label="Artur Rodziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q158017" start="1730" end="1744" title="Rafael Kubelík" label="Rafael Kubelík"/>
<link wikidata="Q364179" start="1746" end="1758" title="Fritz Reiner" label="Fritz Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q444674" start="1760" end="1773" title="Jean Martinon" label="Jean Martinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="1775" end="1786" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q152768" start="1792" end="1808" title="Daniel Barenboim" label="Daniel Barenboim"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="2397" end="2415" title="ticker-tape parade" label="ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="2471" end="2484" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q50806463" start="2807" end="2819" title="Klaus Mäkelä" label="Klaus Mäkelä"/>
<link wikidata="Q313714" start="3158" end="3172" title="Thomas Beecham" label="Thomas Beecham"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="3174" end="3191" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="3193" end="3206" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="3208" end="3220" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352656" start="3222" end="3234" title="Morton Gould" label="Morton Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="3236" end="3250" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q724158" start="3252" end="3264" title="Erich Kunzel" label="Erich Kunzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q78602" start="3266" end="3281" title="Erich Leinsdorf" label="Erich Leinsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q503940" start="3283" end="3296" title="Charles Munch (conductor)" label="Charles Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q344023" start="3298" end="3312" title="Eugene Ormandy" label="Eugene Ormandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="3314" end="3326" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="3328" end="3344" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="3346" end="3365" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="3367" end="3380" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="3382" end="3399" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q509870" start="3401" end="3416" title="Leonard Slatkin" label="Leonard Slatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q297562" start="3418" end="3435" title="Leopold Stokowski" label="Leopold Stokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q336388" start="3437" end="3449" title="James Levine" label="James Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="3451" end="3466" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q310638" start="3468" end="3480" title="George Szell" label="George Szell"/>
<link wikidata="Q61180" start="3482" end="3497" title="Klaus Tennstedt" label="Klaus Tennstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q520493" start="3499" end="3520" title="Michael Tilson Thomas" label="Michael Tilson Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156910" start="3522" end="3534" title="Bruno Walter" label="Bruno Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285" start="3540" end="3553" title="John Williams" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q160706" start="3615" end="3629" title="Carlos Kleiber" label="Carlos Kleiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q430829" start="3792" end="3811" title="Carlo Maria Giulini" label="Carlo Maria Giulini"/>
<link wikidata="Q151608" start="3813" end="3827" title="Claudio Abbado" label="Claudio Abbado"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="3833" end="3846" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949402" start="4047" end="4051" title="WFMT" label="WFMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402561" start="4432" end="4448" title="Ravinia Festival" label="Ravinia Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q576671" start="4466" end="4489" title="Highland Park, Illinois" label="Highland Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4729" end="4745" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402561" start="4844" end="4860" title="Ravinia Festival" label="Ravinia Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4980" end="4997" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q313649" start="5294" end="5305" title="Seiji Ozawa" label="Seiji Ozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336388" start="5317" end="5329" title="James Levine" label="James Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60814" start="5345" end="5365" title="Christoph Eschenbach" label="Christoph Eschenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348801" start="5379" end="5391" title="James Conlon" label="James Conlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q242931" start="5788" end="5799" title="Marin Alsop" label="Marin Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095798" start="6065" end="6088" title="Chicago Symphony Chorus" label="Chicago Symphony Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6112" end="6125" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="6131" end="6152" title="the Recording Academy" label="the Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q481438" start="6345" end="6360" title="Frederick Stock" label="Frederick Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="6411" end="6428" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305214" start="6451" end="6481" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (Mendelssohn)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="6492" end="6508" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="6574" end="6604" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="6605" end="6615" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6651" end="6672" title="Sound_recording_and_reproduction#Electrical" label="electrical recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q239214" start="6739" end="6752" title="Karl Goldmark" label="Karl Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q158017" start="7038" end="7052" title="Rafael Kubelík" label="Rafael Kubelík"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="7075" end="7088" title="high fidelity" label="high fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="7143" end="7150" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="7245" end="7252" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q364179" start="7365" end="7377" title="Fritz Reiner" label="Fritz Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="7521" end="7536" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304650" start="7544" end="7559" title="Ein Heldenleben" label="Ein Heldenleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q35720" start="7576" end="7599" title="Also sprach Zarathustra (Strauss)" label="Also sprach Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q444674" start="7857" end="7870" title="Jean Martinon" label="Jean Martinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="7986" end="8001" title="Sir Georg Solti" label="Sir Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="8038" end="8051" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535817" start="8059" end="8075" title="Georg Solti discography" label="Solti recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="8151" end="8157" title="Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687867" start="8201" end="8215" title="Medinah Temple" label="Medinah Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436110" start="8255" end="8294" title="Krannert Center for the Performing Arts" label="Krannert Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="8302" end="8324" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q462184" start="8329" end="8335" title="Urbana, Illinois" label="Urbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q876053" start="8356" end="8366" title="Sofiensaal" label="Sofiensaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152768" start="8415" end="8431" title="Daniel Barenboim" label="Daniel Barenboim"/>
<link wikidata="Q456999" start="8449" end="8455" title="Teldec" label="Teldec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014212" start="8520" end="8531" title="CSO Resound" label="CSO Resound"/>
<link wikidata="Q158370" start="8748" end="8762" title="Bernard Haitink" label="Haitink&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q153778" start="9063" end="9079" title="Myung-Whun Chung" label="Myung-Whun Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="9222" end="9230" title="Yo-Yo Ma" label="Yo-Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356210" start="9279" end="9286" title="Verdi Requiem" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q172324" start="9307" end="9313" title="Otello" label="Otello"/>
<link wikidata="Q30937" start="9433" end="9446" title="Fantasia 2000" label="Fantasia 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q32433" start="9489" end="9496" title="Lincoln (2012 film)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="9592" end="9613" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q379111" start="9627" end="9645" title="St Matthew Passion" label="St Matthew Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220910" start="9712" end="9718" title="Casino (1995 film)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817258" start="9931" end="9943" title="Broadcast delay" label="tape-delayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="10222" end="10224" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949402" start="10241" end="10245" title="WFMT" label="WFMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949402" start="10265" end="10269" title="WFMT" label="WFMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="10448" end="10454" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182721" start="10532" end="10550" title="Music from Chicago" label="Music from Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q709361" start="10615" end="10629" title="Arthur Fiedler" label="Arthur Fiedler"/>
<link wikidata="Q310638" start="10631" end="10643" title="George Szell" label="George Szell"/>
<link wikidata="Q434972" start="10645" end="10659" title="Pierre Monteux" label="Pierre Monteux"/>
<link wikidata="Q503940" start="10665" end="10678" title="Charles Munch (conductor)" label="Charles Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130683" start="10768" end="10795" title="Video Artists International" label="Video Artists International"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="10802" end="10813" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="10959" end="10962" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62613" start="11745" end="11760" title="Theodore Thomas (conductor)" label="Theodore Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q481438" start="11775" end="11790" title="Frederick Stock" label="Frederick Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915399" start="11805" end="11818" title="Désiré Defauw" label="Désiré Defauw"/>
<link wikidata="Q554610" start="11833" end="11848" title="Artur Rodziński" label="Artur Rodziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q158017" start="11863" end="11877" title="Rafael Kubelík" label="Rafael Kubelík"/>
<link wikidata="Q364179" start="11892" end="11904" title="Fritz Reiner" label="Fritz Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q444674" start="11947" end="11960" title="Jean Martinon" label="Jean Martinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410522" start="11975" end="11988" title="Irwin Hoffman" label="Irwin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="12030" end="12041" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q152768" start="12056" end="12072" title="Daniel Barenboim" label="Daniel Barenboim"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="12087" end="12100" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q50806463" start="12115" end="12127" title="Klaus Mäkelä" label="Klaus Mäkelä"/>
<link wikidata="Q158370" start="12185" end="12200" title="Bernard Haitink" label="Bernard Haitink"/>
<link wikidata="Q430829" start="12246" end="12265" title="Carlo Maria Giulini" label="Carlo Maria Giulini"/>
<link wikidata="Q151608" start="12308" end="12322" title="Claudio Abbado" label="Claudio Abbado"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="12370" end="12381" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="12422" end="12435" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="12510" end="12523" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q450620" start="12606" end="12621" title="John Corigliano" label="John Corigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889606" start="12636" end="12648" title="Shulamit Ran" label="Shulamit Ran"/>
<link wikidata="Q514584" start="12663" end="12682" title="Augusta Read Thomas" label="Augusta Read Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q701257" start="12697" end="12712" title="Osvaldo Golijov" label="Osvaldo Golijov"/>
<link wikidata="Q528639" start="12727" end="12747" title="Mark-Anthony Turnage" label="Mark-Anthony Turnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766925" start="12762" end="12772" title="Anna Clyne" label="Anna Clyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165161" start="12787" end="12798" title="Mason Bates" label="Mason Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q43198571" start="12813" end="12829" title="Elizabeth Ogonek" label="Elizabeth Ogonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156575" start="12844" end="12856" title="Samuel Adams (composer)" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879955" start="12871" end="12884" title="Missy Mazzoli" label="Missy Mazzoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q62113600" start="12899" end="12916" title="Jessie Montgomery" label="Jessie Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12971" end="12982" title="Arthur Mees" label="Arthur Mees"/>
<link wikidata="Q481438" start="13009" end="13024" title="Frederick Stock" label="Frederick Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351189" start="13051" end="13066" title="Eric DeLamarter" label="Eric DeLamarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q90873" start="13116" end="13126" title="Hans Lange (conductor)" label="Hans Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916885" start="13177" end="13194" title="Tauno Hannikainen" label="Tauno Hannikainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18280265" start="13244" end="13257" title="George Schick" label="George Schick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032737" start="13307" end="13319" title="Walter Hendl" label="Walter Hendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410522" start="13346" end="13359" title="Irwin Hoffman" label="Irwin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725652" start="13432" end="13443" title="Henry Mazer" label="Henry Mazer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13470" end="13482" title="Kenneth Jean" label="Kenneth Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832903" start="13509" end="13523" title="Michael Morgan (conductor)" label="Michael Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049448" start="13550" end="13561" title="Yaron Traub" label="Yaron Traub"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195521" start="13611" end="13625" title="William Eddins" label="William Eddins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032737" start="13721" end="13733" title="Walter Hendl" label="Walter Hendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q313649" start="13768" end="13779" title="Seiji Ozawa" label="Seiji Ozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503253" start="13839" end="13853" title="István Kertész (conductor)" label="István Kertész"/>
<link wikidata="Q336388" start="13890" end="13902" title="James Levine" label="James Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60814" start="13934" end="13954" title="Christoph Eschenbach" label="Christoph Eschenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348801" start="13986" end="13998" title="James Conlon" label="James Conlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q242931" start="14030" end="14041" title="Marin Alsop" label="Marin Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542344" start="14320" end="14330" title="Gramophone (magazine)" label="Gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604660" start="14433" end="14442" title="bachtrack" label="bachtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743420" start="14525" end="14562" title="American Classical Music Hall of Fame" label="American Classical Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="14664" end="14677" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="14687" end="14704" title="Recording Academy" label="Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="14707" end="14720" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310132" start="14914" end="14925" title="Duain Wolfe" label="Duain Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q158370" start="15087" end="15102" title="Bernard Haitink" label="Bernard Haitink"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="15293" end="15306" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="15509" end="15516" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="15535" end="15546" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="15561" end="15573" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q371782" start="15590" end="15603" title="Alison Krauss" label="Alison Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="15609" end="15620" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="15687" end="15713" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="15720" end="15731" title="Georg Solti" label="Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227849" start="15967" end="15979" title="John Culshaw" label="John Culshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593916" start="16005" end="16025" title="Grammy Trustees Award" label="Trustees&amp;#x27; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="16154" end="16168" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="16182" end="16205" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="16221" end="16240" title="Vienna Philharmonic" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="16286" end="16312" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759516" start="16315" end="16330" title="Margaret Hillis" label="Margaret Hillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095798" start="16369" end="16392" title="Chicago Symphony Chorus" label="Chicago Symphony Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015809" start="16759" end="16811" title="List of museums and cultural institutions in Chicago" label="List of museums and cultural institutions in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095798" start="16813" end="16836" title="Chicago Symphony Chorus" label="Chicago Symphony Chorus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150204" wikidata="Q270734" url="?curid=150204" title="Broken Hill">
<text>Broken Hill is a city in the far west region of outback New South Wales, Australia. An inland mining city, it is near the border with South Australia on the crossing of the Barrier Highway (A32) and the Silver City Highway (B79), in the Barrier Range. It is above sea level, with a cold semi-arid climate, and an average rainfall of . The closest major city is Mildura, to the south and the nearest State Capital City is Adelaide, the capital of South Australia, which is more than to the southwest and linked via route A32, the Barrier Highway.

The town is prominent in Australia&#x27;s mining, industrial relations and economic history after the discovery of silver-lead-zinc ore led to the opening of various mines, thus establishing Broken Hill&#x27;s recognition as a prosperous mining town well into the 1990s. Despite experiencing a slowing economic situation into the late 1990s and 2000s, Broken Hill itself was listed on the National Heritage List in 2015 and remains Australia&#x27;s longest running mining town.

Broken Hill, historically considered one of Australia&#x27;s boomtowns, has been referred to as &quot;The Silver City&quot;, and less commonly as the &quot;Oasis of the West&quot;, and the &quot;Capital of the Outback&quot;. Although over west of Sydney and surrounded by desert, the town has prominent park and garden displays and offers a number of attractions, such as the Living Desert Sculptures. The town has a high potential for solar power, given its extensive daylight hours of sunshine. 
In the Broken Hill region, the major Aboriginal language groups are the Paakantji, Mayyankapa, and Nyiimpaa.

==Time zone==
Unlike the rest of New South Wales, Broken Hill (and the surrounding region) observes Australian Central Standard Time (UTC+9:30), the same time zone used in nearby South Australia. This is because at the time the Australian dominions adopted standard time, Broken Hill&#x27;s only direct rail link was with Adelaide, not Sydney. Similarly, Broken Hill is regarded as part of South Australia for the purposes of postal parcels rates and telephone charges. Broken Hill also used to be a break of gauge station where the state railway systems of South Australia and New South Wales met.

==Town name==

Broken Hill is Australia&#x27;s longest-lived mining city. In 1844, the explorer Charles Sturt saw and named the Barrier Range, and at the time referred to a &quot;Broken Hill&quot; in his diary. Silver ore was later discovered on this &quot;broken hill&quot; in 1883 by boundary rider Charles Rasp. The &quot;broken hill&quot; that gave its name to Broken Hill actually consisted of a number of hills that appeared to have a break in them. This &quot;broken hill&quot; no longer exists, having been mined away.

The area was originally known as Willyama.

==Geology==
Broken Hill&#x27;s massive orebody, which formed about 1,800 million years ago, has proved to be among the world&#x27;s largest silver–lead–zinc mineral deposits. The orebody is shaped like a boomerang plunging into the earth at its ends and outcropping in the centre. The protruding tip of the orebody stood out as a jagged rocky ridge amongst undulating plain country on either side. This was known as the Broken Hill by early pastoralists. Miners called the ore body the Line of Lode. A unique mineral recently identified from Broken Hill has been named Nyholmite after Ron Nyholm (1917–1971). Lead with the isotope signature of the Broken Hill deposits has been found across the entire continent of Antarctica in ice cores dating back to the late nineteenth century.
==History==
The earliest human settlers in the area around Broken Hill are thought to have been the Wiljakali Indigenous Australians, once thought to have only intermittently lived in the area because of the lack of permanent water sources.
The first British to enter the area was the 1844 expedition led by soldier and explorer Charles Sturt. He was guided there along Stephens Creek by an Indigenous teenager from Menindee called Topar. Sturt saw and named the Barrier Range while searching for an inland sea; so naming it because it blocked his journey north.

Pastoralists first began settling the area in the 1850s, and the main trade route to the area was along the Darling River.

Broken Hill was founded in 1883 by boundary rider Charles Rasp, who patrolled the Mount Gipps fences. In 1883, he discovered what he thought was tin, but the samples proved to be silver and lead. The orebody they came from proved to be the largest and richest of its kind in the world. Rasp and six associates founded the Broken Hill Proprietary Company (BHP), later BHP Billiton, and now BHP again, in 1885 as the Syndicate of Seven. By 1915, BHP had realised that its ore reserves were limited and began to diversify into steel production. Mining at the BHP mines at Broken Hill ceased 28 February 1939. BHP was not the only mining operation at Broken Hill though, and mining continued at the southern and northern ends of the Line of Lode. In the early 20th century, Broken Hill was a centre of mining innovation resulting in a viable froth flotation process. Currently the southern and northern operations are run by Perilya Limited, who plan to open further mines along the Line of Lode.

In 1892 Broken Hill Gaol was built, designed by the Colonial Architect, James Barnet, who also designed the Sydney Museum, among others. Its construction cost £15,000, and was carried out by Dobbee and Son. It opened on 8 November 1892 as a 90-bed facility with five prison wardens and initially holding two female and 19 male prisoners.

The Battle of Broken Hill took place on New Year&#x27;s Day 1915 when two Afghan men, pushing an ice-cream cart, hoisted a Turkish Flag and fired upon a trainload of people who were headed to a New Years Day picnic. Since Australia was at war at the time with the Ottoman Empire, the men were first thought to be Turkish, but were later identified as being from the British colony of India (modern day Pakistan). They killed four and wounded six, before they were killed by a group of policemen and soldiers. The battle witnessed one of the first shots on Australian soil during World War I.

In 1918, the Italian Ambassador to Australia, Emilio Eles, with the help of the Australian police and the army, organised the roundup of Italian deserters working there as miners, to be forcibly sent back to Italy to fight in the war.

Broken Hill is also known for its input into the formation of the labour movement in Australia, and has a rich trade union history. Some of the most bitter industrial disputes have been fought in Broken Hill in 1892, 1909, and 1919. The last of these led to the formation in 1923 of the Barrier Industrial Council, a group of 18 trade unions, which became one of the most influential organisations in the politics of the city. Like many &quot;outback&quot; towns, Broken Hill was built on precious metals, having once had the world&#x27;s richest deposits of lead, zinc and silver. Although now depleted somewhat, mining still yields around two million tonnes annually. Some mine tours are available. Sheep farming is now one of the principal industries in the area and there are considerably more sheep than people – almost 2 million Merino sheep.

On 10 January 2007, the Broken Hill City Council was dismissed by the NSW Minister for Local Government following a public inquiry.

Parts of the town received record rainfall totals since records began in 1884, with total exceeding fell in a 24-hour period on 16 March 2022. The main street resembled a river in the floods that followed resulting in the death of one man.

==Heritage listings==

Broken Hill has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:
* 227 Argent Street: Palace Hotel
* 258–260 Argent Street: Broken Hill Post Office
* 404–408 Argent Street: Walter Sully Emporium
* Broken Hill railway: Broken Hill railway station
* Buck Street: Broken Hill Mosque
* Cobalt Street: Wesley Uniting Church
* 160 Crystal Street: Seppelts Warehouse
* East of corner of Gaffney and Oxide Streets, Proprietary Square: First BHP Offices Chimney Ruin
*Hynes Street: 1915 Picnic Train Attack and White Rocks Reserve.
* 232 Lane Street: &quot;The Old Convent&quot; St Joseph&#x27;s Convent
* 34 Sulphide Street: Broken Hill Trades Hall
* 165 Wolfram Street: Broken Hill Synagogue
* Unnamed road, out: Day Dream Smelter

===Town listings===
The town was listed in 2001 as a National Engineering Landmark by Engineers Australia as part of its Engineering Heritage Recognition Program.

In 2015, Broken Hill became the first city in Australia to be included on the National Heritage List.

==Infrastructure==

===Electric power===

By the 1920s most of the nine mines on the Line of Lode had their own steam-powered electrical generators to power the surface and underground workings. As Broken Hill is in a desert with little water and virtually no fuel, steam generation was an expensive option. In 1927 a plan for a central power-generating facility was proposed by F. J. Mars, consulting electrical engineer with the Central Mine. The proposed powerhouse would provide electricity and compressed air.
The mines agreed and formed Western New South Wales Electric Power Pty Ltd to construct and operate the plant. The Sulzer diesel-powered plant was completed in 1931. This was one of the earliest examples of the use of diesel power generation in Australia. The plant was enlarged in 1950 to cope with increased demand from the North Mine. At the same time, a new power station run by the Southern Power Corporation (owned by Consolidated Zinc) was erected near the New Broken Hill Consolidated Mine to provide power to the southern end of the Line of Lode. Both stations were connected to a common grid that serviced the mines on the &quot;Line of Lode&quot;.

A HVDC back-to-back station with a maximum transmission rate of 40 megawatts was built at Broken Hill in 1986, to draw from the national grid. It consists of 2 static inverters working with a voltage of 8.33 kV. After this station was operational, the two other power stations closed and the equipment was gradually removed from the Central Power Station. The mothballed Southern Power Station, now owned by remnant miner Perilya, still houses five, 9 cylinder, Nordberg marine engines and two Mirrlees V16 marine engines.

In 2010, the Central Power Station (CPS) buildings were handed back to Broken Hill City Council for a proposed re-development as a film studio, due to the perceived need for a facility in Broken Hill by some local people in preparation for the production of &quot;Mad Max: Fury Road&quot;. The historic machinery was all removed and presumably scrapped and the giant pits that the motors were housed in were filled with concrete to convert the buildings into a warehouse type layout. The Broken Hill City Council has received considerable funding and spent a large amount of money and resources on establishing a film studio in the buildings but as at late 2014 these buildings remain largely empty and unused as the production of &quot;Fury Road&quot; shifted to Namibia, Africa, following higher than expected rainfall.

In late 2024, Broken Hill and its surrounds suffered a major power outage caused by a storm that hit in October.
===Solar power===

The high potential for solar power given the extensive daily hours of sunshine in the town led to construction of the 53 MW Broken Hill Solar Plant by AGL Energy. It was funded and supported by the Australian Government and New South Wales Government in a bid to encourage the move away from coal generated power in favour of renewable energy. The plant was completed in 2016 and was one of the largest in Australia at the time.

=== Compressed Air ===
From 2020, the Silver City Energy Storage 200 MW / 1600 MWh (8-hour) compressed-air energy storage (CAES) facility in the Potosi mine is proposed for Broken Hill to balance local electricity.

===Water===
Broken Hill has never had a permanent local water supply that meets the town&#x27;s needs. By 1888 when the town&#x27;s population had reached 5,000, the state government built a series of small storage tanks.

By the 1890s, mining development had increased to the point that there was a severe water shortage and the mines and the people fought for water. Emergency water supplies were shipped by rail from the Darling River. In 1891, the Stephens Creek Reservoir was completed by a private company. The cost of water was high but not excessive and people were willing to pay because the environment was arid. Another reservoir was built at Umberumberka, however variable rainfall meant supplemental supplies by rail and rationing was still needed.

In 1952, Broken Hill&#x27;s demands for a permanent water supply were met with the completion of a pipeline from Menindee. The pipeline could supply of water per hour. Water storage facilities that are part of the Menindee Lakes Scheme on the Darling River secured the water supply to Broken Hill, making it a relative oasis amid the harsh climate of the Australian outback. High evaporation rates have resulted in the policy of using the local storage for supply before using the pipeline.

In 2004, due to severe drought across much of the Murray Darling Basin Catchment area, the Darling River ceased to flow and the Menindee Lakes dried out. Broken Hill essentially ran out of water, with a muddy sludge coming out of some taps around Christmas time in 2004. The high salt content of the water led to a lot of damage to evaporative air conditioners and rusted out hot water systems at an alarming rate.

Due to the over-extraction of water from the tributaries to the Darling River in the early part of the 21st century, the Menindee pipeline became an insecure supply for the city, in its harsh semi-arid climate. In April 2019, a new New South Wales Government-funded pipeline was commissioned. The pipeline was constructed in a joint venture between John Holland Group, MPC Kinetic Group and TRILITY, running from Wentworth on the Murray River. There are four pumping stations along the route and a bulk water storage facility south of Broken Hill. The pipeline can supply up to of raw water per day.

==Transport==

The city&#x27;s isolation was a problem until the Adelaide narrow-gauge railway link was finished in 1888. Since the Government of New South Wales would not allow the South Australian Railways to continue its narrow-gauge railway across the border to the mines, the last were built and operated by a private company, the Silverton Tramway Company. &quot;Silverton&quot; was incorporated into the name because the railway was originally intended to serve the mining town of Silverton. However, by the time the railway reached Silverton it was already being eclipsed by the newer and bigger mine at Broken Hill. The main purpose of the railway was to transport concentrates and ores from the mines to the smelters and port facilities on the coast at Port Pirie, South Australia. Backloading to Broken Hill transported supplies, principally coal for boilers at the mines and timber for the timber sets used underground in mining. The Silverton Tramway Company was the most profitable railway company on the Australian Securities Exchange.

The main sidings and locomotive servicing facilities were in Railwaytown, a suburb of Broken Hill, with sidings running to the south and north to serve the mines. The main passenger station was at Sulphide Street.

From the later 1890s, Broken Hill Council campaigned for a street tramway to provide public transport around town and to the mines. Eventually the Government of New South Wales decided to build one, which was opened in 1902. It was operated by steam trams transferred from Sydney by sea and then by rail across South Australia. After World War I it sustained increasing losses until the Government of New South Wales closed the system in 1926.

A curiosity was the Tarrawingee Tramway, a narrow-gauge railway line that ran north from Broken Hill for about to an area of limestone deposit which was transported to Broken Hill for use in the smelters at the mines. The tramway opened in 1891 but closed in 1898 as the smelters moved to Port Pirie. In 1889 the Public Works Committee of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly recommended that the Government take over the line and it subsequently became a narrow-gauge part of the New South Wales Government Railways (NSWGR) run under contract by the Silverton Tramway Company.

An excursion train on the Silverton Tramway was fired on by two immigrant supporters of the wartime Ottoman Empire in 1915. They shot dead four people and wounded seven more before being killed by police and military officers.

In 1919, a rail link from Broken Hill to Menindee was opened, mainly to transport water from the Darling River to Broken Hill. Earlier sections of what became the Broken Hill railway line had been opened as early as 1885, reaching Trida in 1919, but a gap remained between Trida and Menindee. It was finally closed in 1925, resulting in a continuous route from Sydney to Broken Hill. The terminus for the train was at Crystal Street station, from the Silverton Tramway Company&#x27;s Sulphide Street station. The rolling stock was transported by sea to South Australia and the railway was supervised by the superintendent of the Broken Hill Government Tramways.

In 1927, the direct link to Sydney was completed. In 1937 the NSWGR placed the &quot;Silver City Comet&quot; into service – the first air-conditioned train in Australia, which ran between Broken Hill and Parkes. 

During World War II, land transportation between South Australia and the eastern states became important because of the threat posed by submarines and mines to coastal shipping. Extensive transshipment yards were constructed at Broken Hill in 1942 to allow transshipment of munitions.

With the purchase of the Sulphide Corporation by the Zinc Corporation in 1948, the modern Cockle Creek Smelter was constructed south of Newcastle. This started to take lead and zinc concentrates directly from Broken Hill via rail in the 1960s via the &quot;W44 Concentrate Train&quot;, marking the first major use of the rail link to the eastern seaboard.

In 1970 the gauge railway from Broken Hill to Port Pirie was superseded by a more heavily built gauge line, broadly following the narrow-gauge route but with easier gradients and broader curves. This completed the long-awaited transcontinental rail corridor from Sydney to Perth.

Broken Hill railway station is one of the stops of the &quot;Indian Pacific&quot; passenger service, operated by Journey Beyond, from Sydney to Perth via Adelaide. The weekly NSW TrainLink &quot;Outback Xplorer&quot; service was introduced in 1996; it arrives from Sydney on Mondays, departing Broken Hill on Tuesdays for the return to Sydney. NSW TrainLink also operates a daily road coach service connecting at Dubbo with the &quot;Central West XPT&quot; to Sydney. The return journey arrives daily at 22:45. On 24 June 2019, NSW TrainLink introduced a twice weekly coach service to Adelaide. NSW TrainLink also operates a coach service to Mildura, on Wednesdays and Fridays.

Rex Airlines operates air services from Broken Hill Airport to and from Adelaide, Dubbo, Griffith, Melbourne via Mildura and Sydney. Silver City Scenic Flights provide local scenic flights over the city, longer air safaris to various destinations in outback Australia and also private air charter services from Broken Hill Airport.

Local public transport is provided by CDC Broken Hill, operating four city bus routes from Monday to Saturday. The city is also serviced by two urban taxi companies.

==Climate==
Broken Hill has a cold semi arid climate (&quot;BSk&quot;) under the Köppen climate classification. Winters in Broken Hill are relatively cool; while summers are mostly hot and dry, with the odd cold front that causes a sharp temperature drop from time to time, on account of its far western longitude exposing it to cold airmasses off the Bight. The average maximum during the summer is about with an average of 25% humidity, although storms and cooler weather do occur. Broken Hill averages 157.3 clear days per year. Dust storms are a common problem in the desert, but in the late 1930s the people of Broken Hill, led by Mr Keast of the Zinc Corporation mine, created green reserves to surround the town thus protecting it from the worst of the storms. Dew points in the summer average between .

== Demographics ==


In 1933, Broken Hill was the third largest urban incorporated area in New South Wales, having a population of 26,925. Broken Hill&#x27;s population peaked at around 30,000 in the early 1960s and has shrunk by one third since the heyday of the 1970s zinc boom, with the decrease attributed to migration from the closure and consolidation of mining operations.
The estimated urban population of Broken Hill in 2021 was 17,588. The impact on Broken Hill&#x27;s economy of the shrinking mining industry and the more efficient mining rates resulted in a higher proportion of part-time employment, higher employment participation rate by females, a general reduction in overall household incomes, and an increase in the average age of the populace as the young leave seeking work.

In 2021, Broken Hill had an unemployment rate of 5.5%, which was higher than the state average of 4.9%.

Broken Hill has always had a small indigenous community. In recent decades, the proportion of the population identifying as Aboriginal has increased markedly; from 0.6% in 1971 to 10.0% in 2021, partly owing to the migration of non-indigenous Australians away from Broken Hill.

In the 19th and early 20th century Broken Hill was home to a community of Afghans. Afghans worked as camel drivers in parts of outback Australia, and they made a significant contribution to economic growth when transport options were limited. The camel drivers formed the first sizeable Muslim communities in Australia, and in Broken Hill they left their mark in the form of the first mosque in New South Wales (1880).

In 2021, Broken Hill had a population of 17,588. The median age is 44 and 10.0% of residents are Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander.

86.0% of residents are born in Australia; significantly higher than the national average of 66.9%. The most common other countries of birth are Philippines (1.1%), England (0.8%), and New Zealand (0.4%). The most common reported ancestries in Broken Hill are Australian (43.2%), English (37.8%) and Australian Aboriginal (9.2%). 77.8% of residents reported both parents being born in Australia, notably higher than the national average of 45.9%.

The top religious groups in Broken Hill are Catholic (18.0%), Anglican (8.8%) and Uniting Church (6.1%). 48.8% stated no religion and 9.9% did not answer the question.

==Economy==

Broken Hill has been and still is a town dominated by the mining industry, which led to considerable town prosperity in the 19th and 20th century. The mines founded on the Broken Hill Ore Deposit – the world&#x27;s richest lead-zinc ore body – have until recently provided the majority of direct employment and indirect employment in the city. The Broken Hill Proprietary Company became Australia&#x27;s largest mining company, and later became part of the world&#x27;s largest mining company, BHP.

Before the 1940s, mining was done by hand tools with high labour usage rates and included horse and mule-drawn carts underground. The advent of diesel powered mining equipment in the late 1940s and the move toward mechanised underground mining has resulted in less labour used per tonne of ore recovered, and the mine workforce has declined.

While the low metal prices of the 1990s led to the failure of miner Pasminco, the recent resurgence in metal prices has returned the sole existing operator, Perilya Limited, to profitability and prompted Consolidated Broken Hill Limited to advance development of the untouched Western Lodes and Centenary Lodes. This created over 70 jobs during development and will lead to a second, new, milling operation built within the town.

Owing to its exposure to the vagaries of the mining industry, and because of a swiftly shrinking population, similar to other rural centres, and compounded by its isolation, Broken Hill has encouraged its widespread artistic credentials and is promoting itself as a tourism destination to become less reliant upon mining as a source of employment.

Average incomes in Broken Hill are lower than the national average. According to the the median weekly household income in the city was $1,167; considerably lower than the national average of $1,746.

==Culture==

Broken Hill and the surrounding area has many natural and man-made attractions on offer for the tourist. These include mining operations (some open to the public), a visitor&#x27;s centre and lookout on top of the original Line of Lode mine, historic buildings, town history walking trails, many resident artists and galleries, the Sculpture Symposium, COBB &amp; Co coach &amp; wagon rides, Silverton Camel Farm, Stephen&#x27;s Creek, several quarries, lakes, the Mundi-Mundi plains, and sunsets. The Albert Kersten Mining and Minerals Museum, located on Bromide Street and Crystal Lane, explores the mining history of the town through geology exhibits.

Broken Hill is a major base for both the Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia and School of the Air.

The Willyama Art Society (&quot;Willyama&quot; being an Aboriginal word for &quot;hill with broken contour&quot;) was formed in 1961 under the driving influence of Florence May Harding, who was described in 2020 as &quot;the woman who helped make Broken Hill the Art Capital of Outback Australia&quot;. The founding members of the society included May Harding (secretary and then treasurer until 1971) and fellow artists Alan Cumpston, Kevin Hart (Pro Hart), Sam Byrne (painter), Susan Dorothea White, Joyce Condon, Hugh Schultz, and John Gregory. John Gregory was the society&#x27;s president for its first 15 years. The society organised the 2nd Open-air Art Exhibition in Sturt Park, Broken Hill, on November 19, 1961. May Harding wrote a long review of this exhibition, analysing the entries of many of the society&#x27;s artists. In mid-1962, six members of the society (White, Harding, Cumpston, Hart, Byrne and Gregory) exhibited landscapes in a travelling exhibition &quot;The Broken Hill Art Safari&quot;, which was arranged by the Airlines of South Australia in conjunction with the Royal South Australian Society of Arts and the Contemporary Arts Society, now known as the Contemporary Art Centre of South Australia. May Harding exhibited her painting &quot;Argent Street by Night&quot;. The exhibition was opened by Josephine Heysen, granddaughter of Hans Heysen, at the department store of John Martin &amp; Co. in Adelaide on July 10, 1962, before touring to Broken Hill, Whyalla, and Port Lincoln. In 2021, the outbreak of COVID-19 prevented the society from mounting its 60th anniversary exhibition instead its 61st anniversary was celebrated in an exhibition from December 2 to 17, 2022.

The Brushmen of the Bush was a group of artists who formed in Broken Hill in 1973. Members included Pro Hart and Jack Absalom. The Pro Hart Gallery and Sculpture Park contains a large collection of Hart&#x27;s paintings and sculptures, as well as many artworks of others that he collected during his lifetime. The gallery also features the Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow that he painted in his unique style.

Many clubs exist and are open most nights of the week until late. Establishments catering to both locals and tourists include the Musician&#x27;s Club and the Barrier Social Democratic Club.

Broken Hill has many literary connections. Crime writer Arthur Upfield developed a nostalgic association with the city after his first visit in 1910, and published &quot;The Bachelors of Broken Hill&quot; featuring his character Bonaparte. in 1958. Ion L. Idriess wrote the novel &quot;The Silver City&quot; based on the town. Kenneth Cook&#x27;s 1961 novel &quot;Wake in Fright&quot;—set in the fictional mining town of Bundanyabba—is a thinly disguised portrait of Broken Hill. Cook based the novel on eccentric ocker characters he befriended in Broken Hill, drawing on their penchant for ritualistic drinking, two-up, hunting and alpha-male mateship. The novel was adapted into a 1971 film of the same name, shot on location in Broken Hill and starring Gary Bond, Donald Pleasence and Broken Hill native Chips Rafferty in his final film role.

More recently, much of Australian novelist Max Barry&#x27;s 2013 novel &quot;Lexicon&quot; was set in Broken Hill. Writing celebrating this unique community is featured in “from this Broken Hill”.

Visitors are often fascinated by the houses with corrugated iron walls. Although corrugated iron was widely used as a roofing material throughout Australia, it was not commonly used for walls of houses.

Cheese slaw is a common and popular side dish in Broken Hill, and some residents claim the dish originated in the city.

== TV and film production ==
Broken Hill and the surrounding town of Silverton have been used as the base of various film productions.

One of the most well known films to heavily feature Broken Hill is &quot;The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert&quot; where various scenes in town and surrounding outback were filmed.
Mario&#x27;s Palace, now trading as The Palace Hotel, has the &quot;tack-o-rama&quot; mural featured in &quot;The Adventures of Priscilla&quot;.

Another well known film to be produced in the surrounds of Broken Hill is &quot;Mad Max 2&quot; with principal photography taking place across twelve weeks. Scenes were shot at the Pinnacles as well as the Mundi Mundi Plains. In 2022 filming for Mad Max film &quot;&quot; took place in Silverton.

Other film and TV productions include:
* &quot;Spirits of the Air, Gremlins of the Clouds&quot;
* &quot;Razorback&quot;
* &quot;Dirty Deeds&quot;
* &quot;The Flying Doctors&quot; on the Nine Network (1986–1993)
* &quot;RFDS: Royal Flying Doctor Service&quot; on the Seven Network (2021).

Other films and shows have used Broken Hill for only a few scenes, such as &quot;&quot;, &quot;800 Words&quot;, and &quot;&quot;.

== Health ==

Health effects related to the mining industry were endemic to Broken Hill for many years. In 1895, as many as 1 in 50 miners were estimated to be affected by lead poisoning. As recently as 1991, over 80% of children under 5 years of age had blood lead levels higher than government guidelines.

In the early 1990s an extensive government funded Lead Education program was established and people with children under 5 were able to have free lead testing of their children, homes and gardens to assess lead contamination levels. Any property that had considerably high lead levels in ceiling dust or garden soil was provided with free remediation works to reduce potential exposure to lead dust.

Lead contamination continues to be one of the most serious health concerns, particularly in children in Broken Hill. All infants are required to receive blood tests to examine lead levels. Streets located next to the major mine, including Gaffney, Eyre, and Slag Streets have the unenviable award of being classified as some of the most contaminated residential streets in New South Wales.

==Media==

The town is served by the local newspaper, the &quot;Barrier Daily Truth&quot;. Major metropolitan and national newspapers from Adelaide and Sydney are also available in Broken Hill.

Local radio stations that are available in the Broken Hill region include:

*2DRY FM – 107.7FM – community radio station
*Radio 1656 AM – Independent Local Radio
* ABC Local Radio as ABC Broken Hill – 999 AM (Since Broken Hill is on Central Time, ABC Local Radio&#x27;s national and statewide programming is received from Adelaide instead of Sydney when the Broken Hill studios are not broadcasting local programming.)
* Triple J (ABC) – 102.1 FM
* ABC Radio National – 102.9 FM
* ABC Classic FM – 103.7 FM
* ABC NewsRadio – 104.5 FM
* 2BH Commercial Radio – 567 AM
* 2HIL Hill FM Commercial Radio – 96.5 FM
*Silver City FM 88 – 88 FM
*Hype FM – 87.6 FM
*Vision Christian Radio – 94.9 FM

The following television channels are available free-to-air in the Broken Hill region.
* ABC which broadcasts the ABC TV, ABC Kids/ABC Family, ABC Entertains and ABC News channels.
* SBS which broadcasts the SBS TV, SBS Viceland, SBS Food, SBS World Movies, and SBS WorldWatch channels.
* NITV
* Southern Cross Seven (formerly &quot;Central Television&quot;.)
* Southern Cross Ten
* Southern Cross Nine
* 10 Peach (first digital multichannel ever launched in Broken Hill.)
* 10 Bold
* 9Go!
* 9Gem
* 9Life
* 7two
* 7mate

Although Broken Hill is in New South Wales, the programming schedules for these channels (excluding the ABC) is the same as those of Nine, Ten and Seven in Adelaide, with local adverts inserted and some variations for coverage of Australian Football League or National Rugby League matches, local and national news and current affairs programs, some lifestyle and light entertainment shows and infomercials. This is because Broken Hill, unlike the rest of New South Wales, is on Central Time. ABC channels are relayed from Sydney, so all programming is a half-hour earlier than advertised.

Southern Cross GTS/BKN broadcasts Seven Network programming including AFL telecasts and other sporting and major events. Southern Cross Ten broadcasts Network Ten output and some programming from 10 Bold and 10 Peach. Southern Cross Nine broadcasts Nine Network programming including NRL telecasts and other sporting events.

On 31 October 2010, Southern Cross GTS/BKN commenced broadcasting a full-time Channel Nine relay service. This service was initially a relay of TCN Sydney, with local advertising inserted until 2013 when it switched to a relay of NWS Adelaide.

The Seven Central service (unrelated to the original Central GTS/BKN) and Imparja Television are available via satellite and terrestrial transmission in the adjacent areas.

Broken Hill was featured during the second leg of &quot;The Amazing Race: Unfinished Business&quot;.

== Sport ==
Unusually for a town in New South Wales, Australian rules football is highly popular in Broken Hill and an important part of its culture. The Broken Hill Football League was founded in 1900 and consists of four clubs: North, South, West, and Central. AFL Broken Hill is affiliated with the South Australian National Football League due to the town&#x27;s geographic proximity and cultural ties with South Australia.

Broken Hill Speedway is a speedway track located west of the city, off the Barrier Highway at (). The 400m track holds sidecars and Demolition Derby. It held a major event in 2011, when hosting the motorcycle speedway final round of the Australian Solo Championship.

==Prison==
Broken Hill Correctional Centre, the state&#x27;s fourth-oldest prison still in operation, is located at 109 Gossan Street. It is important to the Far West region, as it allows for imprisonment closer to families who live in the area.

== Notable residents ==

* Steve Abbott – comedian
* Jack Absalom – (1927–2006) artist
* Troy Andrews – wheelchair basketballer and shooter
* June Bronhill – (born June Mary Gough, 1929–2005) Australian internationally renowned soprano light opera singer and musical theatre performer, whose adopted (stage) surname is a contraction of the name of her hometown
* Stuart Bown – Australian rules footballer
* Chad Bugeja – association footballer
* Trevor Butler – Big Brother Australia 2004 winner
* John Casey – commentator
* Isaac Cumming – Australian rules footballer
* Murray Farquhar – (1918–1993) NSW Chief Stipendiary Magistrate (1971–1977)
* Stewart Finlay-McLennan – actor
* Mary Gilmore – poet
* &quot;Lord Tim&quot; Grose – (Tim Ian Grosse) heavy metal musician
* Florence May Harding – (1908–1971) artist and teacher
* Pro Hart – (1928–2006) artist
* Ion Idriess – (1889–1979) novelist
* Roy Inwood – Victoria Cross recipient
* Jamaine Jones – Australian rules footballer
* Rae Desmond Jones – poet and novelist
* The Kid Laroi – rapper, singer-songwriter
* Bruce McGregor – Australian rules footballer
* Albert Morris – essayist and naturalist
* Ronald Sydney Nyholm – chemist and teacher
* Corey Page – actor
* Chips Rafferty – actor
* Stephen Rowe – singer-songwriter
* David Simmons – Former federal MP for Calare and Minister
* Robin Sellick – commercial photographer
* Richard Thilthorpe Slee – General Manager, BHP Mine
* Dean Solomon – Australian rules footballer
* Brent Staker – Australian rules footballer
* Thelma Thomas – costume designer
* Nikki Visser – model and actor
* Taylor Walker – Australian rules footballer
* Susan Dorothea White – artist
* Edward Emerton Warren – businessman

== See also ==

* Broken Hill Women&#x27;s Memorial
* St Josephs Convent

==References==
==Further reading==

* &quot;Railed Transport in the Broken Hill District&quot;. Singleton, C.C. Australian Railway Historical Society Bulletin, April; May; June; July; August 1962
* &quot;Sharing the Lode: The Broken Hill Migrant Story.&quot; Broken Hill Migrant Heritage Committee. Migrant Heritage Centre, 2006
* &quot; From This Broken Hill&quot; &quot;This is a portrait ... of a city and its surrounds. It is a collection of photography, poetry and prose around/about this place.&quot;, 2009

==External links==

* Official Broken Hill Campaign – Discover a lost world
* Official Broken Hill homepage
* Far West Proud | Love where you live!</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270734" start="0" end="11" title="Broken Hill" label="Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066749" start="29" end="37" title="Far West (New South Wales)" label="far west"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="48" end="55" title="outback" label="outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="56" end="71" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="94" end="100" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="134" end="149" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q808922" start="173" end="188" title="Barrier Highway" label="Barrier Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q114781" start="203" end="222" title="Silver City Highway" label="Silver City Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863592" start="237" end="250" title="Barrier Range" label="Barrier Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="282" end="304" title="cold semi-arid climate" label="cold semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q705829" start="361" end="368" title="Mildura" label="Mildura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="421" end="429" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="435" end="442" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q808922" start="529" end="544" title="Barrier Highway" label="Barrier Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="662" end="668" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="669" end="673" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="674" end="678" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="679" end="682" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="713" end="718" title="mining" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q781601" start="936" end="958" title="National Heritage List" label="National Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="1087" end="1095" title="boomtown" label="boomtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="1236" end="1243" title="Outback" label="Outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1273" end="1279" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="1462" end="1473" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223941" start="1596" end="1605" title="Paakantyi (Darling language)" label="Paakantji"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1768" end="1776" title="UTC+9:30" label="UTC+9:30"/>
<link wikidata="Q187180" start="1788" end="1797" title="Time in Australia" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="1813" end="1828" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1970" end="1976" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959245" start="2134" end="2148" title="break of gauge" label="break of gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q548928" start="2330" end="2343" title="Charles Sturt" label="Charles Sturt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863592" start="2362" end="2375" title="Barrier Range" label="Barrier Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2445" end="2451" title="Silver" label="Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="2452" end="2455" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952995" start="2520" end="2534" title="boundary rider" label="boundary rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q215415" start="2535" end="2547" title="Charles Rasp" label="Charles Rasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="2845" end="2848" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2946" end="2952" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="2953" end="2957" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2958" end="2962" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2963" end="2970" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131536" start="3010" end="3019" title="boomerang" label="boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="3143" end="3147" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q740445" start="3149" end="3154" title="ridge" label="ridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3375" end="3384" title="Nyholmite" label="Nyholmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q457335" start="3391" end="3401" title="Ronald Sydney Nyholm" label="Ron Nyholm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3689" end="3698" title="List of Indigenous Australian group names#W" label="Wiljakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="3699" end="3721" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q548928" start="3918" end="3931" title="Charles Sturt" label="Charles Sturt"/>
<link wikidata="Q973323" start="4005" end="4013" title="Menindee" label="Menindee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124733936" start="4021" end="4026" title="Topar" label="Topar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863592" start="4052" end="4065" title="Barrier Range" label="Barrier Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="4153" end="4165" title="Pastoralism" label="Pastoralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q181482" start="4261" end="4274" title="Darling River" label="Darling River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952995" start="4312" end="4326" title="boundary rider" label="boundary rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q215415" start="4327" end="4339" title="Charles Rasp" label="Charles Rasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934918" start="4359" end="4370" title="Mount Gipps Station" label="Mount Gipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="4422" end="4425" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="4456" end="4462" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="4467" end="4471" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="4477" end="4484" title="orebody" label="orebody"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="4666" end="4669" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662321" start="4692" end="4710" title="Syndicate of Seven" label="Syndicate of Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q63092390" start="4747" end="4759" title="ore reserves" label="ore reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="4801" end="4817" title="steel production" label="steel production"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973404" start="5279" end="5295" title="Broken Hill Gaol" label="Broken Hill Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q107970022" start="5323" end="5341" title="New South Wales Government Architect" label="Colonial Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053101" start="5343" end="5355" title="James Barnet" label="James Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q910232" start="5379" end="5392" title="Sydney Museum" label="Sydney Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365916" start="5538" end="5551" title="prison warden" label="prison warden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870567" start="5610" end="5635" title="The Battle of Broken Hill" label="The Battle of Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638392" start="5684" end="5690" title="Afghan (Australia)" label="Afghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5874" end="5888" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="5923" end="5930" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6189" end="6200" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="6550" end="6561" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863589" start="6726" end="6752" title="Barrier Industrial Council" label="Barrier Industrial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790941" start="7140" end="7153" title="Sheep farming" label="Sheep farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q925757" start="7313" end="7337" title="City of Broken Hill" label="Broken Hill City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865916" start="7359" end="7392" title="Minister for Local Government (New South Wales)" label="NSW Minister for Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628401" start="7769" end="7781" title="Palace Hotel, Broken Hill" label="Palace Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38154863" start="7807" end="7830" title="Broken Hill Post Office" label="Broken Hill Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q30102881" start="7856" end="7877" title="Walter Sully Emporium" label="Walter Sully Emporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871640" start="7901" end="7928" title="Broken Hill railway station" label="Broken Hill railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605999" start="7944" end="7962" title="Broken Hill Mosque" label="Broken Hill Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637539" start="7980" end="8001" title="Wesley Uniting Church, Broken Hill" label="Wesley Uniting Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632886" start="8024" end="8042" title="Seppelts Warehouse" label="Seppelts Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611679" start="8110" end="8140" title="First BHP Offices Chimney Ruin" label="First BHP Offices Chimney Ruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066792" start="8156" end="8204" title="1915 Picnic Train Attack and White Rocks Reserve" label="1915 Picnic Train Attack and White Rocks Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8225" end="8277" title="&amp;quot;The Old Convent&amp;quot; St Joseph&amp;#x27;s Convent" label="&amp;quot;The Old Convent&amp;quot; St Joseph&amp;#x27;s Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606000" start="8300" end="8323" title="Broken Hill Trades Hall" label="Broken Hill Trades Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q27132442" start="8346" end="8367" title="Broken Hill Synagogue" label="Broken Hill Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609182" start="8389" end="8406" title="Day Dream Smelter" label="Day Dream Smelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377913" start="8494" end="8513" title="Engineers Australia" label="Engineers Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8529" end="8569" title="Engineers Australia#Engineering Heritage Recognition Program" label="Engineering Heritage Recognition Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q781601" start="8650" end="8672" title="Australian National Heritage List" label="National Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163312" start="9614" end="9631" title="Consolidated Zinc" label="Consolidated Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10638" end="10656" title="Mad Max: Fury Road" label="Mad Max: Fury Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="11138" end="11145" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11450" end="11452" title="Watt#Multiples" label="MW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81864527" start="11453" end="11476" title="Broken Hill Solar Plant" label="Broken Hill Solar Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q292374" start="11480" end="11490" title="AGL Energy" label="AGL Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="11527" end="11548" title="Australian Government" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="11553" end="11579" title="New South Wales Government" label="New South Wales Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q390250" start="11621" end="11625" title="Coal in Australia" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313096" start="11655" end="11671" title="Renewable energy in Australia" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11838" end="11841" title="Kilowatt-hour#Watt-hour multiples" label="MWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260916" start="11851" end="11880" title="compressed-air energy storage" label="compressed-air energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181482" start="12399" end="12412" title="Darling River" label="Darling River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47242291" start="12427" end="12451" title="Stephens Creek Reservoir" label="Stephens Creek Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q973323" start="12851" end="12859" title="Menindee, New South Wales" label="Menindee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817083" start="12952" end="12966" title="Menindee Lakes" label="Menindee Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="13118" end="13129" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598107" start="13253" end="13260" title="2000s Australian drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q181482" start="13710" end="13723" title="Darling River" label="Darling River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="13878" end="13904" title="New South Wales Government" label="New South Wales Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754825" start="13995" end="14013" title="John Holland Group" label="John Holland Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107680" start="14059" end="14068" title="Wentworth, New South Wales" label="Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="14321" end="14341" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="14379" end="14408" title="Government of New South Wales" label="Government of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566134" start="14429" end="14454" title="South Australian Railways" label="South Australian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569563" start="14583" end="14608" title="Southern &amp;amp; Silverton Rail" label="Silverton Tramway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286606" start="14735" end="14744" title="Silverton, New South Wales" label="Silverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14966" start="15010" end="15020" title="Port Pirie" label="Port Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q732670" start="15266" end="15296" title="Australian Securities Exchange" label="Australian Securities Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329547" start="15496" end="15511" title="Sulphide Street railway station" label="Sulphide Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15573" end="15587" title="Tram#Steam" label="street tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216201" start="15787" end="15793" title="Trams in Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15848" end="15859" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329549" start="15979" end="15998" title="Tarrawingee Tramway" label="Tarrawingee Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14966" start="16248" end="16258" title="Port Pirie" label="Port Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="16302" end="16338" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="New South Wales Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982888" start="16444" end="16479" title="New South Wales Government Railways" label="New South Wales Government Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569563" start="16514" end="16539" title="Southern &amp;amp; Silverton Rail" label="Silverton Tramway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338045" start="16642" end="16656" title="Ottoman Empire in World War I" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870567" start="16671" end="16715" title="Battle of Broken Hill" label="shot dead four people and wounded seven more"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875602" start="16811" end="16819" title="Menindee railway station" label="Menindee"/>
<link wikidata="Q181482" start="16867" end="16880" title="Darling River" label="Darling River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973406" start="16933" end="16957" title="Broken Hill railway line" label="Broken Hill railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841345" start="17001" end="17006" title="Trida, New South Wales" label="Trida"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871640" start="17188" end="17210" title="Broken Hill railway station" label="Crystal Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329547" start="17254" end="17277" title="Sulphide Street railway station" label="Sulphide Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973406" start="17453" end="17467" title="Broken Hill railway line" label="link to Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927464" start="17518" end="17535" title="Silver City Comet" label="Silver City Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="17567" end="17582" title="Air conditioning" label="air-conditioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138450" start="17637" end="17643" title="Parkes railway station" label="Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q456407" start="17835" end="17848" title="transshipment" label="transshipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163312" start="17986" end="18002" title="Zinc Corporation" label="Zinc Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139630" start="18023" end="18043" title="Cockle Creek Smelter" label="Cockle Creek Smelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="18069" end="18078" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946213" start="18190" end="18211" title="W44 Concentrate Train" label="W44 Concentrate Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877186" start="18336" end="18346" title="Port Pirie (Mary Elie Street) railway station" label="Port Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331049" start="18517" end="18547" title="Sydney-Perth rail corridor" label="transcontinental rail corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871640" start="18571" end="18598" title="Broken Hill railway station" label="Broken Hill railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193928" start="18632" end="18646" title="Indian Pacific" label="Indian Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544385" start="18684" end="18698" title="Journey Beyond" label="Journey Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585639" start="18705" end="18711" title="Central railway station, Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329143" start="18715" end="18720" title="East Perth railway station" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605152" start="18725" end="18733" title="Adelaide Parklands Terminal" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955406" start="18746" end="18759" title="NSW TrainLink" label="NSW TrainLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927380" start="18766" end="18781" title="Outback Xplorer" label="Outback Xplorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873016" start="18984" end="18989" title="Dubbo railway station" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927055" start="19005" end="19021" title="Central West Express" label="Central West XPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090740" start="19156" end="19164" title="Adelaide Central bus station" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q705829" start="19213" end="19220" title="Mildura" label="Mildura"/>
<link wikidata="Q788906" start="19250" end="19262" title="Rex Airlines" label="Rex Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17528" start="19290" end="19309" title="Broken Hill Airport" label="Broken Hill Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14302" start="19322" end="19330" title="Adelaide Airport" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17542" start="19332" end="19337" title="Dubbo Airport" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17547" start="19339" end="19347" title="Griffith Airport" label="Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q733738" start="19349" end="19358" title="Melbourne Airport" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566390" start="19363" end="19370" title="Mildura Airport" label="Mildura"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="19375" end="19381" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17528" start="19561" end="19580" title="Broken Hill Airport" label="Broken Hill Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875945" start="19621" end="19636" title="CDC Broken Hill" label="CDC Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="19780" end="19802" title="Cold semi-arid climate" label="cold semi arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="19810" end="19813" title="BSk" label="BSk"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="19831" end="19860" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="19957" end="19967" title="cold front" label="cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q186733" start="20102" end="20107" title="Great Australian Bight" label="Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="20282" end="20292" title="Dust storm" label="Dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="21588" end="21598" title="Indigenous Australian" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053658" start="23100" end="23123" title="Broken Hill Ore Deposit" label="Broken Hill Ore Deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="23422" end="23425" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072045" start="23839" end="23847" title="Pasminco" label="Pasminco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23928" end="23943" title="Perilya Limited" label="Perilya Limited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25097" end="25116" title="Sculpture Symposium" label="Sculpture Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47242291" start="25179" end="25199" title="Stephen&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Stephen&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="25402" end="25409" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706756" start="25462" end="25502" title="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia" label="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431282" start="25507" end="25524" title="School of the Air" label="School of the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460709" start="25691" end="25711" title="Florence May Harding" label="Florence May Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q285289" start="25975" end="25983" title="Pro Hart" label="Pro Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q21034427" start="25986" end="26005" title="Sam Byrne (painter)" label="Sam Byrne (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647761" start="26007" end="26027" title="Susan Dorothea White" label="Susan Dorothea White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698802" start="26568" end="26595" title="Airlines of South Australia" label="Airlines of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073851" start="26626" end="26658" title="South Australian Society of Arts" label="South Australian Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164958" start="26711" end="26753" title="Contemporary Art Centre of South Australia" label="Contemporary Art Centre of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q330420" start="26890" end="26901" title="Hans Heysen" label="Hans Heysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246930" start="26930" end="26951" title="John Martin &amp;amp; Co." label="John Martin &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q706029" start="27013" end="27020" title="Whyalla" label="Whyalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q606268" start="27026" end="27038" title="Port Lincoln" label="Port Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q104719764" start="27065" end="27073" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New South Wales" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646009" start="27237" end="27257" title="Brushmen of the Bush" label="Brushmen of the Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q285289" start="27333" end="27341" title="Pro Hart" label="Pro Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110939" start="27346" end="27358" title="Jack Absalom" label="Jack Absalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q658201" start="27573" end="27598" title="Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow" label="Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q320352" start="27885" end="27899" title="Arthur Upfield" label="Arthur Upfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q339196" start="28156" end="28168" title="Kenneth Cook" label="Kenneth Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429640" start="28193" end="28207" title="Wake in Fright (novel)" label="Wake in Fright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076541" start="28343" end="28348" title="ocker" label="ocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q679758" start="28442" end="28448" title="two-up" label="two-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="28450" end="28457" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q593246" start="28473" end="28481" title="mateship" label="mateship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961003" start="28512" end="28521" title="Wake in Fright" label="1971 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074634" start="28636" end="28650" title="Chips Rafferty" label="Chips Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912232" start="28719" end="28728" title="Max Barry" label="Max Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432769" start="28923" end="28938" title="corrugated iron" label="corrugated iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975807" start="29078" end="29089" title="Cheese slaw" label="Cheese slaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286606" start="29268" end="29277" title="Silverton, New South Wales" label="Silverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q255328" start="29408" end="29456" title="The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" label="The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125262" start="29755" end="29764" title="Mad Max 2" label="Mad Max 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="29776" end="29797" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275141" start="29921" end="29928" title="Mad Max" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578083" start="30020" end="30062" title="Spirits of the Air, Gremlins of the Clouds" label="Spirits of the Air, Gremlins of the Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421387" start="30077" end="30086" title="Razorback (film)" label="Razorback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151182" start="30101" end="30112" title="Dirty Deeds (2002 film)" label="Dirty Deeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218258" start="30127" end="30145" title="The Flying Doctors" label="The Flying Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795439" start="30192" end="30225" title="RFDS (TV series)" label="RFDS: Royal Flying Doctor Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="30239" end="30252" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627354" start="30357" end="30366" title="800 Words" label="800 Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="30437" end="30452" title="mining industry" label="mining industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="30565" end="30579" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863584" start="31557" end="31576" title="Barrier Daily Truth" label="Barrier Daily Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650184" start="31852" end="31867" title="ABC Local Radio" label="ABC Local Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646280" start="31871" end="31886" title="ABC Broken Hill" label="ABC Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522899" start="32109" end="32117" title="Triple J" label="Triple J"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280922" start="32137" end="32155" title="ABC Radio National" label="ABC Radio National"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818999" start="32169" end="32183" title="ABC Classic FM" label="ABC Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650194" start="32197" end="32210" title="ABC NewsRadio" label="ABC NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633029" start="32224" end="32227" title="2BH" label="2BH"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633126" start="32256" end="32260" title="2HIL" label="2HIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936171" start="32343" end="32365" title="Vision Christian Radio" label="Vision Christian Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="32466" end="32469" title="ABC Television (Australia)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="32491" end="32497" title="ABC TV (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650119" start="32499" end="32507" title="ABC Kids (Australia)" label="ABC Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650041" start="32508" end="32518" title="ABC Family (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650042" start="32520" end="32534" title="ABC Entertains" label="ABC Entertains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650199" start="32539" end="32547" title="ABC News (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="32560" end="32563" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668212" start="32585" end="32591" title="SBS (Australian TV channel)" label="SBS TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389006" start="32593" end="32605" title="SBS Viceland" label="SBS Viceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079626" start="32607" end="32615" title="SBS Food" label="SBS Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035972" start="32617" end="32633" title="SBS World Movies" label="SBS World Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q112629218" start="32639" end="32653" title="SBS WorldWatch" label="SBS WorldWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314912" start="32666" end="32670" title="National Indigenous Television" label="NITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514755" start="32673" end="32693" title="GTS/BKN" label="Southern Cross Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024982" start="32739" end="32757" title="SGS/SCN" label="Southern Cross Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514755" start="32760" end="32779" title="GTS/BKN" label="Southern Cross Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359746" start="32782" end="32790" title="10 Peach" label="10 Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092404" start="32852" end="32859" title="10 Bold" label="10 Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574515" start="32862" end="32866" title="9Go!" label="9Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513159" start="32869" end="32873" title="9Gem" label="9Gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079623" start="32876" end="32881" title="9Life" label="9Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643793" start="32884" end="32888" title="7two" label="7two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643923" start="32891" end="32896" title="7mate" label="7mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955983" start="33031" end="33035" title="NWS (TV station)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651198" start="33037" end="33040" title="ADS (TV station)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388794" start="33045" end="33050" title="SAS (TV station)" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="33128" end="33154" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="33158" end="33179" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092404" start="33685" end="33692" title="10 Bold" label="10 Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359746" start="33697" end="33705" title="10 Peach" label="10 Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="33893" end="33905" title="Nine Network" label="Channel Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669731" start="33959" end="33962" title="TCN" label="TCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955983" start="34045" end="34048" title="NWS (TV station)" label="NWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265522" start="34064" end="34077" title="QQQ" label="Seven Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006082" start="34134" end="34152" title="Imparja Television" label="Imparja Television"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34290" end="34327" title="The Amazing Race: Unfinished Business" label="The Amazing Race: Unfinished Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858464" start="34348" end="34387" title="Barassi Line" label="Unusually for a town in New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="34389" end="34414" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973405" start="34490" end="34517" title="Broken Hill Football League" label="Broken Hill Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045772" start="34573" end="34578" title="South Broken Hill Football Club" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965465" start="34638" end="34679" title="South Australian National Football League" label="South Australian National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q270734" start="34765" end="34785" title="Broken Hill Speedway" label="Broken Hill Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="34963" end="34982" title="motorcycle speedway" label="motorcycle speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824280" start="35002" end="35030" title="Australian Solo Championship" label="Australian Solo Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973404" start="35044" end="35075" title="Broken Hill Correctional Centre" label="Broken Hill Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066749" start="35191" end="35199" title="Far West (New South Wales)" label="Far West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611749" start="35307" end="35319" title="Steve Abbott (comedian)" label="Steve Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110939" start="35333" end="35345" title="Jack Absalom" label="Jack Absalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846748" start="35369" end="35381" title="Troy Andrews (basketball)" label="Troy Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q547983" start="35422" end="35435" title="June Bronhill" label="June Bronhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="35516" end="35527" title="light opera" label="light opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626347" start="35643" end="35654" title="Stuart Bown" label="Stuart Bown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066187" start="35687" end="35698" title="Chad Bugeja" label="Chad Bugeja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839079" start="35726" end="35739" title="Trevor Butler" label="Trevor Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351904" start="35742" end="35763" title="Big Brother Australia" label="Big Brother Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225435" start="35778" end="35788" title="John Casey (commentator)" label="John Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q53439132" start="35805" end="35818" title="Isaac Cumming" label="Isaac Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939227" start="35851" end="35866" title="Murray Farquhar" label="Murray Farquhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327555" start="35928" end="35951" title="Stewart Finlay-McLennan" label="Stewart Finlay-McLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q455761" start="35962" end="35974" title="Mary Gilmore" label="Mary Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211910" start="35984" end="36010" title="Lord Tim" label="&amp;quot;Lord Tim&amp;quot; Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460709" start="36053" end="36073" title="Florence May Harding" label="Florence May Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q285289" start="36109" end="36117" title="Pro Hart" label="Pro Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672008" start="36141" end="36152" title="Ion Idriess" label="Ion Idriess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372991" start="36178" end="36188" title="Roy Inwood" label="Roy Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="36191" end="36205" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q55106318" start="36218" end="36231" title="Jamaine Jones" label="Jamaine Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281914" start="36264" end="36281" title="Rae Desmond Jones" label="Rae Desmond Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q82890761" start="36304" end="36317" title="The Kid Laroi" label="The Kid Laroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977987" start="36348" end="36362" title="Bruce McGregor" label="Bruce McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710866" start="36395" end="36408" title="Albert Morris" label="Albert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q457335" start="36437" end="36457" title="Ronald Sydney Nyholm" label="Ronald Sydney Nyholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170416" start="36482" end="36492" title="Corey Page" label="Corey Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074634" start="36503" end="36517" title="Chips Rafferty" label="Chips Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610413" start="36528" end="36540" title="Stephen Rowe (musician)" label="Stephen Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239805" start="36563" end="36576" title="David Simmons (Australian politician)" label="David Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352774" start="36623" end="36636" title="Robin Sellick" label="Robin Sellick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329436" start="36665" end="36688" title="Richard Thilthorpe Slee" label="Richard Thilthorpe Slee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246476" start="36719" end="36731" title="Dean Solomon" label="Dean Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961549" start="36764" end="36776" title="Brent Staker" label="Brent Staker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781048" start="36809" end="36822" title="Thelma Afford" label="Thelma Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035271" start="36844" end="36856" title="Nikki Visser" label="Nikki Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690174" start="36877" end="36890" title="Taylor Walker (footballer)" label="Taylor Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647761" start="36923" end="36943" title="Susan Dorothea White" label="Susan Dorothea White"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069858" start="36955" end="36976" title="Edward Emerton Warren" label="Edward Emerton Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190149" start="37010" end="37043" title="Broken Hill Women&amp;#x27;s Memorial" label="Broken Hill Women&amp;#x27;s Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633841" start="37046" end="37064" title="St Josephs Convent" label="St Josephs Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870978" start="37178" end="37224" title="Australian Railway History" label="Australian Railway Historical Society Bulletin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150206" wikidata="Q146521" url="?curid=150206" title="Sorbs">
<text>Sorbs (; ; ; ; ; also known as [[Lusatians]], Lusatian Serbs and [[Wends]]) are a West Slavic ethnic group predominantly inhabiting the parts of Lusatia located in the German states of Saxony and Brandenburg. Sorbs traditionally speak the Sorbian languages (also known as &quot;Wendish&quot; and &quot;Lusatian&quot;), which are closely related to Czech and Lechitic languages. Upper Sorbian and Lower Sorbian are officially recognized minority languages in Germany.

In the Early Middle Ages, the Sorbs formed their own principality, which later shortly became part of the early West Slavic Samo&#x27;s Empire and Great Moravia, as were ultimately conquered by the East Francia (Sorbian March) and Holy Roman Empire (Saxon Eastern March, Margravate of Meissen, March of Lusatia). From the High Middle Ages, they were ruled at various times by the closely related Poles and Czechs, as well as the more distant Germans and Hungarians. Due to a gradual and increasing assimilation between the 17th and 20th centuries, virtually all Sorbs also spoke German by the early 20th century. In the newly created German nation state of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, policies were implemented in an effort to Germanize the Sorbs. These policies reached their climax under the Nazi regime, who denied the existence of the Sorbs as a distinct Slavic people by referring to them as &quot;Sorbian-speaking Germans&quot;. The community is divided religiously between Roman Catholicism (the majority) and Lutheranism. The former Minister President of Saxony Stanislaw Tillich is of Sorbian origin.

==Etymology==
The ethnonym &quot;Sorbs&quot; (&quot;Serbja&quot;, &quot;Serby&quot;) derives from the medieval ethnic groups called &quot;Sorbs&quot; (&quot;Surbi&quot;, &quot;Sorabi&quot;). The original ethnonym, &quot;Srbi&quot;, was retained by the Sorbs and Serbs in the Balkans. By the 6th century, Slavs occupied the area west of the Oder formerly inhabited by Germanic peoples. The Sorbs are first mentioned in the 6th or 7th century. In their languages, the other Slavs call them the &quot;Lusatian Serbs&quot;, and the Sorbs call the Serbs &quot;the south Sorbs&quot;. The name &quot;Lusatia&quot; was originally applied only to Lower Lusatia. It is generally considered that their ethnonym &quot;*Sŕbъ&quot; (plur. &quot;*Sŕby&quot;) originates from Proto-Slavic with an appellative meaning of a &quot;family kinship&quot; and &quot;alliance&quot;, however others argue a derivation from Iranian-Sarmatian.

==History==

===Early Middle Ages===


The name of the Sorbs can be traced to the 6th century or earlier when Vibius Sequester recorded &quot;Cervetiis&quot; living on the other part of the river Elbe which divided them from the Suevi (&quot;Albis Germaniae Suevos a Cerveciis dividiit&quot;). According to Lubor Niederle, the Serbian district was located somewhere between Magdeburg and Lusatia, and was later mentioned by the Ottonians as &quot;Ciervisti&quot;, &quot;Zerbisti&quot;, and &quot;Kirvisti&quot;. The information is in accordance with the Frankish 7th-century &quot;Chronicle of Fredegar&quot; according to which the &quot;Surbi&quot; lived in the Saale-Elbe valley, having settled in the Thuringian part of Francia since the second half of the 6th century or beginning of the 7th century and were vassals of the Merovingian dynasty. 

The Saale-Elbe line marked the approximate limit of Slavic westward migration. Under the leadership of &quot;dux&quot; (duke) Dervan (&quot;Dervanus dux gente Surbiorum que ex genere Sclavinorum&quot;), they joined the Slavic tribal union of Samo, after Samo&#x27;s decisive victory against Frankish King Dagobert I in 631. Afterwards, these Slavic tribes continuously raided Thuringia. The fate of the tribes after Samo&#x27;s death and dissolution of the union in 658 is undetermined, but it is considered that they subsequently returned to Frankish vassalage. 

According to a 10th-century source , they lived &quot;since the beginning&quot; in the region called by them as &quot;Boiki&quot; which was a neighbor to Francia, and when two brothers succeeded their father, one of them migrated with half of the people to the Balkans during the rule of Heraclius in the first half of the 7th century. According to some scholars, the White Serbian Unknown Archon who led them to the Balkans was most likely a son, brother or other relative of Dervan.

Sorbian tribes, Sorbi/Surbi, are noted in the mid-9th-century work of the Bavarian Geographer. Having settled by the Elbe, Saale, Spree, and Neisse in the 6th and early 7th century, Sorbian tribes divided into two main groups, which have taken their names from the characteristics of the area where they had settled. The two groups were separated from each other by a wide and uninhabited forest range, one around Upper Spree and the rest between the Elbe and Saale. Some scholars consider that the contemporary Sorbs are descendants of the two largest Sorbian tribes, the Milceni (Upper) and (Lower), and these tribes&#x27; respective dialects have developed into separate languages. However, others emphasize differences between these two dialects and that their respective territories correspond to two different Slavic archeological cultures of Leipzig group (Upper Sorbian language) and Tornow group ceramics (Lower Sorbian language), both a derivation of Prague(-Korchak) culture.
The &quot;Annales Regni Francorum&quot; state that in 806 Sorbian Duke Miliduch fought against the Franks and was killed. In 840, Sorbian Duke Czimislav was killed. From the 9th century was organized Sorbian March by the East Francia and from the 10th century the Saxon Eastern March (Margravate of Meissen) and March of Lusatia by the Holy Roman Empire. In 932, the German king Henry I conquered Lusatia and Milsko. Gero, Margrave of the Saxon Eastern March, reconquered Lusatia the following year and, in 939, murdered 30 Sorbian princes during a feast. As a result, there were many Sorbian uprisings against German rule. A reconstructed castle, at Raddusch in Lower Lusatia, is the sole physical remnant from this early period.

===High and Late Middle Ages===
In 1002, the Sorbs came under the rule of their Slavic relatives, the Poles, when Bolesław I of Poland took over Lusatia. Following the subsequent German–Polish War of 1003–1018, the Peace of Bautzen confirmed Lusatia as part of Poland; but, it returned to German rule in 1031. In the 1070s, southern Lusatia, passed into the hands of the Sorbs&#x27; other Slavic relatives, the Czechs, within their Duchy of Bohemia. There was a dense network of dynastic and diplomatic relations between German and Slavic feudal lords, e.g. Wiprecht of Groitzsch (a German) rose to power through close links with the Bohemian (Czech) king and marriage to the king&#x27;s daughter. 

The Kingdom of Bohemia eventually became a politically influential member of the Holy Roman Empire but was in a constant power-struggle with neighbouring Poland. In the following centuries, at various times, parts of Lusatia passed to Piast-ruled fragmented Poland. In the German-ruled parts, Sorbs were ousted from guilds, the Sorbian language was banned and German colonisation and Germanisation policies were enacted.

From the 11th to the 15th century, agriculture in Lusatia developed and colonization by Frankish, Flemish and Saxon settlers intensified. This can still be seen today from the names of local villages which geographically form a patchwork of typical German (ending on -dorf, -thal etc.) and typical Slavic origin (ending on -witz, -ow etc.), indicating the language originally spoken by its inhabitants, although some of the present German names may be of later origin from the time of planned name changes to erase Slavic origin, especially in the 1920s and 1930s. In 1327 the first prohibitions on using Sorbian before courts and in administrative affairs in the cities of Altenburg, Zwickau and Leipzig appeared. Speaking Sorbian in family and business contexts was, however, not banned, as it did not involve the functioning of the administration. Also the village communities and the village administration usually kept operating in Sorbian.

===Early modern period===

From 1376 to 1469 and from 1490 to 1635 Lusatia was part of the Lands of the Bohemian Crown under the rule of the houses of Luxembourg, Jagiellon and Habsburg and other kings, whereas from 1469 to 1490 it was ruled by King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary. Under Bohemian (Czech) rule, Sorbs were allowed to return to cities, offices and crafts, Germanisation significantly reduced and the Sorbian language could be used in public. From the beginning of the 16th century the whole Sorbian-inhabited area, with the exception of Bohemian-ruled Lusatia, underwent Germanization.

During the Thirty Years&#x27; War, in 1635, Lusatia became a fiefdom of Saxon electors, but it retained a considerable autonomy and largely its own legal system (see Lusatian League). The Thirty Years&#x27; War and the plague of the 17th century caused terrible devastation in Lusatia. This led to further German colonization and Germanization.

In 1667 the Prince of Brandenburg, Frederick Wilhelm, ordered the immediate destruction of all Sorbian printed materials and banned saying masses in this language. At the same time the Evangelical Church supported printing Sorbian religious literature as a means of fighting the Counterreformation. With the formation of the Polish-Saxon union in 1697, Polish-Sorbian contacts resumed, and Poles influenced the Sorbs&#x27; national and cultural activities (see &quot;Relationship with Poland&quot; below). With the Age of Enlightenment, the Sorbian national revival began and resistance to Germanization emerged. In 1706 the Sorbian Seminary, the main centre for the education of Sorbian Catholic priests, was founded in Prague. Sorbian preaching societies were founded by Evangelical students in Leipzig and Wittenberg in 1716 and 1749, respectively.

===Late modern period===

The Congress of Vienna, in 1815, divided Lusatia between Prussia and Saxony. More and more bans on the use of Sorbian languages appeared from then until 1835 in Prussia and Saxony; emigration of the Sorbs, mainly to the town of Serbin in Texas and to Australia, increased. In 1848, 5000 Sorbs signed a petition to the Saxon Government, in which they demanded equality for the Sorbian language with the German one in churches, courts, schools and Government departments. From 1871 the whole of Lusatia became a part of united Germany and was divided between two parts; Prussia (Silesia and Brandenburg), and Saxony.

In 1871 the industrialization of the region and German immigration began; official Germanization intensified. Persecution of the Sorbs under German rule became increasingly harsh throughout the 19th century. Slavs were labeled inferior to Germanic peoples, and in 1875, the use of Sorbian was banned in German schools. As a result, almost the entire Sorbian population was bilingual by the end of the 19th century.
During World War I, one of the most venerated Serbian generals was Pavle Jurišić Šturm (Paul Sturm), a Sorb from Görlitz, Province of Silesia.

===Interbellum and World War II===

Although the Weimar Republic guaranteed constitutional minority rights, it did not practice them.

Under Nazi Germany, Sorbians were described as a German tribe who spoke a Slavic language. Sorbian costume, culture, customs, and the language was said to be no indication of a non-German origin. The Reich declared that there were truly no &quot;Sorbs&quot; or &quot;Lusatians&quot;, only Wendish-speaking Germans. As such, while the Sorbs were largely safe from the Reich&#x27;s policies of ethnic cleansing, the cultivation of &quot;Wendish&quot; customs and traditions was to be encouraged in a controlled manner and it was expected that the Slavic language would decline due to natural causes. Young Sorbs enlisted in the Wehrmacht and were sent to the front. The entangled lives of the Sorbs during World War II are exemplified by the life stories of Mina Witkojc, and Jan Skala.

Persecution of the Sorbs reached its climax under the Nazis, who attempted to completely assimilate and Germanize them. Their distinct identity and culture and Slavic origins were denied by referring to them as &quot;Wendish-speaking Germans&quot;. Under Nazi rule, the Sorbian language and practice of Sorbian culture was banned, Sorbian and Slavic place-names were changed to German ones, Sorbian books and printing presses were destroyed, Sorbian organizations and newspapers were banned, Sorbian libraries and archives were closed, and Sorbian teachers and clerics were deported to German-speaking areas and replaced with German-speaking teachers and clerics. Leading figures in the Sorbian community were forcibly isolated from their community or simply arrested. The Sorbian national anthem and flag were banned. The specific &quot;Wendenabteilung&quot; was established to monitor the assimilation of the Sorbs.

Towards the end of World War II, the Nazis considered the deportation of the entire Sorbian population to the mining districts of Alsace-Lorraine.

===East Germany===

The first Lusatian cities were captured in April 1945, when the Red Army and the Polish Second Army crossed the river Queis (Kwisa). The defeat of Nazi Germany changed the Sorbs’ situation considerably. The regions in East Germany (the German Democratic Republic) faced heavy industrialisation and a large influx of expelled Germans. The East German authorities tried to counteract this development by creating a broad range of Sorbian institutions. The Sorbs were officially recognized as an ethnic minority, more than 100 Sorbian schools and several academic institutions were founded, the Domowina and its associated societies were re-established and a Sorbian theatre was created. Owing to the suppression of the church and forced collectivization, however, these efforts were severely affected and consequently over time the number of people speaking Sorbian languages decreased by half.

The relationship between the Sorbs and the government of East Germany was not without occasional difficulties, mainly because of the high levels of religious observance and resistance to the nationalisation of agriculture. During the compulsory collectivization campaign, a great many unprecedented incidents were reported. Thus, throughout the Uprising of 1953 in East Germany, violent clashes with the police were reported in Lusatia. A small uprising took place in three upper communes of Błot. There were also tensions between German and Sorbian parents in the 1950s and early 1960s, as many German families protested the state policy of mandatory instruction of the Sorbian language in schools located in bilingual areas. As a consequence of the tensions, which split the local SED, Sorbian language classes were no longer mandatory after 1964, and a temporary but sharp decline in the number of learners occurred immediately thereafter. The number of learners increased again after 1968, when new regulations were adopted giving Domowina a greater role in consulting parents of schoolchildren. The number of learners did not decrease again until after German reunification.

Sorbs experienced greater representation in the German Democratic Republic than under any other German government. Domowina had status as a constituent member organization of the National Front, and a number of Sorbs were members of the Volkskammer and State Council of East Germany. Notable Sorbian figures of the period include Domowina Chairmen Jurij Grós and Kurt Krjeńc, State Council member Maria Schneider, and writer and three-time recipient of the National Prize of the German Democratic Republic Jurij Brězan. 

In 1973, Domowina reported that 2,130 municipal councillors, 119 burgomasters, and more than 3,500 members of commissions and local bodies in East Germany were ethnic Sorbs registered with the organization. Additionally, there was a seat reserved for a Sorbian representative in the Central Council of the Free German Youth, the mass organization for young people in East Germany, and magazines for both the FDJ and the Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation were published in the Sorbian language on a regular basis under the titles &quot;Chorhoj Měra&quot; and &quot;Plomjo&quot;, respectively. As of 1989, there were nine schools with exclusively Sorbian language instruction, eighty-five schools that offered Sorbian-language instruction, ten Sorbian-language periodicals, and one daily newspaper.

===After reunification===

After the reunification of Germany on 3 October 1990, Lusatians made efforts to create an autonomous administrative unit; however, Helmut Kohl’s government did not agree to it. After 1989, the Sorbian movement revived, however, it still encounters many obstacles. Although Germany supports national minorities, Sorbs claim that their aspirations are not sufficiently fulfilled. The desire to unite Lusatia in one of the federal states has not been taken into consideration. Upper Lusatia still belongs to Saxony and Lower Lusatia to Brandenburg. Liquidations of Sorbian schools, even in areas mostly populated by Sorbs, still happen, under the pretext of financial difficulties or demolition of whole villages to create lignite quarries.

Faced with growing threat of cultural extinction, the Domowina issued a memorandum in March 2008 and called for &quot;help and protection against the growing threat of their cultural extinction, since an ongoing conflict between the German government, Saxony and Brandenburg about the financial distribution of help blocks the financing of almost all Sorbian institutions&quot;. The memorandum also demands a reorganisation of competence by ceding responsibility from the Länder to the federal government and an expanded legal status. The call has been issued to all governments and heads of state of the European Union.

Dawid Statnik, president of Domowina, the umbrella association of Sorbs in Germany, said in an interview with Tagesspiegel that he considers it dangerous that the AFD defines the issue of German citizens through an ethnic aspect. He believes that there is a concrete danger for the Sorbs if the AfD enters the governments of the federal states of Brandenburg and Saxony in the autumn elections. 

== Population genetics ==
According to 2013 and 2015 studies, the most common Y-DNA haplogroup among the Sorbs who speak Upper Sorbian in Lusatia (n=123) is R1a with 65%, mainly its R-M458 subclade (57%). It is followed in frequency by I1 (9.8%), R1b (9.8%), E1b1b (4.9%), I2 (4.1%), J (3.3%) and G (2.4%). Other haplogroups are less than 1%. A study from 2003 reported a similar frequency of 63.4% of haplogroup R1a among Sorbian males (n=112). Other studies that covered aspects of Sorbian Y-DNA include Immel et al. 2006, Rodig et al. 2007, and Krawczak et al. 2008. Significant percentage of R1a (25.7-38.3%), but strongly diminished in value because of high R1b (33.5-21.7%), and low I2 (5.8-5.1%) are in whole Saxony and &quot;Germania Slavica&quot; area as well.

A 2011 paper on the Sorbs&#x27; autosomal DNA reported that the Upper Sorbian speakers (n=289) showed the greatest autosomal genetic similarity to Poles, followed by Czechs and Slovaks, consistent with the linguistic proximity of Sorbian to other West Slavic languages. In another genome-wide paper from the same year on Upper Sorbs (n=977), which indicated their genetic isolation &quot;which cannot be explained by over-sampling of relatives&quot; and a closer proximity to Poles and Czechs than Germans. The researchers however question this proximity, as the German reference population was almost exclusively West-German, and the Polish and Czech reference population had many that were part of a German minority. In a 2016 paper, Sorbs cluster autosomally again with Poles (from Poznań).

== Language and culture ==
The oldest known relic of Sorbian literature originated in about 1530 – the Bautzen townsmen&#x27;s oath. In 1548 Mikołaj Jakubica – Lower Sorbian vicar, from the village called Lubanice, wrote the first unprinted translation of the New Testament into Lower Sorbian. In 1574 the first Sorbian book was printed: Albin Mollers’ songbook. In 1688 Jurij Hawštyn Swětlik translated the Bible for Catholic Sorbs. From 1706 to 1709 the New Testament was printed in the Upper Sorbian translation was done by Michał Frencel and in Lower Sorbian by Jan Bogumił Fabricius (1681–1741). Jan Bjedrich Fryco (a.k.a. Johann Friedrich Fritze) (1747–1819), translated the Old Testament for the first time into Lower Sorbian, published in 1790.
Other Sorbian Bible translators include Jakub Buk (1825–1895), Michał Hórnik (Michael Hornig) (1833–1894), Jurij Łušćanski (a.k.a. Georg Wuschanski) (1839–1905). In 1809 for the short period of time, there was the first printed Sorbian newspaper. In 1767 Jurij Mjeń publishes the first secular Sorbian book. Between 1841 and 1843, Jan Arnošt Smoler and Leopold Haupt (a.k.a. J. L. Haupt and J. E. Schmaler) published two-volume collection of Wendish folk-songs in Upper and Lower Lusatia. From 1842, the first Sorbian publishing companies started to appear: the poet Handrij Zejler set up a weekly magazine, the precursor of today’s Sorbian News. In 1845 in Bautzen the first festival of Sorbian songs took place. In 1875, Jakub Bart-Ćišinski, the poet and classicist of Upper Sorbian literature, and Karol Arnošt Muka created a movement of young Sorbians influencing Lusatian art, science and literature for the following 50 years. A similar movement in Lower Lusatia was organized around the most prominent Lower Lusatian poets Mato Kósyk (Mato Kosyk) and Bogumił Šwjela.

In 1904, mainly thanks to the Sorbs’ contribution, the most important Sorbian cultural centre (the Sorbian House) was built in Bautzen. In 1912, the social and cultural organization of Lusatian Sorbs was created, the Domowina Institution - the union of Sorbian organizations. In 1919 it had 180,000 members. In 1920, Jan Skala set up a Sorbian party and in 1925 in Berlin, Skala started Kulturwille- the newspaper for the protection of national minorities in Germany. In 1920, the Sokol Movement was founded (youth movement and gymnastic organization). From 1933 the Nazi party started to repress the Sorbs. At that time the Nazis also dissolved the Sokol Movement and began to combat every sign of Sorbian culture. In 1937, the activities of the Domowina Institution and other organizations were banned as anti-national. Sorbian clergymen and teachers were forcedly deported from Lusatia; Nazi German authorities confiscated the Sorbian House, other buildings and crops.

On May 10, 1945, in Crostwitz, after the Red Army&#x27;s invasion, the Domowina Institution renewed its activity. In 1948, the Landtag of Saxony passed an Act guaranteeing protection to Sorbian Lusatians; in 1949, Brandenburg resolved a similar law. Article 40 of the constitution of German Democratic Republic adopted on 7 October 1949 expressly provided for the protection of the language and culture of the Sorbs. In the times of the German Democratic Republic, Sorbian organizations were financially supported by the country, but at the same time the authorities encouraged Germanization of Sorbian youth as a means of incorporating them into the system of &quot;building Socialism&quot;. Sorbian language and culture could only be publicly presented as long as they promoted socialist ideology. For over 1000 years, the Sorbs were able to maintain and even develop their national culture, despite escalating Germanization and Polonization, mainly due to the high level of religious observance, cultivation of their tradition and strong families (Sorbian families still often have five children). In the middle of the 20th century, the revival of the Central European nations included some Sorbs, who became strong enough to attempt twice to regain their independence. After World War II, the Lusatian National Committee in Prague claimed the right to self-government and separation from Germany and the creation of a Lusatian Free State or attachment to Czechoslovakia. The majority of the Sorbs were organized in the Domowina, though, and did not wish to split from Germany. Claims asserted by the Lusatian National movement were postulates of joining Lusatia to Poland or Czechoslovakia. Between 1945 and 1947 they postulated about ten petitions to the United Nations, the United States, Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, France, Poland and Czechoslovakia, however, it did not bring any results. On April 30, 1946, the Lusatian National Committee also postulated a petition to the Polish Government, signed by Pawoł Cyž – the minister and an official Sorbian delegate in Poland. There was also a project of proclaiming a Lusatian Free State, whose Prime Minister was supposed to be a Polish archaeologist of Lusatian origin- Wojciech Kóčka. The most radical postulates in this area (&quot; Na swobodu so ńečeka, swobodu so beŕe!&quot;) were expressed by the Lusatian youth organization- Narodny Partyzan Łužica. Similarly, in Czechoslovakia, where before the Potsdam Conference in Prague, 300,000 people demonstrated for the independence of Lusatia. The endeavours to separate Lusatia from Germany did not succeed because of various individual and geopolitical interests.
The following statistics indicate the progression of cultural change among Sorbs: by the end of the 19th century, about 150,000 people spoke Sorbian languages. By 1920, almost all Sorbs had mastered Sorbian and German to the same degree. Nowadays, the number of people using Sorbian languages has been estimated to be no more than 40,000.

The Israeli Slavic linguist Paul Wexler has argued that the Yiddish language structure provides &quot;compelling evidence of an intimate Jewish contact with the Slavs in the German and Bohemian lands as early as the 9th century&quot;, and has theorized that Sorbs may have been contributors to the Ashkenazic Jewish population in Europe from the same period.

=== Traditions ===
A Shrove Tuesday festival &quot;Zapust&quot; is the most popular tradition of the Sorbs, deeply linked to the working life of the community. Traditionally, festivities would last one week ahead of the spring sowing of the fields and would feature traditional dress, parade and dancing.

Egg decorating (&quot;pisanici&quot;) is a Slavic Easter tradition maintained by Sorbs since the 17th century.

=== Religion ===

Most current speakers of Upper-Sorbian are part of the Catholic denomination. Originally, the majority of Sorbs were Lutheran Protestants, and this was still the case going into the 20th Century (with a Protestant population of 86.9% recorded in 1900). Only the Sorbs of the Kamenz area – predominantly settled on the expansive former site of the in Panschwitz-Kuckau – veered from the norm, with a Catholic population of 88.4%. Otherwise, the proportion of Catholics remained under 1% throughout the region of Lower Lusatia. Due to the rapid decline in language and cultural identity amongst the Protestant Sorbs – particularly during the years of the GDR – the denominational make-up of the Sorbian-speaking population of the region has now been reversed.

== National symbols ==

The flag of the Lusatian Sorbs is a cloth of blue, red and white horizontal stripes. First used as a national symbol in 1842, the flag was fully recognized among Sorbs following the proclamation of pan-Slavic colors at the Prague Slavic Congress of 1848. Section 25 of the Constitution of Brandenburg contains a provision on the Lusatian flag. Section 2 of the Constitution of Saxony contains a provision on the use of the coat of arms and traditional national colors of the Lusatian Sorbs. The laws on the rights of the Lusatian Sorbs of Brandenburg and Saxony contain provisions on the use of Lusatian national symbols (coat of arms and national colors).

The national anthem of Lusatian Sorbs since the 20th century is the song Rjana Łužica (Beautiful Lusatia). Previously, the songs “Still Sorbs Have Not Perished” (written by Handrij Zejler in 1840) and “Our Sorbs Rise from the Dust” (written by M. Domashka, performed until 1945) served as a hymn.

== Regions of Lusatia ==
There are three main regions of Lusatia that differ in language, religion, and customs.

=== Region of Upper Lusatia ===
Catholic Lusatia encompasses 85 towns in the districts of Bautzen, Kamenz, and Hoyerswerda, where Upper Sorbian language, customs, and tradition are still thriving. In some of these places (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Radibor or Radwor in Sorbian, Crostwitz or Chrósćicy, and Rosenthal or Róžant), Sorbs constitute the majority of the population, and children grow up speaking Sorbian.

On Sundays, during holidays, and at weddings, people wear regional costumes, rich in decoration and embroidery, encrusted with pearls.

Some of the customs and traditions observed include Bird Wedding (25 January), Easter Cavalcade of Riders, Witch Burning (30 April), Maik, singing on St. Martin&#x27;s Day (Nicolay), and the celebrations of Saint Barbara’s Day and Saint Nicholas’s Day.

=== Region of Hoyerswerda (Wojerecy) and Schleife (Slepo) ===

In the area from Hoyerswerda to Schleife, a dialect of Sorbian which combines characteristic features of both Upper and Lower Sorbian is spoken. The region is predominantly Protestant, highly devastated by the brown coal mining industry, sparsely populated, and to a great extent germanicized. Most speakers of Sorbian are over 60 years old.

The region distinguishes itself through many examples of Slavic wooden architecture monuments including churches and regular houses, a diversity of regional costumes (mainly worn by elderly women) that feature white-knitting with black, cross-like embroidery, and a tradition of playing bagpipes.
In several villages, residents uphold traditional festivities such as expelling of winter, &quot;Maik&quot;, Easter and Great Friday singing, and the celebration of &quot;dźěćetko&quot; (disguised child or young girl giving Christmas presents).

=== Region of Lower Lusatia ===
There are 60 towns from the area of Cottbus belonging to this region, where most of the older people over 60 but few young people and children can speak the Lower Sorbian language; the local variant often incorporates many words taken from the German language, and in conversations with the younger generation, German is generally preferred. Some primary schools in the region teach bilingually, and in Cottbus there is an important Gymnasium whose main medium of instruction is Lower Sorbian. The region is predominantly Protestant, again highly devastated by the brown coal mining industry. The biggest tourist attraction of the region and in the whole Lusatia are the marshlands, with many Spreewald/Błóta canals, picturesque broads of the Spree.

Worn mainly by older but on holidays by young women, regional costumes are colourful, including a large headscarf called &quot;lapa&quot;, rich in golden embroidering and differing from village to village.

In some villages, following traditions are observed: Shrovetide, &quot;Maik&quot;, Easter bonfires, Roosters catching/hunting. In Jänschwalde (Sorbian: Janšojce) so-called Janšojski bog (disguised young girl) gives Christmas presents.

== Relationship with Poland ==
Bolesław I the Brave had taken control of the marches of Lusatia (Łużyce), Sorbian Meissen (Miśnia), and the cities of Budziszyn (Bautzen) and Miśnia in 1002, and refused to pay the tribute to the Empire from the conquered territories. The Sorbs sided with the Poles, and opened the town gates and allowed Bolesław I into Miśnia in 1002. Bolesław, after the Polish-German War (1002–1018), signed the Peace of Bautzen on 30 January 1018, which made him a clear winner. The Polish ruler was able to keep the contested marches of Lusatia and Milsko not as fiefs, but as part of Polish territory. The Polish prince Mieszko destroyed about 100 Sorbian villages in 1030 and expelled Sorbians from urban areas, with the exception of fishermen and carpenters who were allowed to live in the outskirts. In the following centuries, at various times, parts of Lusatia formed part of Piast-ruled fragmented Poland.

The 18th century saw increased Polish-Sorbian contacts during the reign of Kings Augustus II the Strong and Augustus III of Poland in Poland and Lusatia. Sorbian pastor and his son polymath took their cues from Polish texts in their Sorbian Bible translations and philological works, respectively. Also Polish-born Jan Bogumił Fabricius established a Sorbian printing house and translated the catechism and New Testament into Sorbian. Polish and Sorbian students established contacts at the University of Leipzig. Polish dignitaries traveled through Lusatia on several occasions on their way between Dresden and Warsaw, encountering Sorbs. Some Polish nobles owned estates in Lusatia.
The first translation from Sorbian into another language was a translation of the poem &quot;Wottendzenje wot Liepska teho derje dostoineho wulze wuczeneho Knesa Jana Friedricha Mitschka&quot; by into Polish, made by Stanisław Nałęcz Moszczyński, a Polish lecturer at the University of Leipzig, and published by the famous Polish traveler Jan Potocki.

A distinct remnant of the region&#x27;s ties to Poland are the 18th-century mileposts decorated with the coat of arms of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth located in various towns in the region.

Polish-Sorbian contacts continued in the 19th century. In the 1840s, Polish Romantic poet befriended the Sorbian writer Jan Arnošt Smoler in Wrocław, and then he settled in Lusatia, where he got to know other leading Sorbian national revival figures , and . Zmorski then issued the Polish newspaper &quot;Stadło&quot; in Budissin, translated four Smoler&#x27;s poems into Polish, and published articles about the Sorbs in other Polish press. Michał Hórnik declared his sympathy and admiration for the Poles, popularised knowledge of Nicolaus Copernicus and Tadeusz Kościuszko through Sorbian press, reported on the events of the Polish January Uprising of 1863–1864 and made contacts with Poles during visits to Warsaw, Kraków and Poznań. Polish historian wrote the first book on Sorbian history &quot;Rys dziejów serbołużyckich&quot;, published in Saint Petersburg in 1861. The book was expanded and published again in cooperation with Michał Hórnik in 1884 in Bautzen, under a new title &quot;Historije serbskeho naroda&quot;. Polish historian and activist was another friend of Sorbs, who from 1875 was involved in Sorbs&#x27; rights protection, participating in Sorbian meetings in Bautzen. Parczewski joined the Maćica Serbska organization in 1875, supported Sorbian publishing, wrote articles about Sorbs in Polish press and collected Sorbian magazines and books, which now form part of the Adam Asnyk Regional Public Library in Kalisz. It was thanks to him, among others, that Józef Ignacy Kraszewski founded a scholarship for Sorbian students. His sister joined the Maćica Serbska in 1878, wrote articles about Sorbs in Polish press and translated Sorbian poems into Polish.
In the early 20th century, Polish slavist and professor met several prominent Sorbs, including Jan Skala, Jakub Bart-Ćišinski and Arnošt Muka.

After World War I and the restoration of independent Poland, Polish linguist Jan Baudouin de Courtenay supported the Sorbs&#x27; right to self-determination and demanded that the League of Nations assume protection over them. In the interbellum, the Poles and Sorbs in Germany closely cooperated as part of the Association of National Minorities in Germany, established at the initiative of the Union of Poles in Germany in 1924. Sorbian journalist, poet and activist Jan Skala was a member of the press headquarters of the Union of Poles in Germany, and was one of the authors of the &quot;Leksykon Polactwa w Niemczech&quot; (&quot;Lexicon of Poles in Germany&quot;). There were also notable Polish communities in Lusatia, such as Klettwitz (, ).

In Poland, Antoni Ludwiczak, founder of the folk high school in Dalki, Gniezno, offered Sorbs five tuition-free spots for each course at the school, however, after the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in 1933, enrollment of Sorbs in the school was almost completely halted. Several Sorbs studied in Poland in the interbellum. In 1930, the Association of Friends of the Sorbs was established in Poznań with Henryk Ułaszyn as its president. A similar association, the Polish Association of Friends of the Sorbian Nation (&quot;Polskie Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Narodu Łużyckiego&quot;), was established at the University of Warsaw in 1936. It gathered people not only from the university. Its president was Professor Stanisław Słoński, and the deputy president was Julia Wieleżyńska. The association was a legal entity. The association in Warsaw issued the Polish-language &quot;Biuletyn Serbo-Łużycki&quot; (&quot;Sorbian Newsletter&quot;), which reported on Serbian affairs.
During World War II, the Poles postulated that after the defeat of Germany, the Sorbs should be allowed free national development either within the borders of Poland or Czechoslovakia, or as an independent Sorbian state in alliance with Poland. On 22 January 1945, Jan Skala was murdered by a Soviet soldier in Dziedzice, and his grave at the local cemetery is now a Polish protected cultural heritage monument. There is also a memorial to Skala in nearby Namysłów. In 1945, Polish troops fought against German forces in several battles in Lusatia, including the largest Battle of Bautzen. There are memorials to Polish soldiers in Bautzen (&quot;Budyšin&quot;), Crostwitz (&quot;Chrósćicy&quot;) and Königswartha (&quot;Rakecy&quot;) with inscriptions in Sorbian, Polish and German.

Prołuż founded in Krotoszyn, expanded to all Poland (3000 members). It was the biggest non-communist organization that dealt with foreign affairs. This youth organization was created during the Soviet occupation and its motto was &quot;Polish guard over Lusatia&quot; (Polish: &quot;Nad Łużycami polska straż&quot;). Its highest activity was in the region of Greater Poland. After the creation of East Germany, Prołuż was dissolved, and its president historian from Poznań Alojzy Stanisław Matyniak was arrested.

After 1945, the Sorbs that historically lived in the eastern part of Lusatia (now again part of Poland) were expelled, as they were German citizens. Eastern Lusatia was resettled by Poles expelled from former eastern Poland annexed by the Soviet Union and has by now lost its Sorbian identity.

In 1946, the establishment of a gymnasium for Sorbs in Zgorzelec, Poland, was initiated, and the registration of Sorbian students at Polish universities resumed. Despite the readiness to accept Sorbian youth in 1946, the gymnasium was not opened as the Sorbs had not yet obtained border passes to Poland. The launch of the gymnasium was postponed by a year and free boarding and scholarships were prepared for the Sorbs, but in view of the continued lack of border passes to Poland and the establishment of a Sorbian gymnasium in Bautzen, the idea was abandoned.

After a proposal to rebuild a pre-war statue of Otto von Bismarck in Bautzen (&quot;Budyšin&quot;) appeared in 2021, the Sorbs objected and the Serbski Institut, in an open letter, reasoned the objection with the Bismarck government&#x27;s repressions of the Sorbs, Poles, as well as Danes and French, and Bismarck&#x27;s calls for the extermination of Poles.

==Relationship with Czechia==

Lusatia was partly or wholly part of the Czech Duchy or Kingdom (also known as Bohemia in the west) at various times between 1075 and 1635, and several remnants of Czech rule can be found in the region. When Lusatia returned from German to Bohemian (Czech) rule, Sorbs were allowed to return to cities, offices and crafts, and the Sorbian language could be used in public. As result, it was in the lands under Czech rule that the Sorbian culture and language persisted, while the more western original Sorbian territory succumbed to Germanization policies. One of the remnants of Czech rule in the region are the many town coats of arms that include the Czech Lion, as in Drebkau (&quot;Drjowk&quot;), Görlitz (&quot;Zhorjelc&quot;), Guben (&quot;Gubin&quot;), Kamenz (&quot;Kamjenc&quot;), Löbau (&quot;Lubij&quot;) and Spremberg (&quot;Grodk&quot;).

In 1706 the Catholic Sorbian Seminary was founded in Prague. In 1846, the organization was founded by Sorbian students in Prague, and it issued the &quot;&quot; magazine until 1892.

Calls for the incorporation of Lusatia into Czechoslovakia were made after Germany&#x27;s defeats in both world wars. In 1945, the Czechs established a gymnasium for the Sorbs in Česká Lípa, then relocated to Varnsdorf in 1946 and to Liberec in 1949, however, the Sorbs took their high school diploma in Bautzen after a Sorbian high school was established there.

==Demography==
Estimates of demographic history of the Sorb population since 1450:
Sorbian population in the middle of the 19th century:
Sorbs are divided into two ethnographical groups:
*Upper Sorbs (about 40,000 people).
*Lower Sorbs, who speak Lower Sorbian (about 15–20,000 people).

The dialects spoken vary in intelligibility in different areas.

=== Diaspora ===
During the 1840s, many Sorbian émigrés travelled to Australia, along with many ethnic Germans. The first was Jan Rychtar, a Wendish Moravian Brethren missionary who settled in Sydney during 1844. There were two major migrations of Upper Sorbs and Lower Sorbs to Australia, in 1848 and 1850 respectively. The diaspora settled mainly in South Australia – especially the Barossa Valley – as well as Victoria and New South Wales.

Many Wends also migrated from Lusatia to the United States, especially Texas.

== See also ==
* List of Sorbs
* Lusatia
* Polabian Slavs
* Serbs
* Wends
* Milceni
* Pavle Jurišić Šturm
* Wendish People&#x27;s Party
* Wends of Texas
* List of ancient Slavic peoples and tribes

==Notes==
== References ==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
==Further reading==

* Filip Gańczak &quot;Mniejszość w czasach popkultury&quot;, Newsweek, nr 22/2007, 03.06.2007.
* &quot;W kręgu Krabata. Szkice o Juriju Brězanie, literaturze, kulturze i językach łużyckich&quot;, pod red. J.Zarka, Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Śląskiego, Katowice, 2002.
* Mirosław Cygański, Rafał Leszczyński &quot;Zarys dziejów narodowościowych Łużyczan&quot; PIN, Instytut Śląski, Opole 1997.
* &quot;Die Sorben in Deutschland&quot;, pod red. M.Schiemann, Stiftung für das sorbische Volk, Görlitz 1997.
* &quot;Mały informator o Serbołużyczanach w Niemczech&quot;, pod red. J.Pětrowej, Załožba za serbski lud, 1997.
* &quot;Dolnoserbske nałogi/Obyczaje Dolnych Łużyc&quot;, pod red. M.Stock, Załožba za serbski lud, 1997.
* &quot;Rys dziejów serbołużyckich&quot; Wilhelm Bogusławski Piotrogród 1861
* &quot;Prołuż Akademicki Związek Przyjaciół Łużyc&quot; Jakub Brodacki. Polska Grupa Marketingowa 2006 .
* &quot;Polska wobec Łużyc w drugiej połowie XX wieku. Wybrane problemy&quot;, Mieczkowska Małgorzata, Szczecin 2006 .
* Wukasch, C. (2004) &quot;A Rock Against Alien Waves: A History of the Wends&quot;. Concordia University Press: Austin, TX .
* &quot;Sorbs,&quot; David Zersen, in &quot;Germans and the Americas: Culture, Politics and History&quot;, 3 vols., edited by Thomas Adam. ABC-CLIO, 2005.

== External links ==
* 
* The Domowina Institution
* &quot;SERBSKE NOWINY&quot;—Sorbian newspaper
* SERBSKI INSTITUT—Sorbian history and culture
* Independent Sorbian internet magazine 
* Sorbian emigration into Australia
* Project Rastko - Lusatia, Electronic Library of Sorbian-Serbian Ties
* Texas Wendish Heritage Society
* Wendish Heritage Society of Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146521" start="0" end="5" title="Sorbs" label="Sorbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q146521" start="31" end="44" title="Sorbs" label="[[Lusatians]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q146521" start="46" end="60" title="Sorbs" label="Lusatian Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q146521" start="65" end="74" title="Sorbs" label="[[Wends]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="82" end="93" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="94" end="106" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="145" end="152" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="175" end="181" title="states of Germany" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="185" end="191" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="196" end="207" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25442" start="239" end="256" title="Sorbian languages" label="Sorbian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="348" end="353" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="358" end="376" title="Lechitic languages" label="Lechitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13248" start="378" end="391" title="Upper Sorbian" label="Upper Sorbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13286" start="396" end="409" title="Lower Sorbian" label="Lower Sorbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="458" end="465" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="475" end="492" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q149427" start="592" end="610" title="Samo&amp;#x27;s Empire" label="Samo&amp;#x27;s Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193152" start="615" end="628" title="Great Moravia" label="Great Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="666" end="678" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149425" start="680" end="693" title="Sorbian March" label="Sorbian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="699" end="716" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q703390" start="718" end="737" title="Saxon Eastern March" label="Saxon Eastern March"/>
<link wikidata="Q170180" start="739" end="760" title="Margravate of Meissen" label="Margravate of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q677501" start="762" end="778" title="March of Lusatia" label="March of Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="790" end="806" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="864" end="869" title="History of Poland during the Piast dynasty" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="874" end="880" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="966" end="978" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1102" end="1121" title="German Empire" label="German nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="1207" end="1216" title="Germanize" label="Germanize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1274" end="1278" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1339" end="1352" title="Slavs" label="Slavic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1460" end="1477" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1497" end="1508" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750338" start="1521" end="1539" title="Minister president (Germany)" label="Minister President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="1543" end="1549" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q77391" start="1550" end="1567" title="Stanislaw Tillich" label="Stanislaw Tillich"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393785" start="1729" end="1734" title="Sorbs (tribe)" label="Sorbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="1853" end="1858" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="1866" end="1873" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1895" end="1900" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="1958" end="1974" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="2351" end="2363" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q749834" start="2489" end="2506" title="Scythian languages" label="Iranian-Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q431367" start="2619" end="2635" title="Vibius Sequester" label="Vibius Sequester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="2705" end="2709" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="2738" end="2743" title="Suevi" label="Suevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q728706" start="2816" end="2830" title="Lubor Niederle" label="Lubor Niederle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="2883" end="2892" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="2897" end="2904" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157106" start="2937" end="2946" title="Ottonian dynasty" label="Ottonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623879" start="3090" end="3111" title="Chronicle of Fredegar" label="Chronicle of Fredegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678" start="3172" end="3177" title="Saale" label="Saale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="3178" end="3182" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="3191" end="3205" title="Migration Period" label="having settled"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="3232" end="3239" title="Francia" label="Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="3337" end="3356" title="Merovingian dynasty" label="Merovingian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q149252" start="3486" end="3492" title="Dervan (duke)" label="Dervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q149427" start="3586" end="3598" title="Samo&amp;#x27;s Empire" label="tribal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q295168" start="3602" end="3606" title="Samo" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109860" start="3665" end="3675" title="Dagobert I" label="Dagobert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311389" start="3736" end="3745" title="Duchy of Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991084" start="4043" end="4048" title="White Serbia" label="Boiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="4186" end="4193" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="4213" end="4222" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550027" start="4307" end="4321" title="Unknown Archon" label="Unknown Archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q646153" start="4485" end="4504" title="Bavarian Geographer" label="Bavarian Geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q149247" start="4984" end="4991" title="Milceni" label="Milceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285378" start="5260" end="5273" title="Leipzig group" label="Leipzig group"/>
<link wikidata="Q13248" start="5275" end="5297" title="Upper Sorbian language" label="Upper Sorbian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q110864122" start="5303" end="5315" title="Tornow group" label="Tornow group"/>
<link wikidata="Q13286" start="5326" end="5348" title="Lower Sorbian language" label="Lower Sorbian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18086903" start="5372" end="5396" title="Prague-Korchak culture" label="Prague(-Korchak) culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q149236" start="5469" end="5477" title="Miliduch" label="Miliduch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090666" start="5541" end="5550" title="Czimislav" label="Czimislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q149425" start="5598" end="5611" title="Sorbian March" label="Sorbian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="5619" end="5631" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703390" start="5662" end="5681" title="Saxon Eastern March" label="Saxon Eastern March"/>
<link wikidata="Q170180" start="5683" end="5704" title="Margravate of Meissen" label="Margravate of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q677501" start="5710" end="5726" title="March of Lusatia" label="March of Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5734" end="5751" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="5777" end="5784" title="Henry I the Fowler" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="5795" end="5802" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943" start="5807" end="5813" title="Upper Lusatia" label="Milsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q63166" start="5815" end="5819" title="Gero" label="Gero"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="5821" end="5829" title="Margrave" label="Margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="6244" end="6264" title="Bolesław I of Poland" label="Bolesław I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q597533" start="6309" end="6339" title="German–Polish War (1003–1018)" label="German–Polish War of 1003–1018"/>
<link wikidata="Q149734" start="6345" end="6361" title="Peace of Bautzen" label="Peace of Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="6562" end="6578" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Duchy of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65633" start="6688" end="6709" title="Wiprecht of Groitzsch" label="Wiprecht of Groitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="6834" end="6852" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Kingdom of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="6911" end="6928" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="7065" end="7070" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="7146" end="7151" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q170346" start="7190" end="7209" title="Ostsiedlung" label="German colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15976" start="7926" end="7935" title="Altenburg" label="Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778" start="7937" end="7944" title="Zwickau" label="Zwickau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="7949" end="7956" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="8290" end="8317" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Lands of the Bohemian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q122293" start="8350" end="8360" title="House of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q194355" start="8362" end="8371" title="Jagiellonian dynasty" label="Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="8376" end="8384" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="8449" end="8466" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="8783" end="8796" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="8810" end="8832" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="8860" end="8867" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="8871" end="8885" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxon electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q640813" start="8965" end="8980" title="Lusatian League" label="Lusatian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341002" start="9018" end="9044" title="second plague pandemic" label="plague of the 17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="9167" end="9178" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="9330" end="9348" title="Evangelical Church in Germany" label="Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="9424" end="9442" title="Counterreformation" label="Counterreformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="9660" end="9680" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9833" end="9841" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="9866" end="9872" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="9918" end="9929" title="Evangelism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="9942" end="9949" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837" start="9954" end="9964" title="Wittenberg" label="Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="10028" end="10046" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="10081" end="10088" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="10093" end="10099" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q25442" start="10134" end="10151" title="Sorbian languages" label="Sorbian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q149755" start="10252" end="10258" title="Serbin, Texas" label="Serbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="10262" end="10267" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q675032" start="10601" end="10608" title="Province of Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700264" start="10613" end="10624" title="Province of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11062" end="11073" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="11101" end="11117" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbian generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q149281" start="11122" end="11154" title="Pavle Jurišić Šturm" label="Pavle Jurišić Šturm (Paul Sturm)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077" start="11168" end="11175" title="Görlitz" label="Görlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q675032" start="11177" end="11196" title="Province of Silesia" label="Province of Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="11248" end="11263" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="11340" end="11352" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="11960" end="11969" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12038" end="12050" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q149516" start="12090" end="12102" title="Mina Witkojc" label="Mina Witkojc"/>
<link wikidata="Q160298" start="12108" end="12117" title="Jan Skala" label="Jan Skala"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="12224" end="12233" title="Germanization" label="Germanize"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="13169" end="13184" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="13271" end="13279" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029870" start="13288" end="13306" title="Second Army (Poland)" label="Polish Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13762" start="13325" end="13330" title="Kwisa" label="Queis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13354" end="13366" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="13425" end="13437" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="13523" end="13539" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="expelled Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q148432" start="13799" end="13807" title="Domowina" label="Domowina"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="14446" end="14478" title="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany" label="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q704655" start="15461" end="15475" title="National Front of the German Democratic Republic" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q168396" start="15519" end="15530" title="Volkskammer" label="Volkskammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q652009" start="15535" end="15564" title="State Council of East Germany" label="State Council of East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28597331" start="15630" end="15640" title="Jurij Grós" label="Jurij Grós"/>
<link wikidata="Q126184" start="15645" end="15656" title="Kurt Krjeńc" label="Kurt Krjeńc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501804" start="15679" end="15694" title="Maria Schneider (politician)" label="Maria Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q449353" start="15739" end="15787" title="National Prize of the German Democratic Republic" label="National Prize of the German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q77196" start="15788" end="15800" title="Jurij Brězan" label="Jurij Brězan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76845" start="16110" end="16127" title="Free German Youth" label="Free German Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q333403" start="16224" end="16259" title="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation" label="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="16762" end="16773" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943" start="17105" end="17118" title="Upper Lusatia" label="Upper Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148689" start="17147" end="17160" title="Lower Lusatia" label="Lower Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="17351" end="17358" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="17842" end="17848" title="States of Germany" label="Länder"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17975" end="17989" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10189" start="18102" end="18114" title="Der Tagesspiegel" label="Tagesspiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="18287" end="18290" title="Alternative for Germany" label="AfD"/>
<link wikidata="Q428875" start="18467" end="18483" title="Human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup" label="Y-DNA haplogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="18527" end="18534" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="18546" end="18549" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q428853" start="18625" end="18627" title="Haplogroup I1" label="I1"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="18636" end="18639" title="Haplogroup R1b" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033864" start="18648" end="18653" title="Haplogroup E-M215 (Y-DNA)" label="E1b1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512235" start="18662" end="18664" title="Haplogroup I-M438" label="I2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584175" start="18673" end="18674" title="Haplogroup J (Y-DNA)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034232" start="18686" end="18687" title="Haplogroup G-M201" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="18791" end="18805" title="haplogroup R1a" label="haplogroup R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q174794" start="19122" end="19138" title="Germania Slavica" label="Germania Slavica"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="19192" end="19205" title="Autosome" label="autosomal DNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19275" end="19303" title="Genealogical DNA test#Autosomal DNA (atDNA) testing" label="autosomal genetic similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="19307" end="19312" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="19326" end="19332" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="19337" end="19344" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25442" start="19390" end="19397" title="Sorbian languages" label="Sorbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="19407" end="19418" title="West Slavic languages" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="19945" end="19951" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="20058" end="20065" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20096" end="20112" title="Mikołaj Jakubica" label="Mikołaj Jakubica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="20215" end="20228" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q149930" start="20293" end="20305" title="Albin Moller" label="Albin Moller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="20359" end="20368" title="the Bible" label="the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20482" end="20496" title="Michał Frencel" label="Michał Frencel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20521" end="20542" title="Jan Bogumił Fabricius" label="Jan Bogumił Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20556" end="20574" title="Jan Bjedrich Fryco" label="Jan Bjedrich Fryco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="20636" end="20649" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20771" end="20784" title="Michał Hórnik" label="Michał Hórnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q65559" start="21039" end="21056" title="Jan Arnošt Smoler" label="Jan Arnošt Smoler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="21366" end="21373" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77194" start="21431" end="21450" title="Jakub Bart-Ćišinski" label="Jakub Bart-Ćišinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q148689" start="21663" end="21676" title="Lower Lusatia" label="Lower Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77198" start="21738" end="21748" title="Mato Kósyk" label="Mato Kósyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q145124" start="21766" end="21780" title="Bogumił Šwjela" label="Bogumił Šwjela"/>
<link wikidata="Q10775414" start="21882" end="21895" title="Serbski dom" label="Sorbian House"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="21910" end="21917" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148432" start="22000" end="22008" title="Domowina" label="Domowina"/>
<link wikidata="Q954854" start="22264" end="22278" title="Sokol Movement" label="Sokol Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q93223" start="22776" end="22785" title="Crostwitz" label="Crostwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="22797" end="22805" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="22883" end="22890" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="22894" end="22900" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="22970" end="22981" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="23040" end="23066" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="23334" end="23347" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="23432" end="23441" title="Socialism" label="Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="23687" end="23699" title="Polonization" label="Polonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24035" end="24047" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="24215" end="24229" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="24516" end="24530" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24551" end="24563" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="25222" end="25240" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="25244" end="25250" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106091" start="25803" end="25814" title="Paul Wexler (linguist)" label="Paul Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="26156" end="26170" title="Shrove Tuesday" label="Shrove Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26186" end="26192" title="Zapust (tradition)" label="Zapust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233785" start="26441" end="26455" title="Egg decorating in Slavic culture" label="Egg decorating"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="26491" end="26497" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93279" start="26921" end="26938" title="Panschwitz-Kuckau" label="Panschwitz-Kuckau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="27224" end="27227" title="East Germany" label="GDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q406991" start="27552" end="27569" title="pan-Slavic colors" label="pan-Slavic colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542601" start="27577" end="27607" title="Prague Slavic Congress, 1848" label="Prague Slavic Congress of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q149206" start="28085" end="28097" title="Rjana Łužica" label="Rjana Łužica"/>
<link wikidata="Q77192" start="28185" end="28199" title="Handrij Zejler" label="Handrij Zejler"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="28367" end="28374" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28456" end="28464" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="28514" end="28521" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81722" start="28523" end="28529" title="Kamenz" label="Kamenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14904" start="28535" end="28546" title="Hoyerswerda" label="Hoyerswerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q93286" start="28664" end="28671" title="Radibor" label="Radibor"/>
<link wikidata="Q93223" start="28694" end="28703" title="Crostwitz" label="Crostwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93287" start="28722" end="28731" title="Ralbitz-Rosenthal" label="Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="29048" end="29054" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29278" start="29119" end="29140" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q192816" start="29176" end="29189" title="Saint Barbara" label="Saint Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="29200" end="29214" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14904" start="29303" end="29314" title="Hoyerswerda" label="Hoyerswerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q572576" start="29318" end="29326" title="Schleife" label="Schleife"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="29686" end="29692" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="29916" end="29924" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="30035" end="30041" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="30046" end="30058" title="Great Friday" label="Great Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="30150" end="30159" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214" start="30240" end="30247" title="Cottbus" label="Cottbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="30859" end="30866" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148859" start="30897" end="30906" title="Spreewald" label="Spreewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="30947" end="30952" title="Spree (river)" label="Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="31245" end="31251" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="31262" end="31269" title="Rooster" label="Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="31377" end="31386" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="31429" end="31449" title="Bolesław I the Brave" label="Bolesław I the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="31486" end="31493" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8738" start="31512" end="31519" title="Meissen" label="Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="31626" end="31632" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q149734" start="31829" end="31845" title="Peace of Bautzen" label="Peace of Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="32301" end="32306" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="32414" end="32436" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q53438" start="32441" end="32463" title="Augustus III of Poland" label="Augustus III of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="32740" end="32753" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="32824" end="32845" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="32933" end="32940" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="32945" end="32951" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="32978" end="32991" title="Szlachta" label="Polish nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q367109" start="33357" end="33368" title="Jan Potocki" label="Jan Potocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q10145" start="33447" end="33455" title="milepost" label="milepost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452777" start="33476" end="33526" title="coat of arms of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="coat of arms of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174101" start="33637" end="33652" title="Romanticism in Poland" label="Polish Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65559" start="33688" end="33705" title="Jan Arnošt Smoler" label="Jan Arnošt Smoler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="33709" end="33716" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="33889" end="33897" title="Budissin" label="Budissin"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="34101" end="34120" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191479" start="34125" end="34143" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="Tadeusz Kościuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="34204" end="34220" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="34288" end="34294" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="34299" end="34305" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="34417" end="34433" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="34530" end="34537" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q149872" start="34785" end="34799" title="Maćica Serbska" label="Maćica Serbska"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="35003" end="35009" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q254524" start="35052" end="35075" title="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski" label="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q160298" start="35346" end="35355" title="Jan Skala" label="Jan Skala"/>
<link wikidata="Q77194" start="35357" end="35376" title="Jakub Bart-Ćišinski" label="Jakub Bart-Ćišinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8948" start="35381" end="35392" title="Arnošt Muka" label="Arnošt Muka"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="35401" end="35412" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q335092" start="35472" end="35497" title="Jan Baudouin de Courtenay" label="Jan Baudouin de Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="35574" end="35591" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q835076" start="35706" end="35751" title="Association of National Minorities in Germany" label="Association of National Minorities in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q318833" start="35790" end="35815" title="Union of Poles in Germany" label="Union of Poles in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160298" start="35863" end="35872" title="Jan Skala" label="Jan Skala"/>
<link wikidata="Q160348" start="36128" end="36137" title="Klettwitz" label="Klettwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170087" start="36189" end="36205" title="folk high school" label="folk high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692673" start="36209" end="36223" title="Dalki, Gniezno" label="Dalki, Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="36313" end="36323" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q144488" start="36753" end="36773" title="University of Warsaw" label="University of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="37127" end="37139" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319761" start="37431" end="37440" title="Dziedzice, Namysłów County" label="Dziedzice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21438156" start="37487" end="37530" title="Cultural property protection in Poland" label="Polish protected cultural heritage monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q717774" start="37576" end="37584" title="Namysłów" label="Namysłów"/>
<link wikidata="Q316843" start="37691" end="37708" title="Battle of Bautzen (1945)" label="Battle of Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93223" start="37783" end="37792" title="Crostwitz" label="Crostwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93250" start="37821" end="37833" title="Königswartha" label="Königswartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q984538" start="37923" end="37932" title="Krotoszyn" label="Krotoszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="38264" end="38278" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="38302" end="38314" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837151" start="38528" end="38536" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans from Poland during and after World War II" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="38621" end="38670" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="former eastern Poland annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q147929" start="38769" end="38778" title="Zgorzelec" label="Zgorzelec"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="39326" end="39343" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="39562" end="39567" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="39572" end="39578" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q179596" start="40324" end="40334" title="Coat of arms of the Czech Republic" label="Czech Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q572518" start="40342" end="40349" title="Drebkau" label="Drebkau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077" start="40372" end="40379" title="Görlitz" label="Görlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q494747" start="40404" end="40409" title="Guben" label="Guben"/>
<link wikidata="Q81722" start="40431" end="40437" title="Kamenz" label="Kamenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156768" start="40461" end="40466" title="Löbau" label="Löbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q572559" start="40491" end="40500" title="Spremberg" label="Spremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="40576" end="40582" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="40750" end="40764" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q740863" start="40885" end="40895" title="Česká Lípa" label="Česká Lípa"/>
<link wikidata="Q158275" start="40915" end="40924" title="Varnsdorf" label="Varnsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q146351" start="40940" end="40947" title="Liberec" label="Liberec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13286" start="41317" end="41330" title="Lower Sorbian" label="Lower Sorbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="41572" end="41589" title="Moravian Brethren" label="Moravian Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="41616" end="41622" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="41775" end="41790" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698920" start="41808" end="41822" title="Barossa Valley" label="Barossa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="41836" end="41844" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="41849" end="41864" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982560" start="41927" end="41943" title="Wends of Texas" label="especially Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597386" start="41963" end="41976" title="List of Sorbs" label="List of Sorbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="41979" end="41986" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="41989" end="42003" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="42006" end="42011" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="42014" end="42019" title="Wends" label="Wends"/>
<link wikidata="Q149247" start="42022" end="42029" title="Milceni" label="Milceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q149281" start="42032" end="42051" title="Pavle Jurišić Šturm" label="Pavle Jurišić Šturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092565" start="42054" end="42081" title="Wendish People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Wendish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982560" start="42084" end="42098" title="Wends of Texas" label="Wends of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159837" start="42101" end="42142" title="List of ancient Slavic peoples and tribes" label="List of ancient Slavic peoples and tribes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150208" wikidata="Q1540243" url="?curid=150208" title="River Stour, Kent">
<text>The River Stour (, rhymes with &quot;hour&quot;) is a river in Kent, England that flows into the North Sea at Pegwell Bay. Above Plucks Gutter, where the Little Stour joins it, the river is normally known as the Great Stour. The upper section of the river, above its confluence with the East Stour at Ashford is sometimes known as the Upper Great Stour or West Stour. In the tidal lower reaches, the artificial Stonar Cut short cuts a large loop in the natural river.

The Stour has Kent&#x27;s second largest catchment area (the River Medway having the largest). The lower part of the river is tidal; its original mouth was on the Wantsum Channel, an important sea route in medieval times. The river has three major tributaries, and many minor ones. For much of its length, it flows in a generally south-west to north-east direction.

The historic city of Canterbury is situated on the river, as are the former Cinque Port of Sandwich and the railway town of Ashford. The route of the Stour Valley Walk follows the river.

==Course==



===Upper Great Stour===
The source, of what is known at that point as the Great Stour, is near the village of Lenham, within a short distance of the River Len, a tributary of the Medway. The source is at a high elevation close to the North Downs escarpment. At first, the river flows south east in a narrow valley parallel to the escarpment and the Greensand ridge to the south, before breaking through the ridge near Hothfield into a broad valley. Three small streams enter from the north, having their headwaters on the close to Downs escarpment. Flood defences can turn this valley into a large lake and an embankment has had to be built to prevent overflow into the Medway catchment barely away to the south. The river turns north east by the village of Great Chart in the direction of its outlet to the sea.

The confluence with the East Stour, flowing from its source near Hythe, is to be found at Pledge&#x27;s Mill at the bottom of East Hill in Ashford.

===Lower Great Stour===
The town of Ashford marks the start of the middle section of the river, sited at a crossing point of the river and on ancient track ways. In Ashford, the river helps form part of the Ashford Green Corridor.

After Ashford, the Stour breaches the North Downs; for most of this distance there are no tributaries. After the Brook stream enters from the right, there are now to Canterbury. In this stretch the river flows through the villages of Wye, Chilham and Chartham, with Wye being a fordable crossing.

The historic city of Canterbury lies at the junction of four branches of the Roman road Watling Street which connected Canterbury with ports around the Kent coast – Lympne, Dover, Richborough and Reculver. Within the city, the river flows in two channels, one through the centre of the city, and the other to the north of the city walls. The two channels rejoin to the east of Canterbury, before the river reaches Fordwich, a former outport of Canterbury and the current tidal limit of the river.

Beyond Fordwich, the river passes between several former gravel pits and through the reed beds of the Stodmarsh National Nature Reserve. Beyond the nature reserve lies the open farmland on the reclaimed marshes surrounding the river crossing at Grove Ferry Picnic Area, near the hamlet of Upstreet.

At the hamlet of Plucks Gutter, the second of the large tributaries enters the main river: the long Little Stour, which begins life as a spring stream in Bekesbourne. From here on, the river is normally known as the River Stour.

===River Stour===
The twin villages in the parish of Stourmouth (West and East) mark the original point where the Stour entered the erstwhile Wantsum Channel, a strait used for hundreds of years until silting and land reclamation turned the sea channel into a large drainage ditch. At this point the third large tributary, the 8.4-mile (13.4 km) Sarre Penn (named locally as the &quot;Fishbourne Stream&quot;) enters with the Wantsum Channel.

Here the river turns southwards to the once-thriving port of Sandwich, after which it loops back on itself to the north before entering the Strait of Dover at Pegwell Bay. The &quot;Stonar Cut&quot; obviates the need for seagoing craft to take the longer route around the loop at Sandwich.

From the tidal limit at Fordwich to the sea, the river is fringed with marshes. Most of them are located on what was the floor of the Wantsum Channel, whilst those to the south lie behind the sand dunes of the Sandwich Flats. These marshes are criss-crossed with drainage ditches. The principal marshes are those of Chislet, within the ancient estuary of the river; Wade, west of Birchington; and Ash Level.

===Stonar Cut===
In the mid-18th century, it became necessary to alleviate the problem of flooding along the lower course of the Stour. The action of tidal drift of shingle along the coast had resulted in the huge loop at the estuary end of the river, and on 29 November 1774 an Act of Parliament was enacted to bypass the loop at the narrowest end, at Stonar. The works, to become known as the &quot;Stonar Cut&quot;, made use of an existing sluice to cut across the neck of the loop, and were completed in 1776.

During World War I, huge volumes of both troops and supplies were needed on the Continent and, in the utmost secrecy, a new port was built at Richborough. Landing facilities along the Cut were built, and the East Kent Light Railway was extended to service the port. Nothing now remains of much of those works, and the Cut has been allowed to return to its natural state.

===Tributaries===
;Notes
==History==

In Roman and medieval times, the river was an important highway, connecting Canterbury with the Continent. Fordwich became important to shipping after the silting up of the southern entrance to the English Channel.

In 1831 Joseph Priestley wrote his &quot;Historical Account of the Navigable Rivers, Canals and Railways&quot;. In it he described in one section the &quot;Canterbury Navigation, or River Stour&quot;. He includes an account of its course and the improvements being carried out at that time to assist navigation, and details of new port facilities.

==Economy==

===Water mills===

Man has used the River Stour and its tributaries for centuries as a source of power. Many different processes were performed by the use of water power:- Corn milling, fulling, paper making and electricity generation. Many of the mills survive today as house conversions, with two of them still working commercially.

===Communications===
Both roads and railways make use of the river. The Watling Street link to Richborough (&quot;Rutupiae&quot;) and their link from Canterbury southwards made use of the North Downs gap. The rail links from Canterbury to the Isle of Thanet and also to Ashford, and the main A28 road follow identical routes.

The 51.5-mile (82.4 km) Stour Valley Walk follows the river for much of its length.

===Fishing===
The Great Stour estuary at Plucks Gutter and Grove Ferry is renowned for its coarse fishing, particularly bream stocks.

==Flooding==

The lower-lying parts of Canterbury have in the past been particularly prone to flooding . The &quot;River Stour (Kent) Internal Drainage Board&quot; has the responsibility of reducing that risk in the river catchment area

==Environment==

In 2006, male fish were found with signs of &quot;feminisation&quot; after having been exposed to treated sewage effluent in the river near Ashford. It was found that oestrogen enters the river when the nearby Bybrook sewage works discharges its end product.

In 2009, Southern Water started work on a £4.2 million environmental improvement project at its Lenham treatment works to ensure wastewater is treated to higher standards. New reed beds, containing more than 7,500 reeds, will help clean up to 4.3 million litres of wastewater from more than 3,600 people each day.

In 2017 The Marine Group based in Cardiff begun work with their water injection dredger on the river through Sandwich and Richborough to tackle some of the sediment build up.

==In popular culture==

Author Russell Hoban repurposes the River Stour where it flows through Canterbury as the &quot;Rivver Sour&quot; in his 1980, post apocalyptic novel &quot;Riddley Walker&quot;.
The River Stour features in the 1944 film &quot;A Canterbury Tale&quot;.

==See also==
*Rivers of the United Kingdom
*Rivers of Kent

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="4" end="15" title="River Stour, Kent" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="63" end="67" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="97" end="106" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425604" start="110" end="121" title="Pegwell Bay" label="Pegwell Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392603" start="129" end="142" title="Plucks Gutter" label="Plucks Gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="154" end="166" title="Little Stour" label="Little Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="212" end="223" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="267" end="277" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q384672" start="287" end="297" title="East Stour, Kent" label="East Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="301" end="308" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="335" end="352" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Upper Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="356" end="366" title="River Stour, Kent" label="West Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="411" end="421" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Stonar Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="530" end="542" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426237" start="632" end="647" title="Wantsum Channel" label="Wantsum Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="717" end="728" title="tributaries" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="857" end="867" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q748895" start="912" end="923" title="Cinque Ports" label="Cinque Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="927" end="935" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782540" start="944" end="956" title="railway town" label="railway town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620577" start="986" end="1003" title="Stour Valley Walk" label="Stour Valley Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246334" start="1148" end="1154" title="Lenham" label="Lenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337576" start="1187" end="1196" title="River Len" label="River Len"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="1217" end="1223" title="River Medway" label="Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="1272" end="1283" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="1368" end="1378" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604433" start="1387" end="1402" title="Greensand Ridge" label="Greensand ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807145" start="1456" end="1465" title="Hothfield" label="Hothfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598954" start="1796" end="1807" title="Great Chart" label="Great Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q384672" start="1876" end="1886" title="East Stour, Kent" label="East Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q967166" start="1917" end="1922" title="Hythe, Kent" label="Hythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="2037" end="2044" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804998" start="2208" end="2230" title="Ashford Green Corridor" label="Ashford Green Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395190" start="2346" end="2358" title="Brook Stream" label="Brook stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q590063" start="2467" end="2470" title="Wye, Kent" label="Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004824" start="2472" end="2479" title="Chilham" label="Chilham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743911" start="2484" end="2492" title="Chartham" label="Chartham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="2552" end="2562" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="2608" end="2618" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="2619" end="2633" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056118" start="2696" end="2702" title="Lympne" label="Lympne"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="2704" end="2709" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607619" start="2711" end="2722" title="Richborough" label="Richborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307700" start="2727" end="2735" title="Reculver" label="Reculver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177468" start="2945" end="2953" title="Fordwich" label="Fordwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185059" start="2964" end="2971" title="outport" label="outport"/>
<link wikidata="Q504874" start="3086" end="3096" title="gravel pit" label="gravel pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q620424" start="3114" end="3122" title="reed bed" label="reed bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099020" start="3131" end="3164" title="Stodmarsh National Nature Reserve" label="Stodmarsh National Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611390" start="3274" end="3297" title="Grove Ferry Picnic Area" label="Grove Ferry Picnic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q590895" start="3318" end="3326" title="Upstreet" label="Upstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392603" start="3346" end="3359" title="Plucks Gutter" label="Plucks Gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="3429" end="3441" title="Little Stour" label="Little Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881598" start="3483" end="3494" title="Bekesbourne" label="Bekesbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220240" start="3612" end="3622" title="Stourmouth" label="Stourmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426237" start="3701" end="3716" title="Wantsum Channel" label="Wantsum Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="3720" end="3726" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421548" start="3905" end="3915" title="Sarre Penn" label="Sarre Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="4064" end="4072" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="4143" end="4158" title="Strait of Dover" label="Strait of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425604" start="4162" end="4173" title="Pegwell Bay" label="Pegwell Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="4365" end="4372" title="Marsh" label="marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964002" start="4610" end="4617" title="Chislet" label="Chislet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="4638" end="4645" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q865021" start="4674" end="4685" title="Birchington" label="Birchington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="4982" end="4999" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5056" end="5062" title="Stonar" label="Stonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5225" end="5236" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328700" start="5426" end="5449" title="East Kent Light Railway" label="East Kent Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="5826" end="5841" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q590422" start="6785" end="6799" title="Isle of Thanet" label="Isle of Thanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="6812" end="6819" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q279963" start="6834" end="6842" title="A28 road" label="A28 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620577" start="6893" end="6910" title="Stour Valley Walk" label="Stour Valley Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17767599" start="7074" end="7079" title="bream" label="bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="7388" end="7412" title="Endocrine system" label="&amp;quot;feminisation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="7450" end="7456" title="Wastewater" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057706" start="7457" end="7465" title="effluent" label="effluent"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="7511" end="7520" title="estrogen" label="oestrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570621" start="7613" end="7627" title="Southern Water" label="Southern Water"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7927" end="7943" title="The Marine Group" label="The Marine Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353673" start="8126" end="8139" title="Russell Hoban" label="Russell Hoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="8190" end="8200" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332458" start="8274" end="8288" title="Riddley Walker" label="Riddley Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q133466" start="8344" end="8361" title="A Canterbury Tale" label="A Canterbury Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573517" start="8384" end="8412" title="Rivers of the United Kingdom" label="Rivers of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338331" start="8414" end="8428" title="Rivers of Kent" label="Rivers of Kent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150209" wikidata="Q491252" url="?curid=150209" title="Robert Smith (musician)">
<text>Robert James Smith (born 21 April 1959) is an English musician who is the co-founder, lead vocalist, guitarist, primary songwriter, and only continuous member of the Cure, a post punk rock band formed in 1976. His guitar-playing style, singing voice, and fashion sense, often sporting a pale complexion, smeared red lipstick, black eye-liner, unkempt wiry black hair, and all-black clothes, were highly influential on the goth subculture that rose to prominence in the 1980s.

Smith&#x27;s other work includes playing the lead guitar as a member of Siouxsie and the Banshees from 1982 to 1984 and being the co-founder of the short-lived band the Glove in 1983. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the Cure in 2019, and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine ranked him as the 157th greatest singer of all time in 2023.

==Early life==
Robert James Smith was born in Blackpool on 21 April 1959, the third of four children of Rita Mary (née Emmott) and James Alexander Smith. He came from a musical family, as his father sang and his mother played the piano. Raised as a Catholic, he later became an atheist. When he was three years old, his family moved to Horley, where he attended St Francis&#x27; Primary School. When he was six, his family moved to Crawley, where he attended St. Francis&#x27; Junior School. He later attended Notre Dame Middle School from 1970 to 1972, and St Wilfrid&#x27;s Comprehensive School from 1972 to 1977. He and his younger sister Janet received piano lessons as children. He later quipped, &quot;[Janet] was a piano prodigy, so sibling rivalry made me take up guitar because she couldn&#x27;t get her fingers around the neck.&quot; He told &quot;Smash Hits&quot; that, from about 1966 when he turned seven years old, his older brother Richard taught him &quot;a few basic chords&quot; on guitar.

Smith began taking classical guitar lessons from the age of nine with a student of guitarist John Williams, whom he called a &quot;really excellent guitarist&quot;. He said, &quot;I learned a lot, but got to the point where I was losing the sense of fun. I wish I&#x27;d stuck with it.&quot; He has said his guitar tutor was &quot;horrified&quot; by his playing. He gave up formal tuition and began teaching himself to play by ear, listening to his older brother&#x27;s record collection. He was 13 or 14 when he became more serious about rock music and &quot;started to play and learn frenetically&quot;. Up until December 1972, he did not have a guitar of his own and had been borrowing his brother&#x27;s, so his brother gave him the guitar for Christmas. Smith said of this gift, &quot;I&#x27;d commandeered it anywayso whether he was officially giving it to me at Christmas or not, I was going to have it!&quot; Rock biographer Jeff Apter maintains that the guitar Smith received for Christmas of 1972 was from his parents, and equates this item with Smith&#x27;s Woolworths &quot;Top 20&quot; guitar that was later used on many of the Cure&#x27;s earliest recordings. Smith was quoted in several earlier sources as saying he purchased the guitar himself for £20 in 1978.

Smith described Notre Dame Middle School as &quot;a very free-thinking establishment&quot; with an experimental approach, a freedom he claims to have abused. On one occasion, he said that he wore a black velvet dress to school and kept it on all day: &quot;The teachers just thought, &#x27;Oh, it&#x27;s a phase he&#x27;s going through, he&#x27;s got some personality crisis, let&#x27;s help him through it.&#x27;&quot; He said &quot;four other kids&quot; beat him up after school, although Apter notes that Smith has given several conflicting versions of the story. Apter also reports that Smith put in just enough effort at Notre Dame to pass tests, and quotes Smith as saying, &quot;If you were crafty enough, you could convince the teachers you were special; I did virtually nothing for three years.&quot; St Wilfrid&#x27;s was reportedly stricter than Notre Dame. In the summer of 1975, Smith and his school bandmates took their O Levels, but only he and Michael Dempsey stayed on to attend sixth form at St Wilfrid&#x27;s from 1976 to 1977.

Smith has said that he was expelled from St Wilfrid&#x27;s as an &quot;undesirable influence&quot; after his band Malice&#x27;s second live performance shortly before Christmas in 1976, which took place at the school and allegedly caused a riot: &quot;I got taken back [in 1977] but they never acknowledged that I was there [...] I did three A levelsfailed biology miserably, scraped through French, and got a &#x27;B&#x27; in English. Then I spent eight or nine months on social security until they stopped my money, so I thought, &#x27;Now&#x27;s the time to make a demo and see what people think.&#x27;&quot; According to Cure biographers Dave Bowler and Bryan Dray, the school expelled ex-Malice co-founder Marc Ceccagno along with Smith, whose new band Amulet played the December school show. Smith has given conflicting accounts of his alleged expulsion, elsewhere saying that he was merely suspended and that it was because he did not get along with the school headmaster, and on another occasion saying he was suspended because his &quot;attitude towards religion was considered wrong&quot;.

==Music career==
===School bands: 1972–1976===
Smith has said that his first band when he was 14 consisted of himself, his brother Richard, their younger sister Janet, and some of Richard&#x27;s friends. He remarked, &quot;It was called the Crawley Goat Band – brilliant!&quot; However, while the Crawley Goat Band may have been Smith&#x27;s first regular group, he would have been just 13 when he and his Notre Dame schoolmates gave their first one-off performance together as the Obelisk, an early incarnation of what would eventually become the Cure. The Obelisk featured Smith (still playing piano at this point) alongside Marc Ceccagno (lead guitar), Michael Dempsey (guitar), Alan Hill (bass), and Laurence &quot;Lol&quot; Tolhurst (percussion) and, according to the Cure&#x27;s official biography &quot;Ten Imaginary Years&quot;, gave their only performance at a school function in April 1972. Jeff Apter, however, dates the performance to April 1973, which is at variance with Smith and his bandmates having already left Notre Dame Middle School by this time.

During the latter part of 1972, the nucleus of Smith, Ceccagno, Dempsey and Tolhurst had gone on to secondary school together at St Wilfrid&#x27;s Comprehensive, where they and their friends continued playing music together. Smith said that they were known simply as &quot;The Group&quot; &quot;because it was the only one at school so we didn&#x27;t need a name.&quot; Dempsey, who eventually moved from guitar to bassist for the Group, said that another name they toyed with was the Brat&#x27;s Club – a reference to Evelyn Waugh&#x27;s &quot;A Handful of Dust&quot;. Smith said that &quot;the group&quot; eventually became Malice, &quot;sort of a sub-metal punk group -with Michael Dempsey, Laurence and two other blokes.&quot; According to the band&#x27;s &quot;Ten Imaginary Years&quot; biography, between January and December 1976, the shifting line-up for Malice featured several &quot;other blokes&quot;, with founding guitarist Marc Ceccagno being replaced by Porl Thompson, an early drummer known only as &quot;Graham&quot; replaced by Lol Tolhurst, and &quot;Graham&#x27;s brother&quot; replaced by vocalist Martin Creasy. By 1977, Malice had become Easy Cure.

===The Cure: 1976–present===
====As singer and frontman====
Smith did not intend to become the lead vocalist of the Cure. Bowler and Dray note that the Obelisk had &quot;featured Dempsey and Ceccagno as guitarists and him [Robert] on piano as very much a background player.&quot; As the Group gradually became Malice and began regular rehearsals in January 1976, Smith was still one of several floating members. Of their first &quot;proper&quot; rehearsal at St Edwards Church, Smith said:

By December 1976, Graham&#x27;s brother had been replaced by vocalist Martin Creasy, a journalist with &quot;The Crawley Observer&quot;, whose brief tenure with the group was a live débâcle according to those involved. By January 1977 Malice had changed their name to Easy Cure, partly to distance themselves from these earlier shows. Both drummer Lol Tolhurst and bassist Mick Dempsey are also noted as having performed vocals with the group in the early years. Tolhurst also sang on a cover of &quot;Wild Thing&quot; at Malice&#x27;s early shows, and Dempsey sang backing vocals on songs like &quot;Killing An Arab&quot;, and even recorded lead vocals on one track on the Cure&#x27;s debut album, their cover of Hendrix&#x27;s &quot;Foxy Lady&quot;. During March 1977, a vocalist named Gary X came and went, and was replaced by Peter O&#x27;Toole, described as &quot;a demon footballer and Bowie fan&quot; who made his singing debut in April. O&#x27;Toole remained Easy Cure&#x27;s steady front man for several months while the group played the local pub circuit, &quot;building up an enormous local following&quot;, and was even the singer on the home demo tapes that landed them their first recording contract with Hansa Records.

However, by the time Easy Cure entered London&#x27;s Sound And Vision Studio to record for Hansa in October 1977, O&#x27;Toole had left to work on a Kibbutz in Israel. Smith then fell into the vocalist role by default, since no better replacement appeared. He told &quot;Musician&quot; magazine in 1989: 

On 14 October 2024, Smith announced that he plans on retiring in 2029. &quot;I’m 70 in 2029, and that’s the 50th anniversary of the first Cure album [&quot;Three Imaginary Boys&quot;]. If I make it that far, that’s it. In the intervening time, I’d like to include playing concerts as part of the overall plan of what we’re going to do. I’ve loved it; the last 10 years of playing shows have been the best 10 years of being in the band. It pisses all over the other 30-odd years! It’s been great&quot; Smith said.

====As principal songwriter====
Smith was also not the sole songwriter or lyricist in the group during their early years; the band name Easy Cure came from a song penned by Lol Tolhurst, while Grinding Halt began as a Tolhurst lyric that Smith shortened to the first half of each line. Easy Cure condensed its name to the Cure shortly afterwards. During 1978–79, Smith composed and recorded demo versions of some of the Cure&#x27;s definitive early songs on his sister Janet&#x27;s Hammond organ with a built-in tape recorder, including &quot;10:15 Saturday Night&quot;.

By the time the &quot;NME&quot; interviewed the band in October 1979 during their tour with Siouxsie and the Banshees, Smith was acknowledged as the principal writer of &quot;almost all of the Cure&#x27;s songs and lyrics&quot;, and stated that he was uncomfortable playing and singing songs that were not his own. Following his return from the Banshees&#x27; tour, Smith also composed most of the music for the album &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot; using the Hammond, a drum machine and his trademark Top 20 Woolworth&#x27;s guitar, during a home demo session in his parents&#x27; basement. Most of the lyrics had been written in one night in Newcastle. Michael Dempsey, discussing his own departure from the group at this time, later remarked: 

Although Smith wrote most of the lyrics for &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot;, many were also rewritten by the group during the recording of the album itself. Dempsey&#x27;s replacement Simon Gallup described the collective writing process to &quot;Sounds&quot; in 1980: Lol Tolhurst later stated that he, Gallup and Smith all wrote lyrics for the Cure&#x27;s early albums, and that the group dynamic only changed after their 1982 album &quot;Pornography&quot;: Tolhurst claimed to have written the lyrics for &quot;All Cats Are Grey&quot; from the 1981 album &quot;Faith&quot;, which he later re-recorded with his own project, Levinhurst. In contrast to Tolhurst&#x27;s recollection of their songwriting as a group effort until after &quot;Pornography&quot;, in 1982 Smith claimed to have written &quot;90 per cent of the &quot;Pornography&quot; album&quot;, and that he therefore could not leave the Cure, because it would not be the Cure without him.

For their first four albums (&quot;Three Imaginary Boys&quot;, &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot;, &quot;Faith&quot; and &quot;Pornography&quot;), all members of the group had received equal songwriting credits. With Simon Gallup&#x27;s departure reducing the group to a duo, and Tolhurst quitting drums to start taking keyboard lessons, from July 1982 until Gallup&#x27;s return in February 1985, according to Smith, much of the writing and recording process within the Cure effectively became a solo effort. Nonetheless, Tolhurst was credited as co-writer of five of the eight songs featured on 1983&#x27;s singles and b-sides collection &quot;Japanese Whispers&quot; (including &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to Bed&quot; and &quot;The Walk&quot;), while &quot;The Love Cats&quot;, &quot;Lament&quot; and &quot;The Dream&quot; were credited to Smith only. Of 1984&#x27;s &quot;The Top&quot;, Smith would say it was &quot;the solo album I never made&quot;, having played nearly all instruments himself except for drums (by Andy Anderson), with Porl Thompson contributing saxophone to one song (&quot;Give Me It&quot;), and Tolhurst contributing keyboards to 3 of the album&#x27;s 10 songs.

In 1985, the band had success with &quot;The Head on the Door&quot;, with Smith as the sole songwriter. The line-up also included Gallup, Tolhurst, Thompson and Boris Williams. In 1987, the double album &quot;Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me&quot;, with singles &quot;Just Like Heaven&quot; and &quot;Hot, Hot, Hot!&quot; was released to increasing popularity for the band in the US. From that time and on subsequent records, the writing was made by the whole band but still with Smith as the main composer and arranger.

===Siouxsie and the Banshees, the Glove, and collaborations ===
====Smith, Severin, and Siouxsie on tour: 1979====

Robert Smith met Steven Severin of Siouxsie and the Banshees at a Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire gig at the London YMCA on 3 August 1979. Both the Banshees and the Cure had been signed to Polydor and its imprint Fiction, respectively, by Chris Parry, and Smith was already a fan of the Banshees. The pair hit it off, and Severin invited Smith to accompany the Banshees on a UK tour in support of their second album &quot;Join Hands&quot;. The two bands embarked on the tour later in August, and meanwhile in September Banshees singer Siouxsie Sioux contributed backing vocals to &quot;I&#x27;m Cold&quot;, the B-side to the Cure&#x27;s next single &quot;Jumping Someone Else&#x27;s Train&quot; (released in November), A few dates into the &quot;Join Hands&quot; tour, however, Banshees&#x27; guitarist John McKay and drummer Kenny Morris quit the band hours before they were due to go on stage in Aberdeen, placing the tour in limbo. Determined not to let the tour end, Smith volunteered to replace McKay temporarily on condition that the Cure remained the opening act, while ex-Slits drummer Budgie joined on drums. The tour resumed on 18 September, with Smith playing in both bands each night. At the tour&#x27;s end, Smith returned full-time to the Cure.

Severin has attributed Smith&#x27;s transition from a reticent figure to a more enigmatic front person to Smith&#x27;s early experiences playing with Siouxsie and the Banshees: 

====Cult Hero and Dance Fools Dance label: 1979–1980====
Smith meanwhile conceived the Cult Hero side-project to collaborate with bassist Simon Gallup of the Magspies, recorded at Morgan Studios in October 1979. With some leftover time in the studio from the Cult Hero sessions, Smith also produced recordings by the Magspies and a young vocal and percussion duo the Obtainers (described by Steve Sutherland of &quot;Melody Maker&quot; as &quot;two 11-year olds banging on pots and pans&quot;), for the fledgling independent label Dance Fools Dance co-founded by Robert Smith and Ric Gallup, elder brother of Simon. The Cult Hero single was released on the Fiction Records label in December 1979, while the Magspies/Obtainers split single appeared on Dance Fools Dance the following year.

====The Stranglers and Associates: April 1980====
On 3 and 4 April 1980 at the Rainbow Theatre in London, Robert Smith and Matthieu Hartley (also of the Magspies, Cult Hero and by this time, the Cure) were among the many guest members of a unique line-up of the Stranglers to play two protest concerts for Hugh Cornwell, who had been imprisoned on drugs charges in late 1979. Joy Division were also one of the support bands on the second night. Recordings from the event were later released as &quot;The Stranglers and Friends – Live in Concert&quot; in 1995. Also during April, Smith provided backing vocals for the Associates&#x27; debut album &quot;The Affectionate Punch&quot;, released in August 1980. At the time, the Associates were also signed to Fiction Records, and had been joined in late 1979 by former Cure bassist Michael Dempsey. The Associates&#x27; front man Billy Mackenzie was a friend of Smith&#x27;s for more than 20 years, and the Cure song, &quot;Cut Here&quot; (from 2001&#x27;s &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; album), was written in response to Mackenzie&#x27;s suicide in 1997. As Smith told &quot;Jam! Showbiz&quot; following the release of &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;: 

====And Also the Trees: 1981–1982====

During 1981, the Cure received a home demo tape from And Also the Trees and immediately became friends. Front-man Simon Huw Jones later told &quot;Abstract Magazine&quot; that the Cure were AATT&#x27;s &quot;biggest fans, the first people who came up to us and said &#x27;we think you&#x27;re great&#x27;&quot; and that the two groups were mutually influenced by one another. The group joined the Cure in support of the &quot;Eight Appearances&quot; tour of Scotland and Northern England during November and December 1981, together with 1313, featuring Steve Severin and Lydia Lunch, and the following year Robert Smith together with Cure/Banshees co-producer Mike Hedges co-produced And Also the Trees&#x27; 1982 cassette release &quot;From Under the Hill&quot;. Smith was initially to have also produced the band&#x27;s debut single &quot;The Secret Sea&quot;, but instead Lol Tolhurst stepped in as producer between 1982–84, both for the band&#x27;s first two singles, and for their self-titled debut album. Smith would again collaborate with And Also the Trees in 1991.

====Post-&quot;Pornography&quot; projects: 1982====
In the wake of the Cure&#x27;s &quot;Fourteen Explicit Moments&quot; tour, which culminated in the departure of Simon Gallup and the temporary dissolution of the Cure, in June 1982, Smith began collaborating with Severin of Siouxsie and the Banshees again. Although released under the name of the Cure, the only personnel to perform on the original &quot;Flexipop&quot; single release of &quot;Lament&quot; in August 1982 were Smith and Severin, and soon afterwards, Smith admitted that the Cure as a band now existed in name only. That August, Smith briefly resurrected the Dance Fools Dance label to record and release the single &quot;Frame One&quot; by Crawley gothic/post-punk outfit Animation. In September, Smith with 
Tolhurst (now on keyboards) and session drummer Steve Goulding went into the studio to record a &quot;blatant pop single&quot; at the instigation of Fiction Records manager Chris Parry. Smith was reportedly so unhappy with the resultant track &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to Bed&quot; that he attempted to have the single released under the name of Recur, feeling that the single let Cure fans down. During October, Smith and Severin also recorded early demos for what would become the Glove&#x27;s &quot;Punish Me With Kisses&quot; single, at Mike Hedges&#x27; studio &quot;The Playground&quot;.

Smith also returned to touring as a live guitarist with Siouxsie and the Banshees from November, following the collapse of then-Banshee John McGeoch from nervous exhaustion one week before the band were due to go on tour. His return to guitar duties with the group prompted Smith to remark: He later said that he was &quot;fed up&quot; and &quot;really disillusioned&quot; with the pressures of playing in the Cure, and that &quot;the Banshees thing came along and I thought it would be a really good escape&quot;. Journalist/biographer Jo-Ann Greene noted that Smith&#x27;s replacement of McGeoch &quot;left a bad taste in many people&#x27;s mouths, as [McGeoch] was informed of his sacking only a week after his recovery from a brief spell of clinical depression&quot;.

====The Venomettes and Marc and the Mambas: 1983====
Returning to England from the Banshees&#x27; tour of Australia, New Zealand, and Japan in January 1983, Smith was approached the following month by Nicholas Dixon, a young choreographer with the Royal Ballet, to score a choreographed adaptation of &quot;Les Enfants Terribles&quot;. To test the idea, Smith and Severin recorded a reworking of the Cure&#x27;s &quot;Siamese Twins&quot;, with Tolhurst on drums, and Anne Stephenson and Virginia Hewes (later known as Ginni Ball) of the Venomettes on violins, which was performed on BBC Two&#x27;s music programme Riverside in March 1983, featuring two dancers choreographed by Dixon. Despite a positive critical reception, however, neither Dixon nor Smith were happy with the results, and the &quot;Les Enfants Terribles&quot; project was shelved indefinitely.

Smith and Severin meanwhile co-wrote the music to Marc and the Mambas&#x27; song &quot;Torment&quot;, which appeared on the album &quot;Torment and Toreros&quot;. Between March and June 1983, Smith recorded with the Glove and (ostensibly) the Cure; prompting him to remark: &quot;I need a holiday ... I keep making plans to go every week, but every week I&#x27;m in another group.&quot;

====The Glove: 1983====

Smith and Severin had first discussed collaborating on an external side-project in 1981, although their respective commitments to the Cure and the Banshees had previously left no time for the project. From May 1983, however, with the Cure on hold and Siouxsie and Budgie working together as the Creatures, recording of the Glove&#x27;s album &quot;Blue Sunshine&quot; began in earnest. Budgie&#x27;s then girlfriend Jeanette Landray, formerly a dancer with Zoo, was recruited to perform vocals, while Andy Anderson from Brilliant was brought in to play drums. The Venomettes with Martin McCarrick were hired to perform strings in studio. The Glove took its name from the &quot;murder mitten&quot; from the Beatles&#x27; animated feature &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;, while the album title came from a B-movie by the same name about a potent strain of LSD that caused people to lose their hair and turn into homicidal maniacs many years after their first trip. Severin said of the project: Smith described the creation of the album by saying: As well as &quot;Barbarella&quot;, &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; and the eponymous &quot;Blue Sunshine&quot;, films cited as having fuelled the project included &quot;The Brood&quot;, &quot;Evil Dead&quot;, &quot;The Helicopter Spies&quot; and &quot;Inferno&quot;. Retrospectively, the &quot;Melody Maker&quot;&#x27;s Steve Sutherland described the Glove as &quot;a manic psychedelic pastiche&quot;.

====Member of the Banshees, single with Tim Pope: 1983–1984====
The Glove&#x27;s &quot;Blue Sunshine&quot; album and its lead single &quot;Like an Animal&quot; were both released in August 1983, followed by the Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; single &quot;Dear Prudence&quot; (a cover of the Beatles&#x27; song) in September, all on the Banshees&#x27; own label Wonderland Records. Smith officially became a member of the Banshees. According to the Banshees&#x27; authorised biography, &quot;Dear Prudence&quot; had been recorded at Smith&#x27;s insistence to document his time with the group, and it became their biggest UK hit, reaching number 3 on the Singles Chart.

Shortly before the group&#x27;s scheduled Royal Albert Hall concerts in September and October 1983, Siouxsie and the Banshees were also invited to participate in an episode of Channel 4&#x27;s television series &quot;Play at Home&quot;, which they agreed to in order to take advantage of having the upcoming concerts filmed. Smith had previously suggested to Severin that &quot;the Banshees shouldn&#x27;t be doing tours, they should be doing something really ambitious like &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; on stage&quot;, and Severin decided to adapt this idea for the &quot;Play at Home&quot; episode, substituting the Wizard of Oz concept with &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot; to tie the theme with the Banshees&#x27; Wonderland recording label. The result was a 45-minute television programme featuring performances from Siouxsie and the Banshees, the Glove and the Creatures, in which all four members of the Banshees appeared in a recreation of the Mad Hatter&#x27;s Tea Party dressed as Alice, while each individual member scripted their own solo character performance and monologue. Musical interludes included the Glove performing &quot;A Blues in Drag&quot;, the Creatures playing &quot;Weathercade&quot; and the whole band performing &quot;Circle&quot;. The programme (which did not air on television until the following year) concluded with live footage of Siouxsie and the Banshees playing &quot;Voodoo Dolly&quot; and &quot;Helter Skelter&quot; live at the Royal Albert Hall. Meanwhile, both the Glove&#x27;s second single, &quot;Punish Me with Kisses&quot;, and the Banshees&#x27; live double album and companion video, &quot;Nocturne&quot; from the Royal Albert Hall shows, appeared in November. In March 1984, the next Banshees single to feature Smith on guitar and keyboards, &quot;Swimming Horses&quot; was released; Smith co-composed the new material with them. This was followed by &quot;Dazzle&quot; in May, and finally the album &quot;Hyæna&quot; in June – Smith having left the Banshees the month prior to release, citing health issues due to his overloaded schedule.

Meanwhile, in between commitments to the Cure, the Glove and the Banshees, Smith also found time to perform on Tim Pope&#x27;s Syd Barrett-inspired &quot;I Want To Be A Tree&quot; single. Pope at the time was the regular director of promotional videos for the Cure, Siouxsie and the Banshees and Marc Almond, among others, but was taken aback when his fame on American MTV as a video director began to rival that of the bands he worked for. He described the project as &quot;a real piss-take of what was going on in America&quot;, prompted by people referring to &quot;Tim Pope Videos&quot;, and said that he &quot;felt really strongly that they were not Tim Pope videos, they were Cure videos or Siouxsie videos or whatever&quot;. Over the 1983 Christmas holidays, Pope and a friend, Charles Gray, recorded what Pope described as &quot;this really stupid song&quot; that they had co-written years earlier as teenagers. Pope made an accompanying video for his showreel, asking several of the artists he worked with (The Cure, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Soft Cell, Talk Talk, the Style Council, Paul Young and Freur) to &quot;come along and slag me off on the showreel&quot;. He then played the artists the song, while filming their reactions to it. &quot;The Old Grey Whistle Test&quot; screened the video, which Pope says resulted in several record deals being offered. The song was re-recorded with Robert Smith playing most instruments in January 1984, produced by Chris Parry, and was released on Fiction Records (with a new video) in June.

====Remixes, Cranes, Pirate Ships, And Also the Trees: 1984–1993====
With the completion of the &quot;Blue Sunshine&quot; project and his departure from Siouxsie and the Banshees, by 1984 Robert Smith had returned to recording and touring with the Cure as his full-time primary band. Between 1985 and 1996, his musical outings beyond the Cure were comparatively rare, with notable exceptions including remix work for And Also the Trees and Cranes. During 1989, Smith and producer Mark Saunders remixed 7 and 12 versions of the song &quot;The Pear Tree&quot;, by And Also the Trees. The &quot;Round Mix&quot; of the song also appeared on the band&#x27;s album &quot;Farewell to the Shade&quot; in 1989, followed by a US-only release of &quot;The Pear Tree EP&quot; the following year. In December that year while mixing the Cure&#x27;s live album &quot;Entreat&quot;, he also recorded a solo cover version of Wendy Waldman&#x27;s &quot;Pirate Ships&quot;, originally intended for &quot;Rubáiyát: Elektra&#x27;s 40th Anniversary&quot;; a compilation album celebrating the history of the Cure&#x27;s US label Elektra Records. Instead, however, the full band line-up of the Cure recorded &quot;Hello, I Love You&quot; by the Doors for Elektra, and &quot;Pirate Ships&quot; did not see official CD release until &quot;Disintegration&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Deluxe Edition&quot; reissue in 2010.

In 1992, Smith invited Cranes to support the Cure live on the Wish Tour. For one of the French dates of the tour (Stade Couvert Régional, Liévin, 15 November 1992), Cranes&#x27; vocalist Alison Shaw was ill and the group had to revise their entire set, with Robert Smith replacing Alison&#x27;s vocal melodies on 6-string bass, and joined by the Cure&#x27;s guitarist Porl Thompson. Cranes wrote most of their next album (1993&#x27;s &quot;Forever&quot;) while on the Wish Tour, and the album&#x27;s title was partly influenced by touring with the Cure. In 1993, Smith and Bryan &quot;Chuck&quot; New remixed the extended 12&quot; version of Cranes&#x27; single &quot;Jewel&quot; from the album; Smith again contributing his trademark Fender Bass VI sound and additional guitars to the remixed track. The single gave Cranes their first Top 30 single in Britain and Norway, and also became their biggest commercial breakthrough in the US.

====Bowie, Reeves Gabrels, Mark Plati, and COGASM: 1994–1999====
From 1993, Smith&#x27;s primary musical engagement was the recording of The Cure&#x27;s album &quot;Wild Mood Swings&quot;, released in 1996 and followed by the Swing Tour, concluding in early 1997. He was meanwhile invited to perform at David Bowie&#x27;s 50th Birthday concert at Madison Square Garden (9 January 1997), where he duetted with Bowie on &quot;The Last Thing You Should Do&quot; and &quot;Quicksand&quot;. Here Smith met Bowie&#x27;s guitarist Reeves Gabrels and co-producer Mark Plati, leading to their collaboration on the single &quot;Wrong Number&quot;. Although released under the name of the Cure, &quot;Wrong Number&quot; was one of several &quot;one-off&quot; studio projects recorded during this period by Robert Smith either performing solo, or with guest musicians from outside the full-time line-up of the Cure. Earlier versions of the song had already been recorded by the band, but Plati and Smith completely reconstructed the track, built around a sampled drum loop by Cure drummer Jason Cooper. Smith and Plati added keyboards, effects and new vocals, while Gabrels laid down &quot;a gazillion guitar tracks&quot;.

In February 1998, Robert again collaborated with Reeves Gabrels in the studio, co-writing, singing and playing on the song &quot;Yesterday&#x27;s Gone&quot; (eventually finding its way to CD release in 2000). The following month, Smith was again recording solo between RAK and Outside studios, assisted this time by co-producer Paul Corkett, whose production credits included Nick Cave, Björk, Placebo, Tori Amos and Suede. These sessions produced &quot;More Than This&quot; (not to be confused with the Roxy Music song) for &quot;The X-Files: The Album&quot;, and a cover of Depeche Mode&#x27;s &quot;World in My Eyes&quot; for the tribute album &quot;For the Masses&quot;. Again, both were released under the name of the Cure, but were essentially Robert Smith solo recordings. Having made a guest appearance on an episode of &quot;South Park&quot; earlier in the year, Smith again collaborated with Trey Parker under the name COGASM, featuring Reeves Gabrels and Jason Cooper, releasing the track &quot;A Sign from God&quot; for the film &quot;Orgazmo&quot;. Smith&#x27;s contribution to &quot;Yesterday&#x27;s Gone&quot; appeared on Gabrels&#x27; solo album &quot;Ulysses (Della Notte)&quot; released in 1999 via Internet and in 2000 on CD by E-magine Music.

====More collaborations: 2003–2007====

In 2002, as &quot;Exclaim!&quot; magazine&#x27;s Cam Lindsay later observed, the Cure became &quot;the band to namedrop as a musical influence, sparking rejuvenation for their career. Artists such as Deftones, Mogwai, Tricky and Thursday praise the band and stress their influence, while others like Hot Hot Heat and the Rapture receive constant comparisons&quot;. From 2003–2004 a steady succession of guest vocal performances were released with other recording artists &quot;feat. Robert Smith&quot;. Smith wrote the words and sang &quot;Perfect Blue Sky (feat. Robert Smith)&quot; for Dutch electronic music producer Junkie XL&#x27;s album &quot;Radio JXL: A Broadcast from the Computer Hell Cabin&quot;, released in June 2003; &quot;All of This (feat. Robert Smith)&quot; for Blink-182&#x27;s self-titled album released in November, and &quot;Believe (feat. Robert Smith)&quot; on veteran Bowie guitarist Earl Slick&#x27;s &quot;Zig Zag&quot; album, released 9 December 2003. Slick meanwhile contributed guitars to the Mark Plati mix of &quot;A Forest&quot; featured on the &quot;Join the Dots&quot; box-set on 27 January 2004. Although issued under the moniker of the Cure, the &quot;Mark Plati mix&quot; was in fact an entirely new recording resulting from the studio collaborations between Slick, Plati and Smith. Smith had also recorded vocals for another completely new version of &quot;A Forest&quot; during 2003, this time billed as a cover version by the German electronic duo &quot;Blank &amp; Jones (feat. Robert Smith)&quot;. Released in September 2003, the single reached number 14 in the German Top100 Singles charts, and three separate remixes later appeared on the 2004 album &quot;Monument&quot;; &quot;A Forest&quot; being described by &quot;AllMusic&quot;&#x27;s Rick Anderson as &quot;the centerpiece of the album&quot;.

January 2004 also saw the single release of Junior Jack&#x27;s &quot;Da Hype (feat. Robert Smith)&quot;, which also appeared on the Belgium-based Italian house music producer&#x27;s album &quot;Trust It&quot; in March. During the same month, an exclusive re-recording of the Cure&#x27;s &quot;Pictures of You&quot;, remixed by Australian electronic musician/producer Paul Mac and released under the banner &quot;Robert Smith – Pictures of You (Paulmac mix)&quot;, featured in the soundtrack to the Australian &quot;rave culture&quot; film &quot;One Perfect Day&quot;. &quot;Truth Is (Featuring – Robert Smith)&quot; appeared on former Nine Inch Nails drummer and co-founder Chris Vrenna&#x27;s second Tweaker album &quot;2 a.m. Wakeup Call&quot;, released 20 April 2004. In 2004, on 17 September at Old Billingsgate Market in London, Smith joined Blink-182 live onstage to perform &quot;All of This&quot; during the MTV Icon tribute to the Cure. On 21 October, Robert stood in as one of three guest presenters for John Peel on BBC Radio 1, just days before Peel&#x27;s death. Near the end of the year, Robert Smith made two guest appearances live at Wembley Arena; first joining Placebo on 5 November on their song &quot;Without You I&#x27;m Nothing&quot; and the Cure&#x27;s &quot;Boys Don&#x27;t Cry&quot;, followed by Blink-182 on 6 December to perform &quot;All of This&quot; and again, &quot;Boys Don&#x27;t Cry&quot;.

In June 2005, Smith appeared on Smashing Pumpkins/Zwan front man Billy Corgan&#x27;s solo debut &quot;TheFutureEmbrace&quot;, sharing vocal duties during the refrain for Corgan&#x27;s cover of the Bee Gees song &quot;To Love Somebody&quot;. In November 2006, Robert appeared on UK trance and trip hop act Faithless&#x27;s album &quot;To All New Arrivals&quot;, on the track &quot;Spiders, Crocodiles &amp; Kryptonite&quot;, featuring prominent samples of the Cure&#x27;s &quot;Lullaby&quot;, for which Smith recorded a new performance of the original vocal. Another guest vocal on Paul Hartnoll of Orbital&#x27;s song &quot;Please&quot; was released as a single and appeared on &quot;The Ideal Condition&quot; in May 2007. Placebo&#x27;s Steve Hewitt meanwhile announced plans to launch a solo dance/drum&#x27;n&#x27;bass-influenced album under the working title of &quot;Ancient B&quot; to feature Smith singing some tracks, and bassist Jon Thorne of Lamb.

====More guest vocals, plus solo cover versions: 2010–2021====

From 2010 to 2012, as well as continuing to collaborate with other artists as a guest performer, many cover versions were released by Robert Smith performing solo. Unlike his previous solo covers (such as &quot;Pirate Ships&quot; and &quot;World in My Eyes&quot;), these were officially released under the name of Robert Smith, rather than the Cure. In 2010, he contributed a cover of &quot;Very Good Advice&quot; from the 1951 film adaptation of &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot; to the album &quot;Almost Alice&quot;; a companion release to Tim Burton&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot;, while &quot;Pirate Ships&quot; from 1989 also saw release on CD for the first time. Further guest vocalist/lyricist collaborations &quot;feat. Robert Smith&quot; during 2010 included the single &quot;J&#x27;aurai tout essayé&quot; (a reworking of Smith and Earl Slick&#x27;s &quot;Believe&quot;) by French Canadian rock singer, guitarist and fellow Bowie/Mark Plati/Earl Slick collaborator Anik Jean and the single version of Crystal Castles&#x27; &quot;Not in Love&quot;, a cover of Platinum Blonde&#x27;s &quot;song of the same name&quot;, released on Fiction Records, 6 December 2010. In June 2011, electronic dance act the Japanese Popstars from Northern Ireland released their album &quot;Controlling Your Allegiance&quot; in the UK, including the track &quot;Take Forever (Ft. Robert Smith)&quot;, and the following month, a solo cover version of &quot;Small Hours&quot; by British singer-songwriter and guitarist John Martyn (1948–2009) was released on the tribute album &quot;Johnny Boy Would Love This&quot;. On 25 October 2011, instrumental rock band 65daysofstatic released the track &quot;Come to Me&quot; featuring Robert Smith as a free download, coinciding with the release of their album &quot;We Were Exploding Anyway&quot;. In 2012 Robert again recorded a solo cover version for a Tim Burton project; this time covering Frank Sinatra&#x27;s 1957 hit song &quot;Witchcraft&quot; for &quot;Frankenweenie Unleashed!&quot;, a 14-track collection of songs &quot;inspired by&quot; the filmmaker&#x27;s stop-motion film, &quot;Frankenweenie&quot;, released on 25 September 2012.

In 2015, Smith contributed vocals to the song &quot;Please&quot; from the album 8:58, a project by Paul Hartnoll. The track is in fact a reworking of the track of the same name from the Ideal Condition, which he also contributed vocals for. On 15 June 2015, the Twilight Sad released a single featuring Smith covering &quot;There&#x27;s a Girl in the Corner&quot;, originally from the Twilight Sad&#x27;s album &quot;Nobody Wants to Be Here and Nobody Wants to Leave&quot;. In 2015, Smith also contributed vocals to &quot;In All Worlds&quot;, a single from Eat Static&#x27;s album &quot;Dead Planet&quot;.
In September 2020, Smith appeared on the Gorillaz&#x27; song &quot;Strange Timez&quot; from their &quot;Song Machine&quot; series and also appeared in the song&#x27;s animated music video.

In December 2020, Smith took part in two live stream charity events, including The Cosmic Shambles Network&#x27;s &quot;Nine Lessons and Carols for Curious People&quot; 24-hour charity live stream, 12 December 2020. Smith played three songs from the &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot; album: &quot;In Your House&quot;, &quot;M&quot; and &quot;Play for Today&quot;. On 22 December 2020, Smith played three songs from the &quot;Faith&quot; album, &quot;The Holy Hour&quot;, &quot;The Funeral Party&quot;, and &quot;The Drowning Man&quot;, for the live stream the annual Second City 24-hour improvisation charity event for &quot;Letters to Santa&quot;

In June 2021, Smith appeared on the Chvrches song &quot;How Not To Drown&quot; from their album &quot;Screen Violence&quot;.

In October 2023, Smith appeared on the Crosses song &quot;Girls Float † Boys Cry&quot; off the album Goodnight, God Bless, I Love U, Delete.

==Musical influences==
Smith has credited his older siblings Richard and Margaret with exposing him to rock music such as the Beatles and the Rolling Stones when he was six years old. He has said that his early songwriting &quot;was influenced by early Beatles – the sense of a three-minute guitar-pop song&quot;, and early in his career the Cure&#x27;s second single &quot;Boys Don&#x27;t Cry&quot; was compared by British music paper &quot;Record Mirror&quot; to &quot;John Lennon at 12 or 13&quot;. His parents encouraged their children&#x27;s musical development, as he told French magazine &quot;Les Inrockuptibles&quot;: &quot;My parents were lending us their stuff; my mum made me listen to a lot of classical music to enable me to have a larger vision of music.&quot; When Smith was eight years old in 1967, Richard played him &quot;Purple Haze&quot; by Jimi Hendrix, who became hugely influential. Of this period, he went on to say, &quot;My brother was also crazy about Captain Beefheart, Cream, Jimi Hendrix, so much so that when I was 7 or 8, to the despair of my parents, I became some kinda little devil fed on psychedelic rock.&quot;

Smith was 10 years old in 1969 when he first heard Nick Drake&#x27;s album &quot;Five Leaves Left&quot;: &quot;Nick Drake&#x27;s on the other side of the coin to Jimi Hendrix. He was very quiet and withdrawn ... I think also that because he had an untimely death like Jimi Hendrix, he was never able to compromise his early work. He was never able to put a foot wrong. It&#x27;s a morbid romanticism, but there is something attractive about that.&quot; It was not long afterwards that Robert Smith attended his first rock concert: Jimi Hendrix at the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival. At the age of 13 in 1972, Smith first saw David Bowie on television, performing &quot;Starman&quot; on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. He recalled, &quot;Every person in Britain who saw that performance, it&#x27;s stuck with them. It&#x27;s like Kennedy being shot for another generation. You just remember that night watching David Bowie on TV. It really was a formative, seminal experience.&quot; Smith said that the first LP he ever purchased with his pocket money was &quot;The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars&quot;. According to Apter, Bowie also paved the way for Smith&#x27;s love of glam rock bands such as Slade, the Sweet, and T. Rex, and during the same period, he also became a fan of Roxy Music. His parents maintained their supportive attitude: &quot;My mum and dad were encouraging us to talk [about] the records we liked. I remember staggering talks about Slade and Gary Glitter.&quot;

Smith said that he was 15 when he first heard Alex Harvey, and that the Sensational Alex Harvey Band was the first and only group he ever really followed. He said, &quot;[Harvey] was probably my only real idol. I travelled around the country to see them. [...] People talk about Iggy Pop as the original punk but certainly in Britain the forerunner of the punk movement was Alex Harvey. [...] I remembered the power of that live performance and I&#x27;ve tried to have that in my mind since I started up my own group.&quot; He soon became influenced by the emergence of the UK punk scene of 1977 and has cited the Sex Pistols, the Stranglers, Elvis Costello and the Buzzcocks as important influences on his own music from this period. He described the release of &quot;Anarchy in the UK&quot; by the Sex Pistols as &quot;the last time something major happened to me and changed me [...] it was the best summer of my life. I remember listening to &#x27;Anarchy&#x27; for the very first time at a party and thinking, &#x27;This is it!&#x27; You knew straight away, you either loved it or hated it, and it polarised an entire nation for that summer.&quot; Elsewhere, Smith said that the Stranglers were his favourite punk band and that Costello &quot;was a cut above the whole lot of them&quot; in terms of lyrics and song crafting.

Smith was influenced by Siouxsie and the Banshees&#x27; &quot;wall of noise&quot; and the Buzzcocks&#x27; melodies, and aspired to combine the two. He said, &quot;The two groups that I aspired to be like were [Siouxsie and] the Banshees and the Buzzcocks. I really liked the Buzzcocks&#x27; melodies, while the great thing about the Banshees was that they had this great wall of noise, which I&#x27;d never heard before. My ambition was to marry the two.&quot; Ian Birch of &quot;Melody Maker&quot; recognised the Banshees&#x27; influence on Smith&#x27;s band early on, comparing the Cure&#x27;s 1978 debut single &quot;Killing An Arab&quot; favourably to Siouxsie&#x27;s &quot;Hong Kong Garden&quot; (released a few months earlier). Speaking of his stint of playing guitar with Siouxsie and the Banshees in 1979, Smith said, &quot;It allowed me to experiment. I inherited an approach from John [McKay] which was just to have everything full up. [...] It was 
phased/flanged distortion noise.&quot; From that time, Siouxsie and the Banshees &quot;were a massive influence on me&quot;. He said, &quot;They were the group who led me towards doing &quot;Pornography&quot;. They drew something out of me.&quot;

Along with the Banshees, early Cure gigs from 1978–1979 supporting other post-punk bands such as Wire and Joy Division also influenced Smith&#x27;s shift in musical direction from the Cure&#x27;s 1979 album &quot;Three Imaginary Boys&quot; to 1980&#x27;s second album &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot;. Playing support for Wire (at Kent University in October 1978) gave Smith the idea &quot;to follow a different course, to hold out against the punk wave [...] Wire pointed out another direction to me&quot;. When asked what were his five favorite guitar tracks, Smith listed &quot;Purple Haze&quot; by Hendrix, &quot;Hanging Around&quot; by Hugh Cornwell of the Stranglers, &quot;Head Cut&quot; by John McGeoch of Siouxsie and the Banshees, &quot;White Riot&quot; by Mick Jones/Joe Strummer of the Clash and &quot;White Light/White Heat&quot; by Lou Reed of the Velvet Underground.

==Musicianship==
===Songwriting===
In an interview in 2000, Smith said that &quot;there is one particular kind of music, an atmospheric type of music, that I enjoy making with the Cure. I enjoy it a lot more than any other kind of sound&quot;. When Smith was asked about the &#x27;sound&#x27; of his songwriting, Smith said that he did not &quot;think there is such a thing as a typical Cure sound. I think there are various Cure sounds from different periods and different line-ups.&quot;

===Guitar playing===

Smith is considered to be one of the most influential and underrated guitarists of the 20th century. In 2022, Andrew Daly of &quot;Guitar World&quot; ranked him at number four in the &quot;22 guitar heroes who shaped the sound of &#x27;80s indie and alternative rock&quot;, saying he &quot;set the gold standard for post-punk, goth rock, new wave, and art rock&quot; and praising his &quot;skillful blending of melody and a never-ending desire to genre hop.&quot;

In a 1992 interview with &quot;Guitar Player&quot;, Smith shared insights from his first guitar lessons—undertaken at the age of nine years—and his guitar-playing style, such as alternative tunings as well as his habit of purposely detuning the high &quot;E&quot; (first) string on his guitars. Of his first lessons, Smith stated:

Smith also described his detuning process: &quot;I don&#x27;t know what it adds, but the guitar just doesn&#x27;t sound quite right to me normally. In the studio, I often defy the tuners, particularly with keyboard overdubs. I even change the speed of the tape to detune some parts. I think a lot of players presented with the same guitar and told to tune it themselves would come up with something drastically different. And the way you play [the guitar] affects the perceived tuning. If Porl [Thompson] and I tune together and play the same thing, but he plays hard and I play soft, it will sound completely off.&quot;

Speaking about &quot;Wish&quot; in 1992, Smith also offered the following input on how detuned instruments played a significant role in the album, and the challenges of capturing the sound live. &quot;A lot of things on our record &quot;Wish&quot; that sound like heavy chorusing are actually just detuned instruments. The only drawback to that is onstage it&#x27;s very confusing sometimes, especially with lots of phasing effects going on. It turns into this overwhelming pulsing sound, and you can&#x27;t hear anything.&quot;

While recording the Cure&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Three Imaginary Boys&quot;, in 1978, Smith was using a Woolworth&#x27;s Top 20 electric guitar, and he was advised by Chris Parry to use a better instrument. Smith bought a Fender Jazzmaster, having recently seen Elvis Costello playing one on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. He then decided to have the Top 20 pickup installed in the Jazzmaster, giving it a third pickup. Smith explained this guitar customization in 1992: &quot;The third pickup [in the Fender Jazzmaster] is from a Woolworth&#x27;s Top 20 guitar, my very first electric. I took it in to record our first album, along with a little WEM combo amp. [Manager/producer] Chris Parry, who was paying for the record, said,&quot; you can&#x27;t use that!&quot; We went out and bought a Fender Jazzmaster, and I immediately had the Top 20 pickup installed in it, which really upset Chris. I played the entire &quot;Three Imaginary Boys&quot; album through a Top 20 pickup. It&#x27;s a brilliant guitar, though I actually bought it because of how it looked.&quot;

Smith&#x27;s guitar work was first heard on the first Cure single &quot;Killing An Arab&quot;, which was released in December 1978, where Smith performed an intricate Middle Eastern sounding descending and ascending guitar riff to accompany the song, as well as the B-side &quot;10:15 Saturday Night&quot;, where Smith played a heavily-distorted &#x27;tremolo bar&#x27; solo. Smith would soon expand on his guitar style further with the Cure&#x27;s second album, &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot;, notably on the single &quot;A Forest&quot;, where Smith played an extended solo-outro on his Jazzmaster, as well as the single &quot;Play For Today&quot;, where Smith demonstrated an intricate use of harmonics.

With every Cure album release onward, Smith would incorporate a number of different guitars and sounds into the Cure&#x27;s repertoire with stylistic versatility and craftsmanship over the course of 30 years. Notably, starting with &quot;The Top&quot;, in 1984, Smith started incorporating Spanish acoustic guitars (notably on the songs &quot;Birdmad Girl&quot;, and &quot;The Caterpillar&quot;), and from the mid-80s onward Smith included more acoustic guitar instrumentation on later Cure songs such as &quot;The Blood&quot;, as well as notable singles such as &quot;In Between Days&quot;, &quot;Just Like Heaven&quot;, and &quot;Friday I&#x27;m In Love&quot;. On the 1987 release &quot;Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me&quot;, Smith showcased a diverse style of guitar playing across the 17-track album. Notably on the opening track &quot;The Kiss&quot; where Smith played an extended Wah-wah pedal introductory solo that opened the LP, as well as the single &quot;Hot Hot Hot!!!&quot; where Smith included an intricate funk playing style that intersected with Porl Thompson&#x27;s guitar lines. Another ingredient of Smith&#x27;s guitar sound is the Fender VI. It proved to be a staple of the Cure&#x27;s sound during the early 1980s on albums such as &quot;Faith&quot;, was used as the main instrument on the Carnage Visors instrumental soundtrack that the band recorded that same year, and was later played by Smith extensively on the 1989 release &quot;Disintegration&quot;. Smith shared the following input of his use of the Fender VI:

Smith wrote several songs on bass. He commented during an interview for the British magazine &quot;Making Music&quot; in 1987: &quot;A lot of the songs that we&#x27;ve done over the years I&#x27;ve written on the bass. I think I&#x27;ve been influenced by listening to [Steven] Severin play really, strumming bass chords. I was given the six-string bass... and as soon as I got that I thought — ah, unusual sound, and I translated that back on to guitar&quot;.

Smith started incorporating more distortion and feedback sounds and textures on albums such as &quot;Wish&quot; where Smith predominantly played a Gibson Chet Atkins as well.

Speaking to &quot;The Hit&quot;, Smith gave a frank assessment of his approach to guitar playing, and musicianship in general. &quot;I&#x27;m not technically a good player but at least I don&#x27;t sound like anyone else. For me the idea of being a musician has nothing to do with technical ability, but I suppose you have to have a certain amount to be able to put ideas into music. I think it&#x27;s important to get past the stage of being comfortable with an instrument. You need the capacity to learn – most people tend to stay at the same level, which [I think] is boring to listen to.&quot;

==Stage persona and image==
Smith started to backcomb his short hair in 1980-1983. He adopted his aesthetic of a pale complexion, smeared red lipstick, black eye-liner, dishevelled nest of wiry long black hair, all-black clothes, and brothel creeper shoes or trainers in 1984, after being the guitarist of Siouxsie and the Banshees for 18 months and borrowing Siouxsie&#x27;s lipstick. Around the same time the goth subculture took off. He denies any credit for this trend and says it is a coincidence that the styles are similar, stating that he wore makeup since he was young and stating that &quot;it&#x27;s so pitiful when &#x27;goth&#x27; is still tagged onto the name the Cure&quot;. The sombre mood of early albums, combined with Smith&#x27;s on-stage persona, cemented the band&#x27;s gothic image. Although considered a goth icon, Smith said he never connected with the label, stating that his aesthetic was a &quot;theatrical&quot; custom.

In 1986, Smith altered his image by appearing on-stage and in press photos sporting short spiky hair and bright polo shirts, which can be seen in &quot;The Cure in Orange&quot;. His new look made the headlines. He soon returned to his usual style.

==In popular culture==
===Early television and film references===
An early &quot;pop culture&quot; reference to the Cure is found in the eleventh episode of BBC2&#x27;s anarchic alternative comedy series &quot;The Young Ones&quot;, from 1984. The series featured regular cameo performances from British rock and pop groups of the period, such as Motörhead, the Damned, and Madness. As the episode&#x27;s title &quot;Sick&quot; suggests, all four of the main characters (Vyvyan, Rick, Neil and Mike) are ill, prompting Vyvyan to send Mike to the pharmacy for medicine. Neil remarks: &quot;I hope Mike hurries back with the cure!&quot; to which Vyvyan replies, &quot;No Neil, Neil, it&#x27;s madness this week.&quot; The band Madness then performs a musical cameo. Rock biographers Bowler and Dray note that increasing popular interest in the Cure in America during the mid-late 1980s became &quot;a pat shorthand for TV and film writers to indicate mixed up children – the Steve Martin film &quot;Parenthood&quot; uses a bedroom poster of Robert to underline the point that &#x27;this adolescent is confused and miserable&#x27;&quot;.

===&quot;Edward Scissorhands&quot; and influence on Tim Burton (1988–2012)===

In 1988, a &quot;Spin&quot; magazine interview with Smith reported that &quot;the director of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot;&quot; (i.e. Tim Burton) had asked Smith to make an appearance in a film. The Cure&#x27;s keyboardist Roger O&#x27;Donnell has since said that during recording of the &quot;Disintegration&quot; album (1988–89), Burton approached the group about providing the soundtrack to the 1990 film &quot;Edward Scissorhands&quot;, and even sent them the script.

In a 1991 article discussing inspirations behind the look of the film&#x27;s title character, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; (citing Burton and costume designer Colleen Atwood) reported that &quot;the character&#x27;s retro hair and penchant for leather clearly draw on punks like the Cure&#x27;s Robert Smith&quot;. Burton is a self-proclaimed fan of the Cure and his sartorial style has been likened to that of Smith. In 1996, Smith confirmed to French magazine &quot;Télérama&quot; that Burton had approached the Cure about a number of collaborations, and regularly kept in touch with the group about each of his latest film projects, but that they had thus far always been too busy either touring or recording to contribute. Burton asked Smith to score the soundtrack for &quot;Sleepy Hollow&quot; (1999), but Smith said that &quot;they were postponing it so much that I got involved with [the Cure&#x27;s album] &quot;Bloodflowers&quot; and let it aside&quot;. In 2009 Burton presented Smith with the Shockwaves NME Godlike Genius Award, saying that when he was &quot;chained to a desk&quot; and &quot;fucking depressed&quot; during his time as a young animator for Disney, &quot;this music was the only thing that saved me. I just want to thank you for inspiring me.&quot; Shortly after the award ceremony, Burton again reiterated to BBC 6 Music his long-standing admiration for the Cure, and his desire to collaborate with them. Smith said that Burton presenting the Godlike Genius award &quot;makes it all that more special&quot;. Smith has since contributed music to Burton&#x27;s &quot;Almost Alice&quot; and &quot;Frankenweenie Unleashed!&quot; album projects (&quot;See → guest vocals + solo cover versions&quot;).

===&quot;The Sandman&quot; (1989–1996)===

Neil Gaiman, author and creator of Vertigo Comics&#x27; &quot;The Sandman&quot; (1989–1996), based the appearance of his lead character partly on that of Smith. Other illustrators of the character over the course of the series&#x27; run have also drawn influence from other popular musicians; Sam Kieth, for instance, describes his rendering of the Sandman character as the &quot;David Bowie/guy-from-the-Cure&quot; version, and said that the Robert Smith look of the character was &quot;really heavily championed&quot; by Gaiman and DC Comics editor Karen Berger. Mike Dringenberg, on the other hand, compared Kieth&#x27;s Sandman to Ron Wood and Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones, and asserts &quot;my version ... was more like Peter Murphy or Robert Smith.&quot; Conversely, Kelley Jones, who illustrated the &quot;Dream Country&quot; and &quot;Season of Mists&quot; (volumes 3 &amp; 4 in the series), said he &quot;just hated the Cure&quot; and thus based his own version of the character on the angular gestures and facial features of Bauhaus front-man Peter Murphy instead. Gaiman said that early conceptual sketches for the character by Leigh Baulch and Dave McKean drew influence from Bowie&#x27;s Aladdin Sane persona, and Bono from U2. Cure posters were also &quot;known to creep into the background of some of the sandman stories&quot; and Smith told fans that he was flattered by Gaiman&#x27;s reference, and thought &quot;The Sandman&quot; was &quot;a brilliant series&quot;.

===&quot;The Crow&quot; (1989–1994)===

Smith&#x27;s lyrics, as well as those of Joy Division&#x27;s Ian Curtis, were quoted and referenced extensively throughout James O&#x27;Barr&#x27;s comic book series &quot;The Crow&quot;, which, like Gaiman&#x27;s &quot;Sandman&quot;, also first appeared on shelves in 1989. One issue of &quot;The Crow&quot; dedicated an entire page to reprinting the lyrics from the Cure song &quot;The Hanging Garden&quot;, and O&#x27;Barr said that he was listening a lot to the Cure&#x27;s early albums such as &quot;Seventeen Seconds&quot; and &quot;Faith&quot; while he was writing the story. O&#x27;Barr has downplayed the influence of Robert Smith on the main character Eric Draven&#x27;s physical appearance, saying that &quot;the idea that the look has been inspired by him has really been overblown&quot; and that the visual aspect of the character owed more to Peter Murphy and Iggy Pop. Smith said that the song &quot;Burn&quot;, the Cure&#x27;s contribution to the 1994 film adaptation&#x27;s soundtrack, was deliberately written and performed in the style of &quot;The Hanging Garden&quot;.

===Other comic book and fan fiction references===
Garth Ennis&#x27;s &quot;Muzak Killer&quot; stories for &quot;2000 AD Comics&quot; from 1991 also contain visual references in the form of characters resembling Robert Smith, and again, Smith himself is a self-professed fan of &quot;2000 AD&quot;. Revolutionary Comics produced a biographical comic book on the Cure in 1991 as Issue No. 30 of &quot;Rock n Roll Comics&quot; series, and the following year &quot;Personality Comics&quot; produced their own Cure biography in the form of &quot;Music Comics 4: The Cure&quot;. Ian Shirley, author of &quot;Can Rock &amp; Roll Save the World?: An Illustrated History of Music and Comics&quot;, considers the fact &quot;that the Cure have spawned two biographical comics ... just shows the impact that Robert Smith and his Goth chic had upon America in the 1990s&quot;. In the 1980s, the Japanese music magazine &quot;8-beat Gag&quot; published a series of caricatures of western artists by manga artist Atsuko Shima; Robert Smith had his own edition, and figured on the cover. Gothic horror and fantasy writer Poppy Z. Brite, in his vampire novel &quot;Lost Souls&quot; (1992), uses a poster of Robert Smith on a bedroom wall as a sexual prop during a homoerotic encounter between two of his characters, Laine and Nothing. Colin Raff of the &quot;New York Press&quot; described &quot;Poppy Z. Brite&#x27;s enthusiastic appraisal of Robert Smith&#x27;s mouth in her (sic) depiction of a fictional blowjob&quot; as &quot;an example of the unfortunate habit of many fiction writers (especially since the 1980s) to invoke pop stars and their lyrics with un-ironic [&quot;sic&quot;] reverence, resulting in prose about as reflective as voyeuristic journalism, bad porn and bumperstickers&quot;.

===Television parodies and cameos: 1990–1993===
In television comedy programs during the early 1990s, Smith was sometimes the subject of lampooning. MTV&#x27;s &quot;Half Hour of Comedy Hour&quot; (1990–1991), featured a mock episode of &quot;This Old House&quot; in which a parody of Smith&#x27;s &quot;Disintegration&quot;-era persona is seen asking building contractors to leave his house in a semi-demolished state to retain the sense of &quot;urban decay&quot;. &quot;The Mary Whitehouse Experience&quot; (1992) poked fun at Smith&#x27;s attempts to use lighter pop music to &quot;show his happier side&quot;, by presenting a series of sketches in which Smith (played by Rob Newman) performs comedic novelty songs &quot;The Laughing Policeman&quot;, &quot;Tie Me Kangaroo Down, Sport&quot;, &quot;Ernie&quot;, &quot;Crash Bang Wallop&quot;, the theme to the children&#x27;s programme &quot;Play Away&quot;, and the WWI soldiers&#x27; &quot;Chinese crackers in your arsehole&quot; parody version of the patriotic anthem &quot;Rule, Britannia!&quot;. Newman portrayed Smith dolefully wailing the lyrics over a backdrop of gloomy Cure-styled mope-rock. Another of the series&#x27; regular characters, Edward Colanderhands, appears in one episode as a member of the Cure&#x27;s audience.

Another sketch on &quot;The Mary Whitehouse Experience&quot; revolved around &quot;Ray: a man afflicted with a sarcastic tone of voice&quot;, also portrayed by Newman, and presented in the style of a medical case history. Ray&#x27;s catchphrase was &quot;oh no, what a personal disaster&quot;. In the series&#x27; final episode, Ray is given a copy of the Cure&#x27;s &quot;Disintegration&quot; LP as a present, and is so overwhelmed that he can no longer speak in a sarcastic tone, and spontaneously begins speaking Flemish. In the closing scene, Ray has a chance meeting with the real Robert Smith in a cameo appearance, who punches Ray in the face and declares &quot;oh no, what a personal disaster&quot;. Rob Newman and David Baddiel&#x27;s live comedy video, &quot;History Today&quot; (1992), also features Newman&#x27;s Robert Smith character, singing the children&#x27;s songs &quot;Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m a Little Teapot&quot;. Smith later made another cameo in the comedy duo&#x27;s spin-off series &quot;Newman and Baddiel in Pieces&quot; (1993). In a scene where David Baddiel fantasizes about his own funeral, Smith appears graveside, saying: &quot;I&#x27;ve never been this miserable. I always preferred him to the other one&quot; before leading a conga of mourners in party-hats around the graveyard.

===&quot;Career Girls&quot; (1997)===
Mike Leigh&#x27;s 1997 film &quot;Career Girls&quot; depicts the reunion of two women who formerly shared both a flat and a love of the Cure as teenagers in the 1980s, featuring the band&#x27;s music and imagery throughout. Smith was invited by Leigh to the premiere, which Smith described as &quot;one of the weirdest afternoons of my life ... There&#x27;s one bit in the film when they see a poster for &#x27;The 13th&#x27;, the first single from the last album, and she says to her friend, &#x27;Are they still releasing records?&#x27; And I thought that was really unfair -&#x27;The unchanging man in the changing world.&#x27;&quot;

===&quot;South Park: Mecha-Streisand&quot; (1998)===
In 1998, Smith voiced an animated version of himself in &quot;Mecha-Streisand&quot;, an episode of &quot;South Park&quot;, in which he battles &quot;Mecha Barbra Streisand&quot; in &quot;a battle of Godzilla vs. Mothra scale&quot; that completely destroys the town of South Park. Streisand is portrayed as a &quot;calculating, self-centered, egotistical bitch&quot; who wants to conquer the world with an ancient artifact accidentally discovered by Eric Cartman, known as the &quot;Diamond of Pantheos&quot;. After film critic Leonard Maltin and actor Sidney Poitier transform into kaiju creatures (based on Ultraman and Gamera, respectively) to battle Mecha-Streisand, yet ultimately fail to defeat the beast, Robert Smith enters, confident he can defeat Mecha-Streisand, with the help of the boys. To battle Mecha-Streisand, the boys help Smith transform into &quot;Smithra&quot;, who has the ability of &quot;robot punch&quot;, and ultimately defeats the monster by taking it by the tail and hurling it into space. He offers to &quot;roshambo&quot; Cartman to get his Walkie-Talkie back, and immediately kicks Cartman in the groin, causing him to drop the walkie-talkie. At the end of the episode, as Smith walks off into the sunset, Kyle Broflovski calls out, &quot;&quot;Disintegration&quot; is the best album ever!&quot; and Cartman adds, &quot;Robert Smith kicks ass!&quot; To date, he is one of only a few celebrities to be portrayed in a universally positive way on the show.

At the time, the episode brought &quot;South Park&quot; its highest ratings to date, with approximately 3,208,000 viewers; about 40,000 more than tuned into ABC&#x27;s &quot;Prime Time Live&quot;. Comedy Central&#x27;s debut screening in February 1998 marked the first time a cable station had beaten one of the Big Three television networks during prime time viewing, and &quot;Robert Smith Kicks Ass&quot; T-shirts were reportedly &quot;doing a healthy trade among Cure fans&quot; soon afterwards. Smith later described the impact of the episode on his nieces and nephews to &quot;Q&quot; magazine: &quot;Being in &quot;South Park&quot; has made a huge impact on their lives. Now that I&#x27;m a cartoon character I&#x27;m fully accepted into their world.&quot; He told Belgian magazine &quot;Humo&quot;:

Interviewed by Placebo&#x27;s Brian Molko for &quot;Les Inrockuptibles&quot; magazine, Smith said that &quot;South Park&quot; creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone sent him the script, but deliberately left some portions blank &quot;to keep the surprise&quot;. He said, &quot;They didn&#x27;t want anybody to know, they wanted to shock. When I saw myself, I found it surrealistic.&quot; In another interview set up by &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, Smith told Fall Out Boy bassist Pete Wentz that the &quot;&quot;Disintegration&quot; is the best album ever!&quot; scene was one of his &quot;greatest moments in life&quot; and described the process:

===&quot;The Mighty Boosh: Nanageddon&quot; (2004)===
In 2004, in an episode of the BBC surreal comedy series &quot;The Mighty Boosh&quot;, &quot;Nanageddon&quot; (Series 2, episode 11), the character Vince Noir offers Howard Moon the opportunity to spend the evening with two goth girls, on the condition that he dresses like a goth. Vince produces a can of &quot;Goth Juice&quot;, described as &quot;the most powerful hairspray known to man, made from the tears of Robert Smith&quot;. In the same episode, the Moon sings &quot;The Love Cats&quot; over the credits. On the same night that Smith was presented with the Godlike Genius Award by Tim Burton at the &quot;Shockwaves NME Awards&quot;, &quot;The Mighty Boosh&quot; also won &quot;Best TV Comedy&quot;. Asked by NME.com backstage after the ceremony if there were any plans for more pop-star cameos in &quot;The Mighty Boosh&quot;, series co-creator and co-star Noel Fielding replied, &quot;We&#x27;re trying to get hold of Robert Smith for the film – I want him to be my uncle. That would be great!&quot;

===&quot;This Must Be the Place&quot; (2011)===
The look of Cheyenne (played by Sean Penn), the main character in director Paolo Sorrentino&#x27;s 2011 film &quot;This Must Be the Place&quot;, is inspired by Smith&#x27;s appearance.

==Personal life==
===Marriage===
Smith met Mary Theresa Poole in drama class at St Wilfrid&#x27;s when they were both around 14 years old, and they were married at Worth Abbey on 13 August 1988. They have 25 nieces and nephews but have remained voluntarily childless, with Smith espousing the antinatalist view that he not only objects to having been born himself but refuses to impose life on another. He also &quot;does not feel responsible enough to bring a child into the world&quot;.

Smith has said that Mary did not always share his confidence and vision for the Cure&#x27;s future early in his musical career, which he used as significant motivation to ensure the band was successful. It has been reported by the &quot;Daily Express&quot; that she used to be a model and worked as a nurse with intellectually disabled children, but gave up her job so that the couple would not have to spend so much time apart as the Cure became more financially successful during the mid-1980s. He told &quot;The Face&quot; in 1985 that he had once accidentally left a video camera running in their home: &quot;After a couple of hours you forget that it&#x27;s on and I was quite horrified at the amount of rubbish we say to each other. It&#x27;s like listening to mental people [...] I feel more natural in the company of people who are mentally unbalanced because you&#x27;re always more alert, wondering what they&#x27;re going to do next.&quot; He added that Mary used to dress as a witch to scare children, that she sometimes dressed up as him, and that he could never take people home as he did not know &quot;who [would] answer the door&quot;.

While the Cure was recording &quot;Wish&quot; at Shipton Manor between 1991 and 1992, among the objects pinned to the wall was &quot;Mary&#x27;s Manor Mad Chart&quot;, listing 17 members of the Manor&#x27;s staff and residents (including the Cure and their entourage) &quot;in order of instability&quot;. Mary was ranked in second place after a kitchen worker named Louise. Smith said of this time, &quot;We all voted and we had an award night. It was very moving.&quot;

===Family===
Smith has an older brother named Richard, an older sister named Margaret, and a younger sister named Janet. He has said that he is significantly younger than Richard and Margaret because his mother &quot;wasn&#x27;t supposed to have&quot; him: &quot;And once [my parents] got me, they didn&#x27;t like the idea of having an only child, so they had my sister. Which is good, because I would have hated not having a younger sister.&quot; He has described Janet as a &quot;piano prodigy&quot; and &quot;the family&#x27;s musical genius&quot; who was too shy to become a performer herself. As well as participating in the Crawley Goat Band since around 1973, Janet played keyboards for Cult Hero in 1979, to which Margaret contributed backing vocals. Janet, together with Simon Gallup&#x27;s then-girlfriend Carol (both dressed as schoolgirls) with real-life schoolboy band the Obtainers, sang backing vocals for Cult Hero at the Marquee Club as the opening act for the Passions in March 1980.

The Cure&#x27;s in-house design company Parched Art created the album cover for the Cure&#x27;s &quot;The Head on the Door&quot; using a manipulated photograph of Janet taken by the band&#x27;s guitarist and album cover artist Pearl Thompson. Janet had known Thompson since they were children, and the pair began dating during his early tenure as lead guitarist for Malice and the Easy Cure. During the mid-1980s, Janet gave up a professional career as a pianist to spend more time with Thompson and the Cure, and the couple were married in March 1988, making Smith and Thompson brothers-in-law until the couple divorced in 2000. Janet is also credited with having taught Smith&#x27;s guitar technician Perry Bamonte to play piano while the band were recording &quot;Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me&quot;, prior to Bamonte joining the group as keyboardist in 1990. According to Bamonte, &quot;With the patience of a saint, she spent a month teaching me the rudiments of playing piano. Before this, I knew nothing.&quot;

During a concert at Tauron Arena Kraków on 20 October 2022, the Cure dedicated their song &quot;I Can Never Say Goodbye&quot; to Richard, who had recently died.

===Views===
Smith is uncomfortable giving interviews and talking to strangers, expressing a desire to avoid both where possible. He has multiple social media profiles, which he uses solely to share news about his work and prevent people from following accounts pretending to be him.

In 2011, Smith described himself as a &quot;liberal kind of guy&quot; who is &quot;uncomfortable with politicised musicians&quot;. He told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 2019, &quot;I&#x27;ve always held what could be considered a socialist viewpoint on the world. I think right of centre is always wrong, and that&#x27;s as political as I get in public.&quot; He has openly expressed disdain for the British royal family, lamenting how musicians he respects have accepted British honours while stating that he would rather &quot;cut off [his] own hands&quot;, as well as sporting a &quot;citizens, not subjects&quot; slogan on his guitar during a tour in 2012 and 2013.

==Discography==
;With the Cure
;With Cult Hero
* &quot;I&#x27;m a Cult Hero&quot; single (1979)

;With the Glove
* &quot;Blue Sunshine&quot; (1983)

;With Siouxsie and the Banshees
* &quot;Nocturne&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Hyæna&quot; (1984)
;As solo artist
* &quot;Very Good Advice&quot; (2010) 
* &quot;Small Hours&quot; (2011)  
* &quot;Witchcraft&quot; (2012) 
* &quot;C Moon&quot; (2014) 
* &quot;There&#x27;s a Girl in the Corner&quot; (2015) 
Collaborations
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Robert Smith at Pictures of You
* 
* Robert Smith at the British Film Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="0" end="18" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert James Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="162" end="170" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="174" end="183" title="post punk" label="post punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q212954" start="422" end="437" title="goth subculture" label="goth subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="549" end="574" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182815" start="642" end="651" title="the Glove" label="the Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="686" end="712" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="756" end="769" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="893" end="902" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1096" end="1104" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1125" end="1132" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280939" start="1183" end="1189" title="Horley" label="Horley"/>
<link wikidata="Q844908" start="1279" end="1286" title="Crawley" label="Crawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595637" start="1405" end="1443" title="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s Catholic School, Crawley" label="St Wilfrid&amp;#x27;s Comprehensive School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438096" start="1587" end="1602" title="sibling rivalry" label="sibling rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q944038" start="1675" end="1683" title="Neck (music)" label="the neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="1705" end="1715" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q370293" start="1949" end="1962" title="John Williams (guitarist)" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q958479" start="2925" end="2935" title="Woolworths Group (United Kingdom)" label="Woolworths"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634883" start="4068" end="4075" title="O Level" label="O Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083623" start="4094" end="4109" title="Michael Dempsey" label="Michael Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q895809" start="4130" end="4140" title="sixth form" label="sixth form"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="4524" end="4531" title="A level" label="A level"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="4655" end="4670" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296195" start="5987" end="6020" title="Lol Tolhurst" label="Laurence &amp;quot;Lol&amp;quot; Tolhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="6871" end="6883" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004281" start="6897" end="6914" title="A Handful of Dust" label="A Handful of Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q739650" start="7321" end="7334" title="Porl Thompson" label="Porl Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="7513" end="7522" title="Easy Cure" label="Easy Cure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8125" end="8145" title="Crawley#Media" label="The Crawley Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225027" start="8518" end="8528" title="Wild Thing (The Troggs song)" label="Wild Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180277" start="9235" end="9248" title="Hansa Records" label="Hansa Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="9400" end="9407" title="Kibbutz" label="Kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942594" start="9522" end="9530" title="Musician (magazine)" label="Musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415138" start="9713" end="9733" title="Three Imaginary Boys" label="Three Imaginary Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="10553" end="10566" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10614" end="10634" title="10:15 Saturday Night" label="10:15 Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="10665" end="10668" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="10735" end="10760" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q853423" start="11067" end="11084" title="Seventeen Seconds" label="Seventeen Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="11112" end="11124" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="11634" end="11640" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q904080" start="11828" end="11839" title="Pornography (album)" label="Pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111160" start="11951" end="11956" title="Faith (The Cure album)" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237229" start="12013" end="12023" title="Levinhurst" label="Levinhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931742" start="12981" end="12998" title="Japanese Whispers" label="Japanese Whispers"/>
<link wikidata="Q734041" start="13059" end="13067" title="The Walk (The Cure song)" label="The Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953146" start="13088" end="13101" title="The Love Cats (song)" label="The Love Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934350" start="13204" end="13211" title="The Top (album)" label="The Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931734" start="13558" end="13578" title="The Head on the Door" label="The Head on the Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708703" start="13678" end="13692" title="Boris Williams" label="Boris Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931096" start="13726" end="13751" title="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me" label="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q956305" start="13778" end="13794" title="Just Like Heaven (The Cure song)" label="Just Like Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706653" start="13811" end="13825" title="Hot Hot Hot!!! (The Cure song)" label="Hot, Hot, Hot!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345722" start="14165" end="14179" title="Steven Severin" label="Steven Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165655" start="14214" end="14231" title="Throbbing Gristle" label="Throbbing Gristle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024747" start="14236" end="14252" title="Cabaret Voltaire (band)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="14271" end="14275" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48889378" start="14394" end="14405" title="Chris Parry (producer)" label="Chris Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932326" start="14577" end="14587" title="Join Hands" label="Join Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="14690" end="14704" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q620501" start="14810" end="14843" title="Jumping Someone Else&amp;#x27;s Train" label="Jumping Someone Else&amp;#x27;s Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247959" start="14958" end="14968" title="John McKay (musician)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672157" start="14981" end="14993" title="Kenny Morris (musician)" label="Kenny Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="15053" end="15061" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q677115" start="15235" end="15240" title="Slits" label="Slits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074381" start="15249" end="15255" title="Budgie (musician)" label="Budgie"/>
<link wikidata="Q904729" start="15681" end="15690" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Cult Hero" label="Cult Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749378" start="15748" end="15760" title="the Magspies" label="the Magspies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296666" start="15774" end="15788" title="Morgan Studios" label="Morgan Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="16011" end="16023" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481499" start="16251" end="16266" title="Fiction Records" label="Fiction Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288732" start="16463" end="16478" title="Rainbow Theatre" label="Rainbow Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q779627" start="16507" end="16523" title="Matthieu Hartley" label="Matthieu Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532854" start="16642" end="16656" title="the Stranglers" label="the Stranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634265" start="16690" end="16703" title="Hugh Cornwell" label="Hugh Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="16760" end="16772" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522888" start="16884" end="16928" title="The Stranglers and Friends – Live in Concert" label="The Stranglers and Friends – Live in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q743137" start="16997" end="17011" title="Associates (band)" label="the Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972148" start="17036" end="17058" title="The Affectionate Punch" label="The Affectionate Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103176" start="17260" end="17275" title="Billy Mackenzie" label="Billy Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q266872" start="17354" end="17362" title="Cut Here" label="Cut Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931030" start="17393" end="17406" title="Greatest Hits (The Cure album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076989" start="17502" end="17514" title="Jam!" label="Jam! Showbiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q489545" start="17667" end="17685" title="And Also the Trees" label="And Also the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429130" start="17728" end="17743" title="Simon Huw Jones" label="Simon Huw Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q261990" start="18185" end="18196" title="Lydia Lunch" label="Lydia Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q530147" start="18274" end="18285" title="Mike Hedges" label="Mike Hedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615278" start="18600" end="18623" title="And Also The Trees (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073685" start="19096" end="19104" title="Flexipop" label="Flexipop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953163" start="19716" end="19736" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to Bed (The Cure song)" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to Bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182815" start="19940" end="19949" title="the Glove" label="the Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346255" start="20192" end="20204" title="John McGeoch" label="John McGeoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="20935" end="20944" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="20946" end="20957" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="20963" end="20968" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="21073" end="21089" title="the Royal Ballet" label="the Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542978" start="21136" end="21157" title="Les Enfants Terribles" label="Les Enfants Terribles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="21412" end="21419" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892868" start="21742" end="21761" title="Marc and the Mambas" label="Marc and the Mambas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825911" start="21828" end="21847" title="Torment and Toreros" label="Torment and Toreros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968986" start="22396" end="22409" title="the Creatures" label="the Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q509867" start="22453" end="22466" title="Blue Sunshine (album)" label="Blue Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074033" start="22562" end="22565" title="Zoo (dance troupe)" label="Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524092" start="22606" end="22619" title="Andy Anderson (drummer)" label="Andy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925560" start="22625" end="22634" title="Brilliant (band)" label="Brilliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q324577" start="22685" end="22701" title="Martin McCarrick" label="Martin McCarrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="22848" end="22864" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368683" start="22904" end="22930" title="Blue Sunshine (film)" label="a B-movie by the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="22956" end="22959" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q389911" start="23313" end="23322" title="The Brood" label="The Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q921605" start="23336" end="23345" title="Evil Dead" label="Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058433" start="23359" end="23379" title="The Helicopter Spies" label="The Helicopter Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029509" start="23396" end="23403" title="Inferno (1953 film)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547244" start="23686" end="23700" title="Like an Animal (The Glove song)" label="Like an Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q637470" start="23803" end="23816" title="Dear Prudence" label="Dear Prudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="24202" end="24215" title="UK Singles Chart" label="Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="24260" end="24277" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="24394" end="24403" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="24699" end="24715" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="24868" end="24887" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q864751" start="25169" end="25196" title="The Hatter" label="Mad Hatter&amp;#x27;s Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269082" start="25208" end="25213" title="Alice (Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="25685" end="25702" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15291378" start="25758" end="25779" title="Punish Me with Kisses" label="Punish Me with Kisses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786014" start="25855" end="25863" title="Nocturne (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656219" start="26014" end="26029" title="Swimming Horses" label="Swimming Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243697" start="26123" end="26129" title="Dazzle (song)" label="Dazzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251439" start="26172" end="26177" title="Hyæna" label="Hyæna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742664" start="26418" end="26426" title="Tim Pope" label="Tim Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q173061" start="26434" end="26445" title="Syd Barrett" label="Syd Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678383" start="26789" end="26798" title="Pisstake" label="piss-take"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882252" start="27267" end="27275" title="Showreel (actors)" label="showreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329303" start="27360" end="27369" title="Soft Cell" label="Soft Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q595705" start="27371" end="27380" title="Talk Talk" label="Talk Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q676522" start="27382" end="27399" title="the Style Council" label="the Style Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q360501" start="27401" end="27411" title="Paul Young" label="Paul Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984800" start="27416" end="27421" title="Freur" label="Freur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248663" start="27562" end="27587" title="The Old Grey Whistle Test" label="The Old Grey Whistle Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138865" start="28293" end="28299" title="Cranes (band)" label="Cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428797" start="28333" end="28346" title="Mark Saunders (record producer)" label="Mark Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q966211" start="28705" end="28712" title="Entreat" label="Entreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325747" start="28761" end="28774" title="Wendy Waldman" label="Wendy Waldman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28838" end="28879" title="Rubáiyát: Elektra&amp;#x27;s 40th Anniversary" label="Rubáiyát: Elektra&amp;#x27;s 40th Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="28959" end="28974" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780088" start="29043" end="29060" title="Hello, I Love You" label="Hello, I Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="29070" end="29079" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q939505" start="29166" end="29180" title="Disintegration (The Cure album)" label="Disintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q546302" start="29301" end="29305" title="Wish (The Cure album)" label="Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860822" start="29353" end="29375" title="Stade Couvert Régional" label="Stade Couvert Régional"/>
<link wikidata="Q217841" start="29377" end="29383" title="Liévin" label="Liévin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404623" start="29552" end="29565" title="Fender Bass VI" label="6-string bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077188" start="29679" end="29686" title="Forever (Cranes album)" label="Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404623" start="29974" end="29988" title="Fender Bass VI" label="Fender Bass VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457443" start="30343" end="30359" title="Wild Mood Swings" label="Wild Mood Swings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="30481" end="30492" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="30525" end="30546" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q583658" start="30602" end="30630" title="The Last Thing You Should Do" label="The Last Thing You Should Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299237" start="30647" end="30656" title="Quicksand (David Bowie song)" label="Quicksand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662821" start="30702" end="30716" title="Reeves Gabrels" label="Reeves Gabrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294208" start="30733" end="30743" title="Mark Plati" label="Mark Plati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715113" start="30796" end="30808" title="Wrong Number (The Cure song)" label="Wrong Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="31221" end="31228" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="31229" end="31238" title="drum loop" label="drum loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q525005" start="31255" end="31267" title="Jason Cooper (musician)" label="Jason Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993389" start="31659" end="31662" title="RAK Studios" label="RAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898039" start="31667" end="31674" title="Outside Studios" label="Outside"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="31766" end="31775" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="31777" end="31782" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="31784" end="31791" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193744" start="31793" end="31802" title="Tori Amos" label="Tori Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="31807" end="31812" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633686" start="31894" end="31909" title="More than This (Roxy Music song)" label="Roxy Music song"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31921" end="31943" title="The X-Files: The Album" label="The X-Files: The Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="31966" end="31978" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428773" start="31992" end="32008" title="World in My Eyes" label="World in My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="32023" end="32036" title="tribute album" label="tribute album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636695" start="32043" end="32057" title="For the Masses" label="For the Masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="32224" end="32234" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="32292" end="32303" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013296" start="32319" end="32325" title="COGASM" label="COGASM"/>
<link wikidata="Q691785" start="32437" end="32444" title="Orgazmo" label="Orgazmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q664232" start="32712" end="32720" title="Exclaim!" label="Exclaim!"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="32894" end="32902" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q645980" start="32904" end="32910" title="Mogwai" label="Mogwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q313627" start="32912" end="32918" title="Tricky (musician)" label="Tricky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433169" start="32923" end="32931" title="Thursday (band)" label="Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q978591" start="32994" end="33006" title="Hot Hot Heat" label="Hot Hot Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426495" start="33011" end="33022" title="The Rapture (band)" label="the Rapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q266429" start="33314" end="33323" title="Tom Holkenborg" label="Junkie XL"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33343" end="33394" title="Radio JXL: A Broadcast from the Computer Hell Cabin" label="Radio JXL: A Broadcast from the Computer Hell Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="33474" end="33483" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q292986" start="33491" end="33508" title="Blink-182 (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670299" start="33603" end="33613" title="Earl Slick" label="Earl Slick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294208" start="33717" end="33727" title="Mark Plati" label="Mark Plati"/>
<link wikidata="Q62055772" start="33741" end="33749" title="A Forest" label="A Forest"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33778" end="33791" title="Join the Dots: B-Sides &amp;amp; Rarities 1978–2001 (The Fiction Years)" label="Join the Dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="33852" end="33859" title="moniker" label="moniker"/>
<link wikidata="Q700750" start="34189" end="34206" title="Blank &amp;amp; Jones" label="Blank &amp;amp; Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q64305519" start="34306" end="34320" title="Top100 Singles" label="Top100 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q700750" start="34395" end="34403" title="Monument (Blank &amp;amp; Jones album)" label="Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="34457" end="34465" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397125" start="34583" end="34594" title="Junior Jack" label="Junior Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="34671" end="34678" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848112" start="34733" end="34741" title="Trust It" label="Trust It"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611102" start="34906" end="34914" title="Paul Mac" label="Paul Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="35054" end="35066" title="rave culture" label="rave culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093117" start="35084" end="35099" title="One Perfect Day (2004 film)" label="One Perfect Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="35174" end="35189" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q537899" start="35213" end="35225" title="Chris Vrenna" label="Chris Vrenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001000" start="35240" end="35247" title="Tweaker (band)" label="Tweaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633403" start="35260" end="35278" title="2 a.m. Wakeup Call" label="2 a.m. Wakeup Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263739" start="35338" end="35361" title="Old Billingsgate Market" label="Old Billingsgate Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q11765144" start="35455" end="35463" title="MTV Icon" label="MTV Icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="35553" end="35562" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="35566" end="35577" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="35689" end="35702" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="35718" end="35725" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569508" start="35760" end="35788" title="Without You I&amp;#x27;m Nothing (song)" label="Without You I&amp;#x27;m Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="35996" end="36013" title="Smashing Pumpkins" label="Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q231567" start="36014" end="36018" title="Zwan" label="Zwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="36029" end="36041" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301624" start="36066" end="36082" title="TheFutureEmbrace" label="TheFutureEmbrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="36161" end="36169" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322142" start="36181" end="36197" title="To Love Somebody (song)" label="To Love Somebody"/>
<link wikidata="Q542071" start="36269" end="36278" title="Faithless" label="Faithless"/>
<link wikidata="Q726667" start="36298" end="36317" title="To All New Arrivals" label="To All New Arrivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047725" start="36441" end="36448" title="Lullaby (The Cure song)" label="Lullaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q348470" start="36545" end="36558" title="Paul Hartnoll" label="Paul Hartnoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q515942" start="36562" end="36569" title="Orbital (band)" label="Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987651" start="36648" end="36667" title="The Ideal Condition" label="The Ideal Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q372318" start="36702" end="36714" title="Steve Hewitt" label="Steve Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="36764" end="36785" title="drum&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;bass" label="drum&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271683" start="36902" end="36912" title="Jon Thorne" label="Jon Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259392" start="36916" end="36920" title="Lamb (electronic band)" label="Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q189875" start="37410" end="37430" title="Alice in Wonderland (1951 Film)" label="1951 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="37440" end="37459" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q658003" start="37485" end="37497" title="Almost Alice" label="Almost Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="37528" end="37538" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174385" start="37566" end="37585" title="Alice in Wonderland (2010 film)" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="37892" end="37907" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q766824" start="38019" end="38034" title="Crystal Castles (band)" label="Crystal Castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q126914094" start="38047" end="38058" title="Not in Love (Crystal Castles song)" label="Not in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391985" start="38077" end="38092" title="Platinum Blonde (band)" label="Platinum Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q384757" start="38106" end="38127" title="Not in Love (Platinum Blond song)" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521426" start="38216" end="38237" title="the Japanese Popstars" label="the Japanese Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="38243" end="38259" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q472578" start="38513" end="38524" title="John Martyn" label="John Martyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254285" start="38654" end="38668" title="65daysofstatic" label="65daysofstatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053010" start="38803" end="38827" title="We Were Exploding Anyway" label="We Were Exploding Anyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="38892" end="38902" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="38931" end="38944" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020538" start="38972" end="38982" title="Witchcraft (1957 song)" label="Witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38999" end="39023" title="Frankenweenie (soundtrack)#Frankenweenie Unleashed!" label="Frankenweenie Unleashed!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051023" start="39131" end="39144" title="Frankenweenie (2012 film)" label="Frankenweenie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39264" end="39268" title="8:58" label="8:58"/>
<link wikidata="Q348470" start="39283" end="39296" title="Paul Hartnoll" label="Paul Hartnoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987651" start="39366" end="39385" title="the Ideal Condition" label="the Ideal Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q750092" start="39442" end="39458" title="the Twilight Sad" label="the Twilight Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162076" start="39601" end="39650" title="Nobody Wants to Be Here and Nobody Wants to Leave" label="Nobody Wants to Be Here and Nobody Wants to Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362276" start="39741" end="39751" title="Eat Static" label="Eat Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="39831" end="39839" title="Gorillaz" label="Gorillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855987" start="39857" end="39870" title="Strange Timez" label="Strange Timez"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752244" start="39894" end="39906" title="Song Machine" label="Song Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="40543" end="40554" title="Second City comedy troupe" label="Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118436" start="40661" end="40669" title="Chvrches" label="Chvrches"/>
<link wikidata="Q107157259" start="40727" end="40742" title="Screen Violence" label="Screen Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036698" start="40790" end="40797" title="Crosses (band)" label="Crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q121300719" start="40852" end="40891" title="Goodnight, God Bless, I Love U, Delete." label="Goodnight, God Bless, I Love U, Delete."/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="41015" end="41026" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="41031" end="41049" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823033" start="41267" end="41286" title="Boys Don&amp;#x27;t Cry (The Cure song)" label="Boys Don&amp;#x27;t Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="41335" end="41348" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="41364" end="41375" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241630" start="41734" end="41745" title="Purple Haze" label="Purple Haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="41755" end="41767" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q312264" start="41873" end="41890" title="Captain Beefheart" label="Captain Beefheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="41892" end="41897" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="42018" end="42034" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211588" start="42094" end="42104" title="Nick Drake" label="Nick Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q918649" start="42124" end="42140" title="Five Leaves Left" label="Five Leaves Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="42594" end="42621" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="1970 Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="42665" end="42676" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455256" start="42709" end="42716" title="Starman (song)" label="Starman"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="42732" end="42747" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="42866" end="42884" title="JFK assassination" label="Kennedy being shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="43045" end="43047" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q682846" start="43098" end="43159" title="The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars" label="The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="43237" end="43246" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q156872" start="43261" end="43266" title="Slade" label="Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="43268" end="43277" title="the Sweet" label="the Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q211770" start="43283" end="43289" title="T. Rex (band)" label="T. Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q334648" start="43343" end="43353" title="Roxy Music" label="Roxy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q355384" start="43528" end="43540" title="Gary Glitter" label="Gary Glitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45375" start="43595" end="43606" title="Alex Harvey (musician)" label="Alex Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030972" start="43617" end="43649" title="the Sensational Alex Harvey Band" label="the Sensational Alex Harvey Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="43828" end="43836" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="44126" end="44130" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="44159" end="44174" title="the Sex Pistols" label="the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="44192" end="44206" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="44211" end="44224" title="the Buzzcocks" label="the Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q486421" start="44318" end="44335" title="Anarchy in the UK" label="Anarchy in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="44904" end="44929" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q62051509" start="45500" end="45515" title="Killing An Arab" label="Killing An Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894607" start="45558" end="45574" title="Hong Kong Garden (song)" label="Hong Kong Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247959" start="45770" end="45781" title="John McKay (musician)" label="John [McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551588" start="45840" end="45846" title="Phaser (effect)" label="phased"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="45847" end="45854" title="Flanging" label="flanged"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="45855" end="45865" title="Distortion (music)" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135620" start="46185" end="46189" title="Wire (band)" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q112221340" start="46702" end="46716" title="Hanging Around (The Stranglers song)" label="Hanging Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346255" start="46783" end="46795" title="John McGeoch" label="John McGeoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q967376" start="46832" end="46842" title="White Riot" label="White Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q357310" start="46852" end="46862" title="Mick Jones (The Clash guitarist)" label="Mick Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q310052" start="46863" end="46875" title="Joe Strummer" label="Joe Strummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="46879" end="46888" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679326" start="46899" end="46921" title="White Light/White Heat (song)" label="White Light/White Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="46931" end="46939" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="46943" end="46965" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="47612" end="47624" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="47797" end="47806" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="47808" end="47817" title="gothic rock" label="goth rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="47819" end="47827" title="new wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="47833" end="47841" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q846643" start="47977" end="47990" title="Guitar Player" label="Guitar Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="48124" end="48143" title="alternative tunings" label="alternative tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q48889378" start="49599" end="49610" title="Chris Parry (producer)" label="Chris Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162697" start="49654" end="49671" title="Fender Jazzmaster" label="Fender Jazzmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="49694" end="49708" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="49730" end="49745" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="51194" end="51203" title="harmonics" label="harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q602752" start="51579" end="51594" title="The Caterpillar (song)" label="The Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q540536" start="51775" end="51790" title="In Between Days" label="In Between Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704285" start="51838" end="51861" title="Friday I&amp;#x27;m In Love" label="Friday I&amp;#x27;m In Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q264300" start="52086" end="52099" title="Wah-wah pedal" label="Wah-wah pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="52221" end="52225" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404623" start="52352" end="52361" title="Fender VI" label="Fender VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111160" start="52512" end="52526" title="Carnage Visors" label="Carnage Visors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345722" start="53012" end="53028" title="Steven Severin" label="[Steven] Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139502" start="54214" end="54229" title="brothel creeper" label="brothel creeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929383" start="54239" end="54247" title="trainers" label="trainers"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="54286" end="54311" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q212954" start="54391" end="54406" title="goth subculture" label="goth subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="54613" end="54617" title="Gothic rock" label="goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141501" start="55083" end="55101" title="The Cure in Orange" label="The Cure in Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="55261" end="55272" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="55337" end="55341" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="55358" end="55376" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="55390" end="55404" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="55526" end="55535" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="55537" end="55547" title="The Damned (band)" label="the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q745741" start="55553" end="55560" title="Madness (band)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507548" start="55596" end="55600" title="Sick (The Young Ones)" label="Sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="56152" end="56164" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137831" start="56176" end="56186" title="Parenthood (film)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293972" start="56494" end="56522" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="56541" end="56551" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738214" start="56630" end="56650" title="Roger O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Roger O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q217182" start="56821" end="56840" title="Edward Scissorhands" label="Edward Scissorhands"/>
<link wikidata="Q258156" start="57043" end="57057" title="Colleen Atwood" label="Colleen Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q377629" start="57352" end="57360" title="Télérama" label="Télérama"/>
<link wikidata="Q208592" start="57664" end="57677" title="Sleepy Hollow (film)" label="Sleepy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q885210" start="57805" end="57817" title="Bloodflowers" label="Bloodflowers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57888" end="57923" title="List of NME Award winners#Shockwaves NME Awards 2009" label="Shockwaves NME Godlike Genius Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="58053" end="58059" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="58222" end="58233" title="BBC 6 Music" label="BBC 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58566" end="58600" title="#More guest vocals, plus solo cover versions: 2010–2021" label="guest vocals + solo cover versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="58653" end="58664" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="58688" end="58702" title="Vertigo Comics" label="Vertigo Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="58715" end="58726" title="The Sandman (Vertigo)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="58774" end="58788" title="Dream (comics)" label="lead character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132235" start="58946" end="58955" title="Sam Kieth" label="Sam Kieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="59033" end="59044" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="59187" end="59196" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q610440" start="59204" end="59216" title="Karen Berger" label="Karen Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846622" start="59218" end="59234" title="Mike Dringenberg" label="Mike Dringenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q211094" start="59288" end="59296" title="Ronnie Wood" label="Ron Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="59301" end="59315" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="59323" end="59337" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q505692" start="59386" end="59398" title="Peter Murphy (musician)" label="Peter Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738276" start="59434" end="59446" title="Kelley Jones" label="Kelley Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q180582" start="59696" end="59703" title="Bauhaus (band)" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q505692" start="59714" end="59726" title="Peter Murphy (musician)" label="Peter Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721300" start="59817" end="59828" title="Dave McKean" label="Dave McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q558969" start="59862" end="59874" title="Aladdin Sane" label="Aladdin Sane"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="59888" end="59892" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="59898" end="59900" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="60227" end="60239" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q207867" start="60247" end="60257" title="Ian Curtis" label="Ian Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353665" start="60309" end="60326" title="James O&amp;#x27;Barr" label="James O&amp;#x27;Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q466708" start="60358" end="60366" title="The Crow" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q10381453" start="60570" end="60588" title="The Hanging Garden (song)" label="The Hanging Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095133" start="60848" end="60859" title="Eric Draven" label="Eric Draven"/>
<link wikidata="Q505692" start="61043" end="61055" title="Peter Murphy (musician)" label="Peter Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="61060" end="61068" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q250912" start="61149" end="61169" title="The Crow (1994 film)" label="1994 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q266844" start="61177" end="61187" title="The Crow (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q541374" start="61327" end="61338" title="Garth Ennis" label="Garth Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="61389" end="61403" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318736" start="61575" end="61595" title="Revolutionary Comics" label="Revolutionary Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170645" start="61738" end="61756" title="Personality Comics" label="Personality Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="62262" end="62267" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="62349" end="62362" title="Gothic horror" label="Gothic horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="62367" end="62374" title="fantasy (genre)" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q450868" start="62382" end="62396" title="Poppy Z. Brite" label="Poppy Z. Brite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994458" start="62425" end="62435" title="Lost Souls (Poppy Z. Brite novel)" label="Lost Souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069508" start="62524" end="62534" title="homoerotic" label="homoerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31176" start="62619" end="62633" title="New York Press" label="New York Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="63200" end="63210" title="Parody" label="lampooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786191" start="63306" end="63320" title="This Old House" label="This Old House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="63511" end="63522" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750507" start="63536" end="63566" title="The Mary Whitehouse Experience" label="The Mary Whitehouse Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348019" start="63739" end="63749" title="Robert Newman (comedian)" label="Rob Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746364" start="63788" end="63810" title="The Laughing Policeman (song)" label="The Laughing Policeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431773" start="63824" end="63851" title="Tie Me Kangaroo Down, Sport" label="Tie Me Kangaroo Down, Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394317" start="63865" end="63870" title="Ernie (The Fastest Milkman in the West)" label="Ernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203005" start="63958" end="63967" title="Play Away" label="Play Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q215729" start="64093" end="64109" title="Rule, Britannia!" label="Rule, Britannia!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64266" end="64286" title="The Mary Whitehouse Experience#Parodies" label="Edward Colanderhands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="64553" end="64573" title="Medical history" label="medical case history"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="64870" end="64877" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q526242" start="65077" end="65090" title="David Baddiel" label="David Baddiel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65123" end="65136" title="The Mary Whitehouse Experience#History Today" label="History Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261218" start="65243" end="65274" title="Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes" label="Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966977" start="65291" end="65315" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Little Teapot" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Little Teapot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018503" start="65401" end="65429" title="Newman and Baddiel in Pieces" label="Newman and Baddiel in Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q270200" start="65648" end="65653" title="conga" label="conga"/>
<link wikidata="Q315756" start="65741" end="65751" title="Mike Leigh" label="Mike Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q973124" start="65775" end="65787" title="Career Girls" label="Career Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669583" start="66152" end="66160" title="The 13th" label="The 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457443" start="66190" end="66204" title="Wild Mood Swings" label="the last album"/>
<link wikidata="Q928177" start="66494" end="66509" title="Mecha-Streisand" label="Mecha-Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="66537" end="66547" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311640" start="66581" end="66586" title="Mechagodzilla" label="Mecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="66587" end="66603" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="66631" end="66639" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="66644" end="66650" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="66881" end="66893" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="66959" end="66973" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="66984" end="66998" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="67014" end="67019" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340870" start="67040" end="67048" title="Ultraman" label="Ultraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q687240" start="67053" end="67059" title="Gamera" label="Gamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q106631" start="67469" end="67477" title="roshambo" label="roshambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q938319" start="67503" end="67516" title="Walkie-Talkie" label="Walkie-Talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47345" start="67669" end="67684" title="Kyle Broflovski" label="Kyle Broflovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q939505" start="67708" end="67722" title="Disintegration (The Cure album)" label="Disintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="68075" end="68078" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022169" start="68092" end="68107" title="Prime Time Live" label="Prime Time Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="68115" end="68129" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906538" start="68230" end="68259" title="Big Three television networks" label="Big Three television networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="68495" end="68517" title="Q (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Q&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="68741" end="68748" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223741" start="68756" end="68767" title="Brian Molko" label="Brian Molko"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="68861" end="68872" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="68877" end="68887" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="69148" end="69168" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="69187" end="69199" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310166" start="69208" end="69218" title="Pete Wentz" label="Pete Wentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478925" start="69493" end="69509" title="The Mighty Boosh (TV series)" label="The Mighty Boosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636187" start="69578" end="69588" title="Vince Noir" label="Vince Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636187" start="69596" end="69607" title="Howard Moon" label="Howard Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212954" start="69654" end="69658" title="Gothic subculture" label="goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104919" start="69691" end="69710" title="Gothic fashion" label="dresses like a goth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69885" end="69893" title="List of recurring The Mighty Boosh characters#The Moon" label="the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953146" start="69906" end="69919" title="The Love Cats (song)" label="The Love Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388430" start="70297" end="70310" title="Noel Fielding" label="Noel Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="70522" end="70531" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q374678" start="70565" end="70581" title="Paolo Sorrentino" label="Paolo Sorrentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q511347" start="70605" end="70627" title="This Must Be the Place (film)" label="This Must Be the Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278186" start="70840" end="70851" title="Worth Abbey" label="Worth Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355340" start="70921" end="70942" title="Voluntary childlessness" label="voluntarily childless"/>
<link wikidata="Q578728" start="70969" end="70981" title="antinatalism" label="antinatalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="71403" end="71416" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634273" start="71677" end="71685" title="The Face (magazine)" label="The Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q546302" start="72355" end="72359" title="Wish (The Cure album)" label="Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q775768" start="72369" end="72382" title="The Manor Studio" label="Shipton Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q904729" start="73487" end="73496" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Cult Hero" label="Cult Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q610919" start="73731" end="73743" title="Marquee Club" label="Marquee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522184" start="73767" end="73779" title="The Passions (British band)" label="the Passions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931734" start="73898" end="73918" title="The Head on the Door" label="The Head on the Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q739650" start="74023" end="74037" title="Pearl Thompson" label="Pearl Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738209" start="74499" end="74512" title="Perry Bamonte" label="Perry Bamonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931096" start="74563" end="74588" title="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me" label="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q15014400" start="74831" end="74850" title="Tauron Arena Kraków" label="Tauron Arena Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="75118" end="75130" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="75301" end="75308" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="75402" end="75415" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="75486" end="75495" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="75528" end="75543" title="Centre-right politics" label="right of centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059094" start="75640" end="75676" title="Republicanism in the United Kingdom" label="disdain for the British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="75728" end="75743" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom" label="British honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q904729" start="75982" end="76002" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Cult Hero" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Cult Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q509867" start="76048" end="76061" title="Blue Sunshine (album)" label="Blue Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786014" start="76116" end="76124" title="Nocturne (Siouxsie and the Banshees album)" label="Nocturne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251439" start="76146" end="76151" title="Hyæna" label="Hyæna"/>
<link wikidata="Q472578" start="76253" end="76253" title="John Martyn" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q4020538" start="76263" end="76273" title="Witchcraft (1957 song)" label="Witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="76491" end="76513" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150210" wikidata="Q211831" url="?curid=150210" title="David Suchet">
<text>Sir David Courtney Suchet ( ; born 2 May 1946) is an English actor. He is known for his work on stage and in television. He portrayed Edward Teller in the television serial &quot;Oppenheimer&quot; (1980) and received the RTS and BPG awards for his performance as Augustus Melmotte in the British serial &quot;The Way We Live Now&quot; (2001). International acclaim and recognition followed his performance as Agatha Christie&#x27;s detective Hercule Poirot in &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Poirot&quot; (1989–2013), for which he received a 1991 British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) nomination.

A prolific stage actor, Suchet has been nominated for nine Olivier Awards and a Tony Award.

==Early life and family==
Suchet was born on 2 May 1946 in the Paddington area of London, the son of Jack Suchet
and his wife Joan Patricia (&quot;née&quot; Jarché; 1916–1992), an actress. Jack emigrated from South Africa to England in 1932, trained to be a physician at St Mary&#x27;s Hospital Medical School, London, in 1933, and became an obstetrician and gynaecologist.

Suchet&#x27;s father was of Lithuanian-Jewish descent, the son of Izidor Suchedowitz, originally from Kretinga in the Pale of Settlement of the Russian Empire. At some point, the family name was recorded as &quot;Schohet&quot;, a Yiddish word, from Hebrew &quot;shochet&quot;, defining the profession of kosher butcher. Suchet&#x27;s father changed his surname to Suchet while living in South Africa. David&#x27;s mother was born in England and was Anglican. She was of Russian-Jewish descent on her father&#x27;s side, and English Anglican on her mother&#x27;s side. He was raised without religion, but became a practising Anglican in 1986, and was confirmed in 2006.

Suchet and his brothers, John and Peter, attended Grenham House boarding school in Birchington-on-Sea, Kent. Then, after attending another independent school, Wellington School in Somerset, he took an interest in acting and joined the National Youth Theatre at the age of 16. He trained and graduated from the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, where he later became a vice president, retiring in 2018.

==Career==

===Theatre===
Suchet began his acting career at the Gateway Theatre, Chester in 1969. He then appeared in many reps, including Worthing, Birmingham, Belgrade Theatre, Coventry, Liverpool Playhouse, and the Watermill Theatre. In 1973, he joined the Royal Shakespeare Company. In 1981–82, he played Bolingbroke in &quot;Richard II&quot; opposite Alan Howard. In 1993 he played &quot;John&quot; in the drama &quot;Oleanna&quot; at the Royal Court Theatre. It was directed by Harold Pinter, and co-starred Lia Williams as &quot;Carol&quot;.

He made his West End debut opposite Saskia Reeves in the Kempinski play &quot;Separation&quot;, at the Comedy Theatre in 1987. In 1996–97 he played opposite Dame Diana Rigg in the West End production of &quot;Who&#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?&quot;. He was featured as Salieri from 1998 to 2000 in the Broadway production &quot;Amadeus&quot;. In 2007, at the Chichester Festival Theatre, he played Cardinal Benelli in &quot;The Last Confession&quot;, about the death of Pope John Paul I. In 2014, he reprised the role of Benelli in the Australian tour of the play.

He has been starring as Lady Bracknell in &quot; The Importance of Being Earnest&quot; by Oscar Wilde at the Vaudeville Theatre in London since June 2015 and on tour. In January 2022, Suchet had a three-week residency at the Harold Pinter Theatre performing &quot;Poirot and More, A Retrospective&quot;.

===Television and film===
In 1985, Suchet played Blott in &quot;Blott on the Landscape&quot;.

In 1988, Suchet played Leopold Bloom in the Channel 4 documentary &quot;The Modern World: Ten Great Writers&quot;, in which some of James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Ulysses&quot; was dramatised. In 1988 Suchet appeared in the penultimate episode of the television series &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot;. He appeared as Yves Drouard, a scheming adulterer, in the episode &quot;A Time to Die&quot;.

In 1989, he took the title role of Hercule Poirot for the long-running television series &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Poirot&quot;. In his book, &quot;Poirot and Me&quot;, Suchet mentions that prior Poirot actor Peter Ustinov one day approached him and told him that Suchet could play Poirot and would be good at it. Suchet then spoke to Brian Eastman from ITV, who sent him some of the novels to read. &quot;And as I did so, it slowly dawned on me that I&#x27;d never actually seen the character I was reading about on the screen...He was quite, quite different: more elusive, more pedantic and, most of all, more human than the person I&#x27;d seen on the screen.&quot; 

Still unsure, Suchet rang his brother John, who advised him against it, calling Poirot &quot;a bit of a joke, a buffoon. It&#x27;s not you at all.&quot; Suchet took his brother&#x27;s advice as a challenge and accepted the role. In preparation, he wrote a five-page character study of Poirot detailing 93 different aspects of his life. Suchet said he took the list on set with him and &quot;gave a copy to every director I worked with on a Poirot film.&quot;
Suchet went on to play the role in adaptations of every novel and short story featuring the character written by Agatha Christie. In preparation for the role, he says that he read every novel and short story and compiled an extensive file on Poirot.

In 2001, he had the lead role in the David Yates-directed BBC television serial &quot;The Way We Live Now&quot;. In April 2002, he played the real-life barrister George Carman in the BBC drama &quot;Get Carman: The Trials of George Carman QC&quot;.

In 2003, Suchet starred as the ambitious Cardinal Wolsey in the two-part ITV drama &quot;Henry VIII&quot; opposite Ray Winstone as Henry VIII and Helena Bonham Carter as Anne Boleyn. In May 2006, he played the role of the fallen press baron Robert Maxwell in &quot;Maxwell&quot;, a BBC2 dramatisation of the final 18 months of Maxwell&#x27;s life. In 2006, he voiced Poirot in the adventure game &quot;Agatha Christie: Murder on the Orient Express&quot;.

At Christmas 2006, he played the vampire hunter Abraham Van Helsing in a BBC adaptation of Bram Stoker&#x27;s novel &quot;Dracula&quot;. He appeared in the disaster film &quot;Flood&quot;, released in August 2007, as the Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, at a time when London is devastated by flooding. Suchet appeared on daytime-TV chat show &quot;Loose Women&quot; on 6 February 2008 to talk about his film &quot;The Bank Job&quot;, in which he played Lew Vogel, alongside Jason Statham and Saffron Burrows. In 2008, he took part in the genealogy documentary series &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot;.

He starred in the 2009 CBC made-for-TV film &quot;Diverted&quot;. He starred as the main antagonist, Reacher Gilt, in the 2010 Sky TV adaptation of &quot;Going Postal&quot;, based on Pratchett&#x27;s book of the same name. He appeared in the film &quot;Act of God&quot; as Benjamin Cisco. In 1987, Suchet played a bigfoot hunter in &quot;Harry and the Hendersons&quot;. He had roles in two Michael Douglas films, &quot;A Perfect Murder&quot; and &quot;The In-Laws&quot;. In 1997, he starred in the independent film &quot;Sunday&quot;.

Between 2014 and 2015, Suchet appeared in and narrated two BBC Television documentaries, undertaking an epic journey spanning the Mediterranean, inspired by the life and travels of the apostles St. Peter and St. Paul.

In 2016, Suchet took on the role of the narrator in the BBC live production of &quot;Peter Pan Goes Wrong&quot;, where he serves as the sole &quot;professional&quot; among the cast. At one point during the broadcast, when one of the actors is electrocuted, he is asked to distract the audience. His solution is to take Captain Hook&#x27;s moustache and start acting like Poirot, even delivering his lines in a Belgian accent. This prompts the director (who is also playing Captain Hook) to retrieve the moustache and dismiss Suchet.

In 2017, Suchet starred as Dr Fagan in the BBC One adaptation of Evelyn Waugh&#x27;s &quot;Decline and Fall&quot;, and guest starred in the role of a character called &quot;The Landlord&quot;, for an episode of the tenth series of &quot;Doctor Who&quot; entitled &quot;Knock Knock&quot;.

==Canal Trust and River Thames Alliance==
After starting work at Stratford-on-Avon in 1973, Suchet had a narrowboat named &quot;Prima Donna&quot; fitted out to his specification as a residence there. He later became vice-president of the Lichfield and Hatherton Canals Trust, whose most challenging achievement has been securing funding, via an appeal and from influencing government decisions, concerning the building of the new M6 Toll motorway, where it cuts the lines of the Lichfield Canal and the Hatherton Canal, both of which the Trust wishes to see reopened.

He was voted in as chairman of the River Thames Alliance in November 2005. At the July 2006 Annual General Meeting of the River Thames Alliance, he agreed to continue being chairman for another year. He is a patron of the River Thames Boat Project.

==Awards, honours and appointments==
In 2002, he was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE). In October 2008, Suchet was awarded an honorary degree for his contributions to the Arts, from the University of Chichester. This was presented by the Vice-Chancellor at the Chichester Festival Theatre. 

On 7 January 2009, he was awarded Freedom of the City of London, at the Guildhall in London. In July 2010, David Suchet was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Kent at Canterbury Cathedral in Canterbury. He was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2011 New Year Honours for &quot;services to drama&quot;. On 18 March 2014, Suchet was given a Lifetime Achievement Award at the RTS Programme Awards 2013 for his outstanding performance in &quot;Agatha Christie″s Poirot&quot;. Suchet is Honorary President of The Leica Society.

Suchet was knighted in the 2020 Birthday Honours for services to drama and charity.
==Personal life==

===Family and genealogy===
In 1972, Suchet first met his wife, Sheila Ferris, at the Belgrade Theatre, Coventry, where they were both working; he says that he fell in love with her as soon as he saw her, and that it took a while to persuade her to go out for a meal with him. They were married on 30 June 1976; the couple have a son, Robert (b. 1981), formerly a captain in the Royal Marines, and a daughter, Katherine (b. 1983), a physiotherapist.

Suchet is the brother of John Suchet, a former national news presenter for Five News, and former ITN newscaster, and presenter of the evening concert on Classic FM (2020). He is the uncle of broadcaster Richard Suchet, who is the son of Suchet&#x27;s younger brother, Peter. Suchet&#x27;s nephew is the RT broadcaster Rory Suchet.

Suchet&#x27;s maternal grandfather, James Jarché, was a famous Fleet Street photographer notable for the first pictures of Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson and also for his pictures of Louis Blériot (1909) and the Siege of Sidney Street. Suchet first became interested in photography when his grandfather gave him a Leica M3 camera as a present. The Jarché family was originally named Jarchy, and were Russian Jews.

Suchet&#x27;s great-great-great-grandfather, George Jezzard, was a master mariner. He was captain of the brig &quot;Hannah&quot;, which sank nine miles off the coast of Suffolk during a violent storm on 28 May 1860, in which more than 100 vessels sank and at least 40 people died. Jezzard and six others of his crew were saved by local rescuers just before their ship sank.

===Religious beliefs===
Raised without religion, in 1986 Suchet underwent a religious conversion after reading Romans 8 in his hotel room. Soon afterwards, he was baptised into the Church of England. Suchet stated in an interview with &quot;Strand&quot; Magazine, &quot;I&#x27;m a Christian by faith. I like to think it sees me through a great deal of my life. I very much believe in the principles of Christianity and the principles of most religions, actually—that one has to abandon oneself to a higher good.&quot;

In 2012, Suchet made a documentary for the BBC on his personal hero, Saint Paul, to discover what he was like as a man by charting his evangelistic journey around the Mediterranean. In 2014, he filmed a documentary about the apostle Saint Peter.

In November 2012, the British Bible Society appointed David Suchet and Dr Paula Gooder as new vice-presidents. They joined the existing vice-presidents: John Sentamu (Archbishop of York), Vincent Nichols (Archbishop of Westminster), Barry Morgan (Archbishop of Wales), David F. Ford (Regius Professor of Divinity at Cambridge), Joel Edwards (International Director of Micah Challenge) and Lord Alton of Liverpool. Following the time when he bade farewell to his role as Hercule Poirot, Suchet fulfilled a 27-year ambition to make an audio recording of The Bible&#x27;s New International Version, which was released in April 2014.

===Political views===
In August 2014, Suchet was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to &quot;The Guardian&quot; expressing their hope that Scotland would vote to remain part of the United Kingdom in the September 2014 referendum on that issue.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
== Stage ==
==Video games==
*&quot;Agatha Christie: Murder on the Orient Express&quot; (2006)

==Interviews and TV documentaries==

===Poirot and Agatha Christie===
* &quot;Being Poirot&quot; BBC documentary (2014)
* &quot;David Suchet on playing Hercule Poirot – Dead Man’s Folly&quot; Q&amp;A – BFI 
* &quot;David Suchet Final Poirot scene hardest of my career&quot; BBC 2013 
* &quot;David Suchet on Poirot&#x27;s Death &quot; Loose Women ITV 2015 
* &quot;Au revoir Hercule Poirot&quot; – BBC News 
* &quot;Poirot&#x27;s David Suchet&quot; ITV 
* &quot;The David Suchet Interview by Studio 10 (Australia)&quot; The ultra-smooth talking David Suchet aka Agatha Christie&#x27;s Hercule Poirot drops by Studio 10.
* &quot;Premier.tv : David Suchet talks about Poirot&quot; 
* &quot;Holly and Phil chat with David Suchet&quot; BBC – 13 November 2013 
* &quot;Today Tonight – David Suchet&quot; Channel Seven, Perth (Australia) 2014 
* &quot;David Suchet interviewed by Clive Anderson&quot; BBC, Wogan 1990s 
* &quot;The Mystery of Agatha Christie&quot; ITV Perspectives, 2013.
* &quot;Agatha Christie&quot; BBC documentary 
* &quot;The Agatha Christie code&quot; ITV 2005 

===BBC documentaries===
* &quot;David Suchet on the Orient Express&quot; (TV documentary) (2010) 
* &quot;David Suchet: In the Footsteps of St Paul&quot; (BBC documentary) (2012) 
* &quot;David Suchet: In the Footsteps of St Peter&quot; (BBC Documentary) (2015) 

===Other interviews===
* &quot;The One Show: David Suchet&quot; – Interview (30 April 2015) BBC 
* &quot;Long Day&#x27;s Journey into Night&quot; David Suchet on acting, &quot;Digital Theatre Plus&quot; 2013 
* &quot;Roles, Characters, Empathy: David Suchet (On) Acting&quot; 2012 
* &quot;Suchet receives CBE&quot; BCC 2011 
* &quot;David Suchet, Actor – A Birthday Tribute&quot; 2011 
* &quot;International Emmy Winner – David Suchet&quot; BBC 2009 
* &quot;David Suchet – Who Do You Think You Are&quot; BBC 2009 
* &quot;Cannes Interview with David Suchet&quot; May 1997 

==Further reading==
* Suchet, David and Wansell, Geoffrey. &quot;Poirot and Me&quot;. Headline Book Publishing, 7 November 2013 (UK), 1 October 2014 (US). 

==References==
==External links==
*
*David Suchet on Biography Channel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211831" start="0" end="25" title="David Suchet" label="Sir David Courtney Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="134" end="147" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098548" start="179" end="190" title="Oppenheimer (miniseries)" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="221" end="224" title="Royal Television Society" label="RTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925844" start="229" end="232" title="Broadcasting Press Guild Awards" label="BPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773869" start="309" end="328" title="The Way We Live Now (2001 TV serial)" label="The Way We Live Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="409" end="424" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="442" end="456" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q391101" start="466" end="495" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="544" end="587" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="668" end="682" title="Olivier Awards" label="Olivier Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="689" end="699" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="765" end="775" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="784" end="790" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115390" start="803" end="814" title="Jack Suchet" label="Jack Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900469" start="973" end="1011" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital Medical School" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1013" end="1019" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421205" start="1105" end="1122" title="Lithuanian Jews" label="Lithuanian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788115" start="1179" end="1187" title="Kretinga" label="Kretinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="1195" end="1213" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1221" end="1235" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="1307" end="1314" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1326" end="1332" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1339" end="1346" title=":wikt:shochet" label="shochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1526" end="1534" title="Church of England" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="1547" end="1561" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="Russian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259588" start="1772" end="1776" title="John Suchet" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q865021" start="1830" end="1848" title="Birchington-on-Sea" label="Birchington-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981486" start="1906" end="1923" title="Wellington School, Somerset" label="Wellington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="1927" end="1935" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087430" start="1982" end="2004" title="National Youth Theatre" label="National Youth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q385471" start="2057" end="2097" title="London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art" label="London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974372" start="2376" end="2393" title="Watermill Theatre" label="Watermill Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="2418" end="2443" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="2467" end="2478" title="Henry IV of England" label="Bolingbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q649562" start="2488" end="2498" title="Richard II (play)" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567882" start="2514" end="2525" title="Alan Howard (Coronation Street)" label="Alan Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350266" start="2581" end="2588" title="Oleanna (play)" label="Oleanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="2642" end="2655" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539402" start="2672" end="2684" title="Lia Williams" label="Lia Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2786" end="2796" title="Separation (play)" label="Separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="2870" end="2880" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q856274" start="2917" end="2953" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?"/>
<link wikidata="Q451831" start="3039" end="3046" title="Amadeus (play)" label="Amadeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095994" start="3070" end="3097" title="Chichester Festival Theatre" label="Chichester Festival Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745631" start="3135" end="3154" title="The Last Confession" label="The Last Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q37278" start="3181" end="3197" title="Pope John Paul I" label="Pope John Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q830501" start="3301" end="3315" title="Lady Bracknell" label="Lady Bracknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q830501" start="3326" end="3357" title="The Importance of Being Earnest" label="The Importance of Being Earnest"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="3367" end="3378" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="3502" end="3523" title="Harold Pinter Theatre" label="Harold Pinter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24669516" start="3646" end="3668" title="Blott on the Landscape (TV series)" label="Blott on the Landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q573988" start="3700" end="3713" title="Leopold Bloom" label="Leopold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3721" end="3730" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="3946" end="3969" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="4017" end="4026" title="adulterer" label="adulterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q391101" start="4166" end="4195" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="4283" end="4296" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q312988" start="5492" end="5503" title="David Yates" label="David Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5513" end="5516" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773869" start="5541" end="5560" title="The Way We Live Now (2001 TV serial)" label="The Way We Live Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537692" start="5617" end="5630" title="George Carman" label="George Carman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5638" end="5641" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="5746" end="5761" title="Cardinal Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="5820" end="5832" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="5836" end="5846" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="5851" end="5871" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="5875" end="5886" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420621" start="5934" end="5945" title="press baron" label="press baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q333468" start="5946" end="5960" title="Robert Maxwell" label="Robert Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="5987" end="5991" title="BBC Two" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="6086" end="6100" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6107" end="6152" title="Agatha Christie: Murder on the Orient Express" label="Agatha Christie: Murder on the Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="6194" end="6201" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622359" start="6209" end="6228" title="Abraham Van Helsing" label="Abraham Van Helsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="6252" end="6263" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="6283" end="6290" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q846544" start="6317" end="6330" title="disaster film" label="disaster film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212516" start="6337" end="6342" title="Flood (2007 film)" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q877955" start="6382" end="6403" title="Deputy Prime Minister" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451933" start="6522" end="6533" title="Loose Women" label="Loose Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q790071" start="6588" end="6600" title="The Bank Job" label="The Bank Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q169963" start="6648" end="6661" title="Jason Statham" label="Jason Statham"/>
<link wikidata="Q232419" start="6666" end="6681" title="Saffron Burrows" label="Saffron Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="6712" end="6721" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985293" start="6747" end="6772" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (British TV series)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="6804" end="6807" title="CBC Television" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283973" start="6831" end="6839" title="Diverted" label="Diverted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447613" start="6935" end="6947" title="Terry Pratchett&amp;#x27;s Going Postal" label="Going Postal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="7095" end="7102" title="bigfoot" label="bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q240899" start="7119" end="7143" title="Harry and the Hendersons" label="Harry and the Hendersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="7171" end="7186" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q282069" start="7200" end="7216" title="A Perfect Murder" label="A Perfect Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305746" start="7233" end="7244" title="The In-Laws (2003 film)" label="The In-Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126287" start="7296" end="7314" title="Sunday (1997 film)" label="&amp;quot;Sunday&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="7376" end="7390" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="7511" end="7520" title="Saint Peter" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="7525" end="7533" title="Paul the Apostle" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404908" start="7621" end="7641" title="Peter Pan Goes Wrong" label="Peter Pan Goes Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="8135" end="8147" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8161" end="8177" title="Decline and Fall#In other media" label="Decline and Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22677147" start="8285" end="8297" title="Doctor Who (series 10)" label="tenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="8307" end="8317" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q29513242" start="8339" end="8350" title="Knock Knock (Doctor Who)" label="Knock Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q649870" start="8464" end="8474" title="narrowboat" label="narrowboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543259" start="8597" end="8606" title="Lichfield Canal" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681502" start="8611" end="8620" title="Hatherton Canal" label="Hatherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q458051" start="8789" end="8796" title="M6 Toll" label="M6 Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543259" start="8838" end="8853" title="Lichfield Canal" label="Lichfield Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681502" start="8862" end="8877" title="Hatherton Canal" label="Hatherton Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="8963" end="8975" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="9241" end="9283" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551577" start="9390" end="9414" title="University of Chichester" label="University of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095994" start="9465" end="9492" title="Chichester Festival Theatre" label="Chichester Festival Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="9530" end="9549" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="9568" end="9577" title="Guildhall" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="9656" end="9674" title="University of Kent" label="University of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="9678" end="9698" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="9731" end="9775" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621996" start="9789" end="9810" title="2011 New Year Honours" label="2011 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="9917" end="9942" title="Royal Television Society" label="RTS Programme Awards 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="10079" end="10087" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q96134180" start="10095" end="10116" title="2020 Birthday Honours" label="2020 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882650" start="10256" end="10272" title="Belgrade Theatre" label="Belgrade Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="10274" end="10282" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="10534" end="10541" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="10549" end="10562" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259588" start="10646" end="10657" title="John Suchet" label="John Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641132" start="10696" end="10705" title="Five News" label="Five News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210241" start="10718" end="10721" title="ITN" label="ITN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136813" start="10989" end="11001" title="James Jarché" label="James Jarché"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="11016" end="11028" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="11076" end="11087" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="11092" end="11106" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396" start="11136" end="11149" title="Louis Blériot" label="Louis Blériot"/>
<link wikidata="Q815102" start="11165" end="11187" title="Siege of Sidney Street" label="Siege of Sidney Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15266940" start="11267" end="11275" title="Leica M3" label="Leica M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="11537" end="11544" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508851" start="11854" end="11862" title="Romans 8" label="Romans 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="11924" end="11941" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="12331" end="12341" title="Saint Paul" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="12495" end="12506" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q920404" start="12531" end="12552" title="British and Foreign Bible Society" label="British Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771317" start="12583" end="12595" title="Paula Gooder" label="Paula Gooder"/>
<link wikidata="Q336564" start="12662" end="12674" title="John Sentamu" label="John Sentamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="12676" end="12694" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q765284" start="12697" end="12712" title="Vincent Nichols" label="Vincent Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711221" start="12714" end="12739" title="Archbishop of Westminster" label="Archbishop of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q449108" start="12742" end="12754" title="Barry Morgan (bishop)" label="Barry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860077" start="12756" end="12775" title="Archbishop of Wales" label="Archbishop of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020599" start="12778" end="12791" title="David F. Ford" label="David F. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309475" start="12793" end="12821" title="Regius Professor of Divinity" label="Regius Professor of Divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="12825" end="12834" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614582" start="12837" end="12849" title="Joel Edwards (Evangelical Alliance)" label="Joel Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12877" end="12892" title="Micah Challenge" label="Micah Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173562" start="12898" end="12908" title="David Alton, Baron Alton of Liverpool" label="Lord Alton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="13061" end="13070" title="The Bible" label="The Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200072" start="13078" end="13103" title="New International Version" label="New International Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="13257" end="13269" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="13382" end="13406" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on that issue"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13488" end="13533" title="Agatha Christie: Murder on the Orient Express" label="Agatha Christie: Murder on the Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="14767" end="14774" title="Saint Paul" label="St Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="14849" end="14857" title="Saint Peter" label="St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732516" start="15553" end="15577" title="Headline Publishing Group" label="Headline Book Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q622329" start="15677" end="15694" title="Biography Channel" label="Biography Channel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150211" wikidata="Q197286" url="?curid=150211" title="Zhang Sanfeng">
<text>Zhang Sanfeng (also spelled Zhang San Feng, Chang San-Feng) refers to a legendary Chinese Taoist who many believe invented the Chinese martial art tai chi. However, other sources point to earlier versions of tai chi predating Sanfeng. He was purported to have achieved immortality.

==History==
There are conflicting accounts of where Zhang Sanfeng was born. According to the History of Ming, he was born in Liaoning in late Song and lived up to 212 years. In 2014, the local government of Shaowu, Fujian province, claimed that he was born in their city. His given name was Tong (通) and his courtesy name was Junbao (). He specialised in Confucian and Taoist studies, scholarly and literary arts. During the reign of Emperor Shizu in the Yuan dynasty, he was nominated as a candidate to join the civil service and held office as the Magistrate of Boling County (博陵縣; around present-day Dingzhou, Baoding, Hebei). While touring around the mountainous regions near present-day Baoji, Shaanxi, he saw the summits of three mountains and decided to give himself the Taoist name &quot;Sanfengzi&quot; (三丰子), hence he also became known as &quot;Zhang Sanfeng&quot;.

Zhang Sanfeng&#x27;s life was one of indifference to fame and wealth. After declining to serve the government and giving away his property to his clan, he travelled around China and lived as an ascetic. He spent several years on Mount Hua before settling in the Wudang Mountains.

==Legend==
Zhang Sanfeng is purported as having created the concept of &quot;neijia&quot; () in Chinese martial arts, specifically tai chi, a Neo-Confucian syncretism of martial arts with his mastery of &quot;daoyin&quot; (or &quot;neigong&quot;) principles. On one occasion, he observed a bird attacking a snake and was greatly inspired by the snake&#x27;s defensive tactics. It remained still and alert in the face of the bird&#x27;s onslaught until it made a lunge and fatally bit its attacker. This incident inspired him to create a set of 75 tai chi movements. He is also associated with the Taoist monasteries in the Wudang Mountains.

Huang Zongxi&#x27;s &quot;Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan&quot; (1669) gave Zhang Sanfeng credit for the development of a Taoist &quot;internal martial arts&quot; style, as opposed to the &quot;external&quot; style of the Shaolin martial arts tradition. Stanley Henning&#x27;s article, &quot;Ignorance, Legend and Taijiquan&quot;, criticised the myth that Zhang Sanfeng created tai chi and cast doubt on whether Zhang really existed.

Zhang Sanfeng was also an expert in the White Crane and Snake styles of Chinese martial arts, and in the use of the &quot;jian&quot; (double-edged Chinese sword). According to 19th century documents preserved in the archives of the Yang and Wu-styles tai chi families, Zhang Sanfeng&#x27;s master was Xu Xuanping, a Tang dynasty Taoist poet and &quot;daoyin&quot; expert.

==Writings==
Writings attributed to Zhang Sanfeng include the &quot;Da Dao Lun&quot; (), &quot;Xuanji Zhi Jiang&quot; (), &quot;Xuan Tan Quanji&quot; (), &quot;Xuan Yao Pian&quot; (), &quot;Wu Gen Shu Ci&quot; () and others. These were compiled into a collection known as &quot;The Complete Collection of Mr Zhang Sanfeng&quot; (), which is found in &quot;Dao Zang Ji Yao&quot; (), a series of Taoist texts compiled by Peng Dingqiu () in the early Qing dynasty. It also contained introductory notes on Taoist martial arts and music.

==In folktales, fiction and media==
===Literature===
Owing to his legendary status, Zhang Sanfeng&#x27;s name appears in Chinese &quot;wuxia&quot; novels, films and television series as a spiritual teacher and martial arts master and Taoist practitioner. Zhang Sanfeng&#x27;s popularity among the Chinese is also attributed to his personality and association with Confucianism and Taoism.

The best known depiction of Zhang Sanfeng in fiction is probably in Jin Yong&#x27;s &quot;wuxia&quot; novel &quot;The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber&quot;, which is primarily set in the final years of the Yuan dynasty. In the novel, Zhang Sanfeng is a former Shaolin monk who founded the Wudang School based in the Wudang Mountains. He has seven apprentices, the &quot;Seven Heroes of Wudang&quot;, one of whom is the father of the novel&#x27;s protagonist, Zhang Wuji.

According to &quot;The Complete Collection of Mr Zhang Sanfeng&quot;, he might have been still alive in the reign of the Tianshun Emperor (r. 1457–1464) of the Ming dynasty. The emperor, who was unable to find Zhang Sanfeng, gave him the title of &quot;zhenren&quot; (Taoist immortal).

===Film and television===
* Portrayed by Alex Man in the 1980 ATV TV Series &quot;Tai Chi Master&quot; and sequel.
* Portrayed by Kenny Ho in the 1991 Chinese Television System television series &quot;Young Zhang Sanfeng&quot;.
* Portrayed by Jet Li in the 1993 film &quot;Tai Chi Master&quot;.
* Portrayed by Sammo Hung in the 1993 &quot;Kung Fu Cult Master&quot;
* Portrayed by Eddie Kwan in the 1996 TVB series &quot;Rise of the Taiji Master&quot;
* Portrayed by Dicky Cheung in the 2002 TV series &quot;Taiji Prodigy&quot;
* Portrayed by Vincent Zhao in the 2002 TV series &quot;Wudang I&quot; and its sequel, 2005 TV series &quot;Wudang II&quot;.
* Portrayed by Yu Chenghui in the 2009 Wenzhou TV series &quot;The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber&quot;
* Portrayed by Seo Hyun-Chul in the 2015–2016 SBS TV series &quot;Six Flying Dragons&quot;.
* Portrayed by Liu Yi Chen in the 2018 film Zhang Sanfeng: Peerless Hero and its 2020 sequel Tai Chi Hero.
* Portrayed by Donnie Yen in the 2022 film &quot;New Kung Fu Cult Master 1&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
* Wile, Douglas &quot;Lost T&#x27;ai-chi Classics from the late Ch&#x27;ing Dynasty&quot; (1996) State University of New York Press, Albany. 
* Albert Liu, &quot;Nei Jia Quan: Internal Martial Arts&quot;, North Atlantic Books, 2004
* &quot;Journal of Asian Martial Arts&quot; Volume 16, No. 4, 2007. Via Media Publishing, Santa Fe, New Mexico US. 

==External links==
* Master Chang San-Feng by Michael P. Garofalo
* Literati page casts serious doubt on Zhang Sanfeng&#x27;s existence</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q197286" start="0" end="13" title="Zhang Sanfeng" label="Zhang Sanfeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="90" end="96" title="Taoism" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="147" end="154" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="269" end="280" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q28763" start="376" end="391" title="History of Ming" label="History of Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="408" end="416" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="425" end="429" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025451" start="490" end="496" title="Shaowu" label="Shaowu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="498" end="504" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075910" start="591" end="604" title="courtesy name" label="courtesy name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="638" end="647" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="652" end="658" title="Taoism" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="717" end="730" title="Kublai Khan" label="Emperor Shizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="738" end="750" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q645183" start="886" end="894" title="Dingzhou" label="Dingzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q58584" start="896" end="903" title="Baoding" label="Baoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="905" end="910" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q514796" start="975" end="980" title="Baoji" label="Baoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="982" end="989" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="1354" end="1361" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112568" start="1389" end="1398" title="Mount Hua" label="Mount Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034" start="1422" end="1438" title="Wudang Mountains" label="Wudang Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663990" start="1518" end="1524" title="neijia" label="neijia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="1537" end="1557" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="1572" end="1579" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="1583" end="1596" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="1611" end="1623" title="Kung Fu" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195503" start="1650" end="1656" title="daoyin" label="daoyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526446" start="1673" end="1680" title="neigong" label="neigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034" start="2064" end="2080" title="Wudang Mountains" label="Wudang Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q31754" start="2083" end="2095" title="Huang Zongxi" label="Huang Zongxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q803758" start="2552" end="2563" title="Fujian White Crane" label="White Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252282" start="2568" end="2573" title="Snake Kung Fu" label="Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284919" start="2634" end="2638" title="jian" label="jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893959" start="2744" end="2748" title="Yang-style tai chi" label="Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749461" start="2753" end="2755" title="Wu-style tai chi" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045137" start="2813" end="2824" title="Xu Xuanping" label="Xu Xuanping"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="2828" end="2840" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3333" end="3345" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q754803" start="3554" end="3559" title="wuxia" label="wuxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="3877" end="3885" title="Jin Yong" label="Jin Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318749" start="3923" end="3956" title="The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber" label="The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="4013" end="4025" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403602" start="4067" end="4074" title="Shaolin School" label="Shaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442100" start="4096" end="4109" title="Wudang School" label="Wudang School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034" start="4123" end="4139" title="Wudang Mountains" label="Wudang Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4171" end="4205" title="List of The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber characters#Wudang School" label="&amp;quot;Seven Heroes of Wudang&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q835087" start="4266" end="4276" title="Zhang Wuji" label="Zhang Wuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q9983" start="4400" end="4416" title="Emperor Yingzong of Ming" label="Tianshun Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="4439" end="4451" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q197745" start="4532" end="4539" title="zhenren" label="zhenren"/>
<link wikidata="Q712097" start="4607" end="4615" title="Alex Man" label="Alex Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185807" start="4696" end="4704" title="Kenny Ho" label="Kenny Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q707546" start="4717" end="4742" title="Chinese Television System" label="Chinese Television System"/>
<link wikidata="Q159577" start="4809" end="4815" title="Jet Li" label="Jet Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q471919" start="4839" end="4853" title="Tai Chi Master (film)" label="Tai Chi Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q311219" start="4876" end="4886" title="Sammo Hung" label="Sammo Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q844679" start="4905" end="4924" title="Kung Fu Cult Master" label="Kung Fu Cult Master"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4946" end="4956" title="Eddie Kwan" label="Eddie Kwan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4986" end="5010" title="Rise of the Taiji Master" label="Rise of the Taiji Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q713119" start="5032" end="5044" title="Dicky Cheung" label="Dicky Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5073" end="5086" title="Taiji Prodigy" label="Taiji Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q708480" start="5108" end="5120" title="Vincent Zhao" label="Vincent Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059897" start="5233" end="5244" title="Yu Chenghui" label="Yu Chenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q704837" start="5281" end="5314" title="The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber (2009 TV series)" label="The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q928831" start="5367" end="5370" title="Seoul Broadcasting System" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18880750" start="5387" end="5405" title="Six Flying Dragons" label="Six Flying Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q311723" start="5535" end="5545" title="Donnie Yen" label="Donnie Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q97352241" start="5569" end="5594" title="New Kung Fu Cult Master 1" label="New Kung Fu Cult Master 1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150212" wikidata="Q742782" url="?curid=150212" title="Lechitic languages">
<text>The Lechitic (or Lekhitic) languages are a language subgroup consisting of Polish and several other languages and dialects that were once spoken in the area that is now Poland and eastern Germany. It is one of the branches of the larger West Slavic subgroup; the other branches of this subgroup are the Czech–Slovak languages and the Sorbian languages.

==Languages==
The Lechitic languages are:
* Polish, used by approximately 38 million native speakers in Poland and several million elsewhere. Polish is considered to have several dialects, including Greater Polish, Lesser Polish, and Masovian, among others;
** Silesian, used today by over 530,000 people (2011 census) in Polish Silesia and by some more in Czech Silesia. The different varieties of Silesian are often considered to be dialects of Polish and Czech, and are sometimes seen as forming a distinct language;
* Pomeranian, spoken by Slavic Pomeranians, of which the only remaining variety is:
** Kashubian, used today by over 110,000 people (2011 census) in the eastern part of Pomerania. Sometimes it is considered a dialect of Polish;
** Slovincian, extinct since the 20th century.
* Polabian, extinct since the mid-18th century, a West Lechitic language formerly spoken by Slavic peoples in areas around the Elbe river in what is now the northeast of Germany.

==Features==
Common West Slavic features that are also present in Lechitic:
# χ́ &gt; š́ in front of ě2, i2
# sk, zɡ &gt; š́č́, ž́ǯ́ in front of ě2, i2
# χ́ &gt; š́ after i, ь, ę, ŕ̥
# epenthetic l only in initial position after soft labials
# -ě3 in the nominative/accusative plural and genitive singular (duš́ě3) and accusatieve plural of kon’ě3 (instead of -ę)
# replacement of the instrumental singular ending -omъ with -ъmъ
# Creation of the nominative masculine/neuter singular ending/active preterite participle ending -a (reka, nesa instead of reky, nesy
# õrt-, õlt- &gt; rot-, lot- (rola, radło)
# (ti̯, di̯ &gt;) t́̄, d́̄; kt́ &gt; ć, ʒ́
# Extension of the pronoun tъ &gt; tъnъ
# Replacement of č́ьto with co via the genitive singular č́ьso
# Use of the compound adjectival genitive and dative masculine/neuter singular endings -ego and -emu through analogy with jego, jemu
# Temporal adverbs ending in -dy instead of -da
# Creation of the conjunction of intent aby
# Tendency for establishing a non-mobile accent
# Tendency to raise long vowels

There was no Proto-Lechitic language, but rather Lechitic languages are a group of dialects with many shared features. The central and eastern territories came under the control of the Piasts, which created a political, cultural (especially religious) unit, which caused the Pomeranians and Polabians to have weaker contact, as the Pomeranians were absorbed into the state by Mieszko I and began integrating with the Eastern Lechites.

Common Lechitic features include:
# Labiovelarization of *telt (but compare Polabian &quot;mlåkə&quot; and Kashubian/Slovincian &quot;młȯko&quot;; also &quot;czółn&quot;)
# Replacement of *tort, tolt, tert, telt
## In accented and preaccented syllables (i.e. under rising intonation): tórᵒt &gt; tᵒrot &gt; trot
## In circumflex and post-accented syllables (i.e. under falling intonation) *tolt &gt; tòlᵒt or ‘tolòt &gt; talt
# Softening of consonants before front vowels
# Velarization of ŕ̥
# Development of sonants (voiced consonants) into complex groups of a vowel and a consonant r, l
## west and central ĺ̥ l̥ &gt; oł &gt; åu̯; Pĺ̥T (before a non-back hard consonant_ in the northeast &gt; ‘el, in the south &gt; ‘il; after TČKP and Pĺ̥T in the northeast ĺ̥ l̥ &gt; oł
## ŕ̥T, r̥ &gt; ar (and then in Polabian &gt; or); ŕ̥T́ &gt; ir (Polabian) &gt; er &gt;ar, or &gt; (Polish) ir, iř &gt; er, eř (which hardens before labials and ch)
# Hardening of consonants before r̥ &lt; ŕ̥T
# *ěT &gt; ‘a (Lechitic ablaut)
# *ęT &gt; ǫ
# eT &gt;’o

==Sample text==
The following is the Lord&#x27;s Prayer in several of the Lechitic languages:

==Etymology==
The term &quot;Lechitic&quot; is applied both to the languages of this group and to Slavic peoples speaking these languages (known as Lechites). The term is related to the name of the legendary Polish forefather Lech and the name Lechia by which Poland was formerly sometimes known. For more details, see &quot;Lechites&quot;.

==See also==
* Lech, Čech, and Rus
* West Lechitic dialects

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="4" end="12" title="Lechitic languages" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="17" end="25" title="Lechitic languages" label="Lekhitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="27" end="36" title="Lechitic languages" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="43" end="60" title="language group" label="language subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="75" end="81" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="237" end="248" title="West Slavic languages" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334789" start="303" end="325" title="Czech–Slovak languages" label="Czech–Slovak languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25442" start="334" end="351" title="Sorbian languages" label="Sorbian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="398" end="404" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q669048" start="533" end="541" title="Dialects of Polish" label="dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106789" start="553" end="567" title="Greater Poland dialect" label="Greater Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q361709" start="569" end="582" title="Lesser Poland dialect" label="Lesser Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274559" start="588" end="596" title="Masovian dialect" label="Masovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30319" start="615" end="623" title="Silesian language" label="Silesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="683" end="690" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45551" start="711" end="724" title="Czech Silesia" label="Czech Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="801" end="807" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="812" end="817" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q149588" start="876" end="886" title="Pomeranian language" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937043" start="898" end="916" title="Pomeranians (tribe)" label="Slavic Pomeranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33690" start="961" end="970" title="Kashubian language" label="Kashubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="1043" end="1052" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="1094" end="1100" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36822" start="1105" end="1115" title="Slovincian language" label="Slovincian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="1151" end="1159" title="Polabian language" label="Polabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16539761" start="1199" end="1212" title="West Lechitic dialects" label="West Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="1276" end="1280" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="3903" end="3921" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="4109" end="4117" title="Lechites" label="Lechites"/>
<link wikidata="Q338097" start="4187" end="4191" title="Lech, founder of Poland" label="Lech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961536" start="4205" end="4211" title="Lechia" label="Lechia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="4286" end="4294" title="Lechites" label="Lechites"/>
<link wikidata="Q338097" start="4318" end="4337" title="Lech, Čech, and Rus" label="Lech, Čech, and Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16539761" start="4340" end="4362" title="West Lechitic dialects" label="West Lechitic dialects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150213" wikidata="Q218868" url="?curid=150213" title="Trilateral Commission">
<text>The Trilateral Commission is a nongovernmental international organization aimed at fostering closer cooperation between Japan, Western Europe and North America. It was founded in July 1973, principally by American banker and philanthropist David Rockefeller, an internationalist who sought to address the challenges posed by the growing economic and political interdependence between the U.S. and its allies in North America, Western Europe, and Japan. The leadership of the organization has since focused on returning to &quot;our roots as a group of countries sharing common values and a commitment to the rule of law, open economies and societies, and democratic principles&quot;. 

The Trilateral Commission is headed by an executive committee and three regional chairs representing Europe, North America, and the Asia-Pacific region, with headquarters in Paris, Washington, D.C., and Tokyo, respectively. Meetings are held annually at locations that rotate among the three regions; regional and national meetings are held throughout the year. Most gatherings focus on discussing reports and debating strategy to meet the commission&#x27;s aims.

The Trilateral Commission represents influential commercial and political interests. As of 2021, there were roughly 400 members, including leading figures in politics, business, media, and academia. Each country within the three regions is assigned a quota of members reflecting its relative political and economic strength.

==History==

===Founding===
The Trilateral Commission was formed in 1973 by private citizens of Japan, North American nations (the U.S. and Canada), and Western European nations to foster substantive political and economic dialogue across the world. The idea of the commission was developed in the early 1970s, a time of considerable discord among the United States and its allies in Western Europe, Japan, and Canada.
To quote its founding declaration:
* &quot;Growing interdependence is a fact of life of the contemporary world. It transcends and influences national systems... While it is important to develop greater cooperation among all the countries of the world, Japan, Western Europe, and North America, in view of their great weight in the world economy and their massive relations with one another, bear a special responsibility for developing effective cooperation, both in their own interests and in those of the rest of the world.&quot;
* &quot;To be effective in meeting common problems, Japan, Western Europe, and North America will have to consult and cooperate more closely, on the basis of equality, to develop and carry out coordinated policies on matters affecting their common interests... refrain from unilateral actions incompatible with their interdependence and from actions detrimental to other regions... [and] take advantage of existing international and regional organizations and further enhance their role.&quot;
* &quot;The Commission hopes to play a creative role as a channel of free exchange of opinions with other countries and regions. Further progress of the developing countries and greater improvement of East-West relations will be a major concern.&quot;
Zbigniew Brzezinski, a Rockefeller advisor who was a specialist on international affairs (and later President Jimmy Carter&#x27;s National Security Advisor from 1977 to 1981), left Columbia University to organize the group, along with:
* Edwin Reischauer, professor at Harvard University and United States Ambassador to Japan, 19611966
* George S. Franklin, executive director of the Council on Foreign Relations 1953–1971 
* Gerard C. Smith, SALT I negotiator and its first North American chairman
* Henry D. Owen, foreign policy studies director at the Brookings Institution
* Max Kohnstamm, European Policy Centre
* Robert R. Bowie, the Foreign Policy Association and director of the Harvard Center for International Affairs
* Marshall Hornblower, former partner at Wilmer, Cutler &amp; Pickering
* Tadashi Yamamoto, Japan Center for International Exchange
* William Scranton, former governor of Pennsylvania. 
Other founding members included Alan Greenspan and Paul Volcker, both later heads of the Federal Reserve System. 

The organization&#x27;s records are stored at the Rockefeller Archive Center in North Tarrytown, NY.

==Meetings==
The Trilateral Commission initiated its biannual meetings in October 1973 in Tokyo, Japan. In May 1976 the first plenary meeting of all of the commission&#x27;s regional groups took place in Kyoto, Japan. Since the ninth meeting in 1978, plenary meetings have taken place annually. Besides annual plenary meetings, regional meetings have also taken place in each of the Asia Pacific Group, the European Group and the North American Group. Since its founding, the discussion group has produced an official journal, &quot;Trialogue&quot;.

==Membership==

Membership is divided into numbers proportionate to each of the think tank&#x27;s three regional areas. North America is represented by 120 members: 20 Canadian, 13 Mexican and 87 American. The European group has reached its limit of 170 members from almost every country on the continent; the ceilings for individual countries are 20 for Germany, 18 for France, Italy and the United Kingdom, 12 for Spain and 1–6 for the rest. At first Asia and Oceania were represented only by Japan, but in 2000 the Japanese group of 85 members became the Pacific Asia group, comprising 117 members: 75 Japanese, 11 South Koreans, seven Australian and New Zealand citizens, and 15 members from the ASEAN nations (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand). The Pacific Asia group also included 9 members from China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The commission now claims &quot;more than 100&quot; Pacific Asian members.

The Trilateral Commission&#x27;s bylaws apparently deny membership to public officials. It draws its members from politics, business, and academia, and has three chairpersons, one from each region. The current chairs are former U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Joseph S. Nye, Jr., former head of the European Central Bank Jean-Claude Trichet, and Yasuchika Hasegawa, chair of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company.

===Leadership===
As of September 2021
===Notable members===
*Graham Allison, Director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and Dean of the Harvard Kennedy School
*Alyssa Ayres, Dean of the Elliott School of International Affairs, George Washington University 
*Catherine Bertini, Professor, Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs
*Antony Blinken, U.S. Secretary of State 2021–2025, son of Donald Mayer Blinken, stepson of Samuel Pisar 
*Michael R. Bloomberg, founder/CEO of Bloomberg L.P., mayor of New York City 2002–2013, namesake of largest U.S. school of public health at Johns Hopkins
*Sophie Boissard, Chief Executive Officer, Korian Group
*Robert R. Bowie, Director of Policy Planning 1953–1957, Foreign Policy Association, co-founder with Henry Kissinger of Harvard Center for International Affairs 1958, Counselor of the State Department 1966–1968, CFR, CIA Chief National Intelligence Officer 1977–1979
*Lael Brainard, Chairman of the U.S. National Economic Council; member of U.S. Federal Reserve&#x27;s Board of Governors; former Under Secretary U.S. Treasury
*Ian Bremmer, president of Eurasia Group and GZERO Media
*Nicola Brewer, British diplomat, British High Commissioner to South Africa, DCMG
*Esther Brimmer, executive director/CEO of , Atlantic Council board; former Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs
*Mark Brzezinski, president and CEO of Brzezinski Strategies LLC, son of Zbigniew Brzezinski, and U.S. Ambassador to Sweden 2011–2015
*Zbigniew Brzezinski, U.S. National Security Advisor in Carter administration
*Steve Bunnell, partner in O’Melveny &amp; Myers LLP, former General Counsel at DHS
*R. Nicholas Burns, U.S. Ambassador to China since 2021, professor and board member of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard Kennedy School, director of the Aspen Strategy Group, senior counselor at The Cohen Group, board member of Entegris Inc., CFR member, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Fulbright scholar at Queen Mary University of London 2020, vice chair of the American Ditchley Foundation, senior advisor at Chatham House, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs 2005–2008, Atlantic Council board
*George H. W. Bush, President of the United States 1989–1993, Vice President of the United States 1981-1989
*Ash Carter, director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard Kennedy School, U.S. Secretary of Defense 2015–2017, CFR board, Aspen Strategy Group, Atlantic Council honorary director
*Jimmy Carter, President of the United States 1977–1981
*Jean Charest, partner in McCarthy Tétrault LLP, former Premier of Québec, member of the Queen&#x27;s Privy Council for Canada
*Michael Chertoff, chairman/co-founder of The Chertoff Group, Secretary of Homeland Security 2005–2009, judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 3rd Circuit 2001–2003, Assistant Attorney General for the DoJ Criminal Division 2003–2005, Atlantic Council board
*Raymond Chrétien, strategic adviser at Fasken, former chair of the Montréal Council on Foreign Relations, former Associate Under Secretary of State of External Affairs, former Canadian Ambassador to the Congo, Belgium, Mexico, the United States, and France, nephew of Jean Chrétien
*Heidi Crebo-Rediker, former Chief Economist, U.S. Department of State and Assistant Secretary of State; Senior Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations
*Helima Croft, Managing Director, RBC Capital Markets
* Lee Cullum, Journalist, PBS
*Caroline Daniel, British journalist, &quot;Financial Times&quot;
*John M. Deutch, Director of CIA 1995–1996, Aspen Strategy Group)
*Paula Dobriansky, Senior Fellow, Harvard Belfer Center; former U.S. Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs
*Wendy Dobson, Professor Emerita, Roman School of Management, University of Toronto
*Hedley Donovan, former editor-in-chief of &quot;Time&quot;
*Nina Easton, Co-CEO, SellerEaston, former Washington Editor of &quot;Fortune&quot;
*Jeffrey Epstein, former hedge fund manager convicted of sex trafficking in 2008, described as &quot;an enthusiastic member of the Trilateral Commission&quot; in 2002
*Dawn Farrell, President and CEO, TransAlta Corporation
*Diana Farrell, former CEO and President, JP Morgan Institute, former Head of McKinsey Global Institute, former Deputy Director, U.S. National Economic Council
*Laurence &quot;Larry&quot; Fink, CFR board member, BlackRock CEO since 1988, WEF trustee
*George S. Franklin, executive director of the Council on Foreign Relations 1953–1971
*Richard Gardner, Columbia law professor, U.S. Ambassador to Spain 1993–1997, U.S. Ambassador to Italy 1977–1981
*David Gergen, Harvard Kennedy School professor, adviser to Nixon, Ford, Reagan, Clinton, commentator for CNN
*Jamie S. Gorelick, partner at WilmerHale, U.S. Deputy Attorney General 1994–1997, General Counsel of DoD 1993–1994, defended BP after 2010 oil spill, 9/11 Commission member, Amazon board member
*Donald E. Graham, Graham Holdings chair since 2013, &quot;Washington Post&quot; publisher 1979–2000, Pulitzer Prize board 1999–2008, Facebook board 2009–2015, Bilderberg meeting attendee in 2009 and 2010
*Kelly Grier, former U.S. Chair and Managing Partner, EY
*Jane Harman, former Member, U.S. House of Representatives; President Emerita, Wilson Center
*Linda Hasenfratz, CEO, Linamar Corporation
*Anniken Hauglie, former Director General, Norwegian Oil and Gas Association, former Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, Norway
*Kerry Healey, President of the Milken Center for Advancing the American Dream; former Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts
*Marillyn A. Hewson, Former Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Lockheed Martin Corporation
*Fiona Hill, &quot;The Globalist&quot; writer, former Senior Director for Europe and Russia of the NSC

*Carla Anderson Hills, CFR co-chair 2007–2017, U.S. HUD Secretary 1975–1977, U.S. Trade Representative 1989–1993
*Melody Hobson, Co-CEO and President, Ariel Investments
*Gerda Holzinger-Burgstaller, Chief Executive Officer, Erste Bank, Austria
*Karen Elliott House, Former Publisher, The &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;; former Senior Vice President, Dow Jones &amp; Company.
*Christopher B. Howard, Robert Morris University president since 2016, CFR, Rhodes scholar, Harvard Board of Overseers, Aspen Strategy Group
*Vivian Hunt, British businesswoman and Managing Partner at McKinsey, London
*Samuel P. Huntington, former director of Harvard’s Center for International Affairs, former White House Coordinator of Security Planning for the U.S. National Security Council
*David Ignatius, &quot;Washington Post&quot; journalist, &quot;Body of Lies&quot; author, Aspen Strategy Group
*Ken Juster, U.S. Ambassador to India
*Juliette Kayyem, Lecturer in Public Policy, JFK School of Government, Harvard University; former Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of Homeland Security
*John Kingman, British businessman and chairman at Legal &amp; General
*Henry Kissinger KCMG, National Security Adviser 1969–1975, U.S. Secretary of State 1973–1977, first chair of the 9/11 Commission Nov.–Dec. 2002, author of NSS Memo 200, Bilderberg attendee, subject of &quot;The Trials of Henry Kissinger,&quot; mentor of Klaus Schwab, Atlantic Council board
*Max Kohnstamm, European Policy Centre
*Jovan Kovacic, East West Bridge founder and president
*Nicholas D. Kristof, &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist, Aspen Strategy Group member, Rhodes scholar
*Stephanie Kusie, Canadian Member of Parliament
*Monique Leroux, Former Chair of the Board and CEO, Desjardins Group
*Tove Lifvendahl, political editor-in-chief of Svenska Dagbladet
*Cecilia Malmstrom, former European Commissioner for Trade, European Commission
*Heather McPherson, Canadian Member of Parliament
*Judith A. &quot;Jami&quot; Miscik, CFR vice chair, CIA Deputy Director for Intelligence 2002–2005, Global Head of Sovereign Risk at Lehman Brothers 2005–2008, PIAB chair 2014–2017, president/vice-chair of Kissinger Associates since 2009
*Andrea Mitchell, Chief Foreign Affairs &amp; Chief Washington Correspondent NBC News, Anchor &quot;Andrea Mitchell Reports,&quot; MSNBC; spouse of Alan Greenspan
*Susan Molinari, former Member, U.S. House of Representatives
*Walter Mondale, VPOTUS 1977–1981, candidate in 1984 presidential election
*Mario Monti, prime minister of Italy 2011–2013
*Heather Munroe-Blum, Chair, Canada Pension Plan Investment Board
*John Negroponte, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State 2007–2009, UN Ambassador 2001–2004, first Director of National Intelligence 2005–2007, subject of &quot;The Ambassador,&quot; brother of MIT Media Lab founder Nicholas Negroponte
*Michelle Nunn, President and CEO, CARE
*Joseph Nye, former U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Atlantic Council board
*Claudia Olsson, founder and chair, Stellar Capacity
*Meghan O&#x27;Sullivan, Trilateral Commission North American chair, CFR board, Aspen Strategy Group
*Henry D. Owen, foreign policy studies director at the Brookings Institution
*Stephen Peel, British private equity investor
*Martin J. Munsch III, U.S. United Nations Deputy Communications Pakistan Mission Relations 2003-2010 under Bush, Clinton 2003 - 2010
*Edwin Reischauer, Harvard professor and U.S. Ambassador to Japan, 1961–1966
*Ginni Rometty, former President and CEO of IBM
*David Rubenstein, CFR chair, Carlyle Group founder, namesake of HKS building, WEF trustee, Aspen Strategy Group
*Indira Samarasekera, Bennett Jones, former president and former vice-chancellor of the University of Alberta
*David E. Sanger, &quot;New York Times&quot; White House correspondent, Aspen Strategy Group
*Eric E. Schmidt, ex-CEO of Google, Bilderberg attendee
*Susan C. Schwab, Former U.S. Trade Representative
*William Scranton, former governor of Pennsylvania
*Kristen Silverberg, President and COO, Business Roundtable; former U.S. Ambassador to the European Union
*Gerard C. Smith, lead SALT 1 negotiator
*Rajiv Shah, Rockefeller Foundation president, Atlantic Council board
*Wendy Sherman, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State since 2021; former professor of the practice of public leadership and director of the Center for Public Leadership at the Harvard Kennedy School; former Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, U.S. Department of State
*Olympia Snowe, U.S. senator from Maine 1995–2013
*Keir Starmer, British Prime Minister and leader of the Labour Party
*James B. Steinberg, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State 2009–2011 under Obama, Deputy National Security Advisor 1997–2001 under Clinton, CFR member, Aspen Strategy Group, Bilderberg attendee
*Jake Sullivan, U.S. National Security Advisor since 2021
*Carole Taylor, former Chair CBC/Radio Canada, former Chair, Canadian Ports
*Frances Townsend, Homeland Security Advisor 2004–2008, CFR board, Aspen Strategy Group, Atlantic Council board
*Philip H. Trezise, Center for Law and Social Policy
*Cyrus Vance Sr., U.S. Secretary of State 1977–1980
*Jacob Wallenberg, Bilderberg attendee, &quot;prince in Sweden&#x27;s royal family of finance&quot; 
*Marcus &quot;Husky&quot; Wallenberg, Swedish banker formerly at Citibank, Deutsche Bank, S. G. Warburg &amp; Co., Citicorp and the SEB Group
*Paul C. Warnke, Center for Law and Social Policy, Clifford, Warnke, Glass, McIlwain &amp; Finney
*David Willetts, British Conservative Party peerage
*Tadashi Yamamoto, Japan Center for International Exchange
*Robert Zoellick, World Bank president 2007–2012, CFR member, Bilderberg attendee
*Nigel Higgins, Chairman of Barclays Bank

==Assessments==
Social critic and academic Noam Chomsky has criticized the commission as undemocratic, pointing to its key publication &quot;The Crisis of Democracy&quot;, which describes the strong popular interest in politics during the 1970s as an &quot;excess of democracy&quot;. He has cited it as one of the most interesting and insightful books showing the modern democratic system not to really be a democracy at all, but controlled by elites who seek to keep the general public disengaged from genuine democratic participation by subtle and mostly non-violent methods and to redefine democracy itself in operative terms that enshrine their own interests as a tiny privileged minority. Chomsky adds that as it was an internal discussion, they felt free to &quot;let their hair down&quot; and to talk openly about the need for an increasingly active and defiant public to be reduced back to its proper state of apathy and obedience lest it continue to use democratic means to deprive them of their power.

Critics accuse the Commission of promoting a global consensus among the international ruling classes in order to manage international affairs in the interest of the financial and industrial elites under the Trilateral umbrella.

In his 1980 book &quot;With No Apologies&quot;, Republican Senator Barry Goldwater suggested that the discussion group was &quot;a skillful, coordinated effort to seize control and consolidate the four centers of power: political, monetary, intellectual, and ecclesiastical... [in] the creation of a worldwide economic power superior to the political governments of the nation-states involved.&quot;

==Conspiracy theories involving the Trilateral Commission==

Some conspiracy theorists believe the organization to be a central plotter of a world government or synarchy. In his book &quot;Among the Truthers: A Journey Through America&#x27;s Growing Conspiracist Underground&quot;, Jonathan Kay wrote that Luke Rudkowski interrupted a lecture by former Trilateral Commission director Zbigniew Brzezinski in April 2007 and accused the organization and a few others of having orchestrated the 9/11 attacks to initiate a new world order.

Economist Anthony C. Sutton was critical of the Trilateral Commission&#x27;s goals and methods, but also said the group could not be characterized as conspiratorial, but his criterion for a conspiracy is that membership be secretive and highly policed. He wrote: &quot;The Trilateral Commission is not a conspiracy. Its membership list is completely public - it costs a postage stamp to get one.” However, in the same text he clarifies what is problematic about the Commission, arguing that it amounts to “a forum for discussion, a place where ideas can be kicked around, &#x27;a rich man&#x27;s club,&#x27; as someone commented, where people can be assessed, where discrete comment and criticism can be made away from a nosy press and a possibly unsympathetic public.&quot; 

Neo-conservative pundit Charles Krauthammer mockingly alluded to the conspiracy theories about the commission when he was asked in 2012 who makes up the &quot;Republican establishment&quot;, saying, &quot;Karl Rove is the president. We meet every month on the full moon... [at] the Masonic Temple. We have the ritual: Karl brings the incense, I bring the live lamb and the long knife, and we began... with a pledge of allegiance to the Trilateral Commission.&quot;

==Publications==
Books
* 

== See also ==
* Bilderberg Group
* World Economic Forum
* Bohemian Grove
* Samuel Huntington (author of &quot;The Crisis of Democracy&quot;)
* Valdai Discussion Club
* Internationalism
==References==
== External links ==

* &quot;The Crisis of Democracy&quot; (1975). A Report on the Governability of Democracies to the Trilateral Commission. New York University Press.

==Further reading==
Articles
*Brzezinski, Zbigniew. “America and Europe”. &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, Vol. 49, No. 1, October 1970. (pp. 11–30) Includes Brzezinski&#x27;s proposal for the establishment of a body like the Trilateral Commission.

Books
* Brzezinski, Zbigniew. &quot;Between Two Ages: America&#x27;s Role in the Technetronic Era&quot;. New York, NY: Viking Press, 1970. 
* Gill, Stephen. &quot;American Hegemony and the Trilateral Commission&quot; (Cambridge Studies in International Relations). Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
* Kay, Jonathan. &quot;Among the Truthers: A Journey Through America&#x27;s Growing Conspiracist Underground&quot;. New York, NY: Harper, 17 May 2011. 
* Rockefeller, David. &quot;Memoirs&quot;. New York, NY: Random House, 2002. 
* Sklar, Holly. &quot;Trilateralism: The Trilateral Commission and Elite Planning for World Management&quot;. Boston, MA: South End Press, 1980. 
*Sutton, Antony C. &quot;Trilaterals Over America&quot;. Boring, OR: CPA Book Publishers, 1995. . 162 pages.
*Wood, Patrick M. &quot;Technocracy Rising: The Trojan Horse Of Global Transformation&quot;. Coherent Publishing, 2014. 

==External links==
* Membership as of August 2011
* Membership as of April 2015
* Membership as of December 2016 
* Membership as of September 2021 
* Membership as of March 2022
* Is the Trilateral Commission the secret organization that runs the world? (Fact check against conspiracy theories from &quot;The Straight Dope&quot;, 1987)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="4" end="25" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="31" end="46" title="Non-governmental organization" label="nongovernmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="47" end="73" title="international organization" label="international organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="240" end="257" title="David Rockefeller" label="David Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="262" end="278" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="3174" end="3193" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="3274" end="3296" title="President Jimmy Carter" label="President Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="3304" end="3329" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="3355" end="3374" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183253" start="3412" end="3428" title="Edwin Reischauer" label="Edwin Reischauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3443" end="3461" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q120428579" start="3466" end="3499" title="United States Ambassador to Japan" label="United States Ambassador to Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3512" end="3530" title="George S. Franklin" label="George S. Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="3558" end="3586" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026663" start="3600" end="3615" title="Gerard C. Smith" label="Gerard C. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3617" end="3623" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks#SALT I Treaty" label="SALT I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10711435" start="3675" end="3688" title="Henry D. Owen" label="Henry D. Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="3729" end="3750" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q660745" start="3753" end="3766" title="Max Kohnstamm" label="Max Kohnstamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q769334" start="3768" end="3790" title="European Policy Centre" label="European Policy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349091" start="3793" end="3808" title="Robert R. Bowie" label="Robert R. Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978292" start="3861" end="3901" title="Harvard Center for International Affairs" label="Harvard Center for International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3904" end="3923" title="Marshall Hornblower" label="Marshall Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022698" start="3943" end="3973" title="Wilmer, Cutler &amp;amp; Pickering" label="Wilmer, Cutler &amp;amp; Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674386" start="3976" end="3992" title="Tadashi Yamamoto" label="Tadashi Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156548" start="3994" end="4033" title="Japan Center for International Exchange" label="Japan Center for International Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q880776" start="4036" end="4052" title="William Scranton" label="William Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q879318" start="4061" end="4085" title="List of Governors of Pennsylvania" label="governor of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="4120" end="4134" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q349785" start="4139" end="4151" title="Paul Volcker" label="Paul Volcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="4177" end="4199" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve System"/>
<link wikidata="Q30268613" start="4253" end="4279" title="Rockefeller Archive Center" label="Rockefeller Archive Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="4509" end="4514" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="5556" end="5561" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q210362" start="6086" end="6104" title="Joseph S. Nye, Jr." label="Joseph S. Nye, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q152905" start="6147" end="6166" title="Jean-Claude Trichet" label="Jean-Claude Trichet"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="6201" end="6230" title="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company" label="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663882" start="6294" end="6308" title="Graham Allison" label="Graham Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882367" start="6326" end="6377" title="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" label="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="6394" end="6416" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q106679018" start="6418" end="6430" title="Alyssa Ayres" label="Alyssa Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365722" start="6444" end="6483" title="Elliott School of International Affairs" label="Elliott School of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052540" start="6516" end="6533" title="Catherine Bertini" label="Catherine Bertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302856" start="6546" end="6594" title="Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs" label="Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821917" start="6596" end="6610" title="Antony Blinken" label="Antony Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="6612" end="6635" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q84323643" start="6654" end="6674" title="Donald M. Blinken" label="Donald Mayer Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729586" start="6687" end="6699" title="Samuel Pisar" label="Samuel Pisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="6702" end="6722" title="Michael R. Bloomberg" label="Michael R. Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="6739" end="6753" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg L.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="6755" end="6777" title="mayor of New York City" label="mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q858206" start="6841" end="6854" title="Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health" label="Johns Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349091" start="6912" end="6927" title="Robert R. Bowie" label="Robert R. Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q730465" start="6929" end="6956" title="Director of Policy Planning" label="Director of Policy Planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468305" start="6968" end="6994" title="Foreign Policy Association" label="Foreign Policy Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="7012" end="7027" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978292" start="7031" end="7071" title="Harvard Center for International Affairs" label="Harvard Center for International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176626" start="7078" end="7111" title="Counselor of the United States Department of State" label="Counselor of the State Department"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7123" end="7126" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations#Notable historical members" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470875" start="7179" end="7192" title="Lael Brainard" label="Lael Brainard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232634" start="7215" end="7240" title="National Economic Council (United States)" label="National Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="7257" end="7298" title="Federal Reserve Board" label="Federal Reserve&amp;#x27;s Board of Governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="7323" end="7336" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980992" start="7338" end="7349" title="Ian Bremmer" label="Ian Bremmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274136" start="7364" end="7377" title="Eurasia Group" label="Eurasia Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028966" start="7395" end="7408" title="Nicola Brewer" label="Nicola Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="7471" end="7475" title="Dame Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="DCMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532848" start="7477" end="7491" title="Esther Brimmer" label="Esther Brimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="7521" end="7537" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809006" start="7552" end="7619" title="Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs" label="Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588921" start="7621" end="7636" title="Mark Brzezinski" label="Mark Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="7693" end="7712" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889384" start="7718" end="7743" title="U.S. Ambassador to Sweden" label="U.S. Ambassador to Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="7755" end="7774" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="7781" end="7806" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="7810" end="7831" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="Carter administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071872" start="7859" end="7880" title="O’Melveny &amp;amp; Myers" label="O’Melveny &amp;amp; Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="7912" end="7915" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="DHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q519825" start="7917" end="7934" title="R. Nicholas Burns" label="R. Nicholas Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q115151654" start="7936" end="7960" title="U.S. Ambassador to China" label="U.S. Ambassador to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882367" start="8007" end="8058" title="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" label="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="8062" end="8084" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="8102" end="8122" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380128" start="8177" end="8185" title="Entegris" label="Entegris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="8192" end="8195" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355037" start="8208" end="8233" title="Rockefeller Brothers Fund" label="Rockefeller Brothers Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="8235" end="8252" title="Fulbright scholar" label="Fulbright scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q195668" start="8256" end="8287" title="Queen Mary University of London" label="Queen Mary University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075441" start="8312" end="8340" title="Ditchley Foundation" label="American Ditchley Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q263016" start="8360" end="8373" title="Chatham House" label="Chatham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965296" start="8375" end="8421" title="Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs" label="Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="8433" end="8449" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="8457" end="8474" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="8476" end="8506" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="8518" end="8553" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806029" start="8565" end="8575" title="Ash Carter" label="Ash Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882367" start="8593" end="8644" title="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" label="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="8648" end="8670" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="8672" end="8697" title="U.S. Secretary of Defense" label="U.S. Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8709" end="8712" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations#Board of directors" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="8720" end="8740" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="8742" end="8758" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="8778" end="8790" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="8792" end="8822" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966" start="8834" end="8846" title="Jean Charest" label="Jean Charest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012273" start="8859" end="8876" title="McCarthy Tétrault" label="McCarthy Tétrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="8889" end="8906" title="Premier of Québec" label="Premier of Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631137" start="8922" end="8959" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Privy Council for Canada" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Privy Council for Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q733612" start="8961" end="8977" title="Michael Chertoff" label="Michael Chertoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q642859" start="9022" end="9052" title="Secretary of Homeland Security" label="Secretary of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="9077" end="9118" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the 3rd Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="9130" end="9156" title="United States Assistant Attorney General" label="Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889741" start="9165" end="9186" title="United States Department of Justice Criminal Division" label="DoJ Criminal Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="9198" end="9214" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420759" start="9222" end="9238" title="Raymond Chrétien" label="Raymond Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436818" start="9261" end="9267" title="Fasken" label="Fasken"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="9490" end="9503" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q105438860" start="9505" end="9524" title="Heidi Crebo-Rediker" label="Heidi Crebo-Rediker"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="9555" end="9574" title="United States Department of State" label="Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="9624" end="9652" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112366" start="9687" end="9706" title="RBC Capital Markets" label="RBC Capital Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045034" start="9738" end="9753" title="Caroline Daniel" label="Caroline Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="9781" end="9796" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369015" start="9804" end="9818" title="John M. Deutch" label="John M. Deutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="9820" end="9835" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="9847" end="9867" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668691" start="9870" end="9886" title="Paula Dobriansky" label="Paula Dobriansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697450" start="10067" end="10081" title="Hedley Donovan" label="Hedley Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="10115" end="10119" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946733" start="10127" end="10138" title="Nina Easton" label="Nina Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="10196" end="10203" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904131" start="10211" end="10226" title="Jeffrey Epstein" label="Jeffrey Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="10235" end="10245" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448801" start="10411" end="10432" title="TransAlta Corporation" label="TransAlta Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271152" start="10434" end="10447" title="Diana Farrell" label="Diana Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="10511" end="10536" title="McKinsey Global Institute" label="McKinsey Global Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232634" start="10567" end="10592" title="National Economic Council (United States)" label="National Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218882" start="10594" end="10625" title="Larry Fink" label="Laurence &amp;quot;Larry&amp;quot; Fink"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10627" end="10630" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations#Board of directors" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q219635" start="10645" end="10654" title="BlackRock" label="BlackRock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="10671" end="10674" title="WEF" label="WEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="10730" end="10758" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327990" start="10770" end="10785" title="Richard N. Gardner" label="Richard Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="10787" end="10795" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="10811" end="10835" title="U.S. Ambassador to Spain" label="U.S. Ambassador to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056264" start="10847" end="10871" title="U.S. Ambassador to Italy" label="U.S. Ambassador to Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701575" start="10883" end="10895" title="David Gergen" label="David Gergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="10897" end="10919" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="10942" end="10947" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824551" start="10949" end="10953" title="Presidency of Gerald Ford" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="10955" end="10961" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="10963" end="10970" title="Presidency of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="10988" end="10991" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q376800" start="10993" end="11010" title="Jamie S. Gorelick" label="Jamie S. Gorelick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022698" start="11023" end="11033" title="WilmerHale" label="WilmerHale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364289" start="11035" end="11063" title="U.S. Deputy Attorney General" label="U.S. Deputy Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531814" start="11075" end="11097" title="General Counsel of the Department of Defense" label="General Counsel of DoD"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="11118" end="11120" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735638" start="11127" end="11141" title="Deepwater Horizon oil spill" label="2010 oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250400" start="11143" end="11158" title="9/11 Commission" label="9/11 Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="11167" end="11173" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294282" start="11188" end="11204" title="Donald E. Graham" label="Donald E. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121014" start="11206" end="11221" title="Graham Holdings" label="Graham Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634982" start="11240" end="11267" title="List of prizes won by The Washington Post" label="&amp;quot;Washington Post&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="11289" end="11303" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="11321" end="11329" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="11347" end="11365" title="Bilderberg meeting" label="Bilderberg meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834124" start="11387" end="11391" title="2010 Bilderberg Conference" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q489097" start="11446" end="11448" title="Ernst &amp;amp; Young" label="EY"/>
<link wikidata="Q272628" start="11450" end="11461" title="Jane Harman" label="Jane Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11478" end="11507" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q872975" start="11528" end="11541" title="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars" label="Wilson Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q29790945" start="11543" end="11559" title="Linda Hasenfratz" label="Linda Hasenfratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825668" start="11566" end="11573" title="Linamar" label="Linamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15477955" start="11587" end="11602" title="Anniken Hauglie" label="Anniken Hauglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195506" start="11718" end="11730" title="Kerry Healey" label="Kerry Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="11827" end="11840" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953889" start="11842" end="11860" title="Marillyn Hewson" label="Marillyn A. Hewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="11918" end="11945" title="Lockheed Martin Corporation" label="Lockheed Martin Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24009805" start="11947" end="11957" title="Fiona Hill (presidential advisor)" label="Fiona Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736791" start="11965" end="11978" title="The Globalist" label="The Globalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="12045" end="12048" title="U.S. National Security Council" label="NSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q457445" start="12051" end="12071" title="Carla Anderson Hills" label="Carla Anderson Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="12073" end="12076" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419581" start="12102" end="12115" title="HUD Secretary" label="HUD Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="12127" end="12152" title="U.S. Trade Representative" label="U.S. Trade Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813152" start="12164" end="12177" title="Mellody Hobson" label="Melody Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975304" start="12201" end="12218" title="Ariel Investments" label="Ariel Investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310001" start="12274" end="12284" title="Erste Bank" label="Erste Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407715" start="12295" end="12314" title="Karen Elliott House" label="Karen Elliott House"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="12344" end="12363" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111885" start="12427" end="12448" title="Christopher B. Howard" label="Christopher B. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347821" start="12450" end="12474" title="Robert Morris University" label="Robert Morris University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="12497" end="12500" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149762" start="12502" end="12516" title="List of Rhodes Scholars" label="Rhodes scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676287" start="12518" end="12544" title="Harvard Board of Overseers" label="Harvard Board of Overseers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="12546" end="12566" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q47010849" start="12568" end="12579" title="Vivian Hunt" label="Vivian Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="12627" end="12635" title="McKinsey" label="McKinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="12645" end="12665" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="12686" end="12693" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978292" start="12696" end="12728" title="Center for International Affairs" label="Center for International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="12737" end="12748" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="12790" end="12820" title="U.S. National Security Council" label="U.S. National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174815" start="12822" end="12836" title="David Ignatius" label="David Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="12844" end="12859" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936926" start="12884" end="12896" title="Body of Lies (novel)" label="Body of Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="12911" end="12931" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390231" start="12933" end="12943" title="Ken Juster" label="Ken Juster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837650" start="12945" end="12969" title="U.S. Ambassador to India" label="U.S. Ambassador to India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309009" start="12971" end="12986" title="Juliette Kayyem" label="Juliette Kayyem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="13015" end="13039" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="JFK School of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="13041" end="13059" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="13089" end="13125" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="U.S. Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251241" start="13127" end="13139" title="John Kingman (businessman)" label="John Kingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470848" start="13177" end="13196" title="Legal &amp;amp; General" label="Legal &amp;amp; General"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="13198" end="13213" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13214" end="13218" title="List of current honorary Knights and Dames of the Order of St Michael and St George#Honorary Knights/Dames Commander (KCMG/DCMG)" label="KCMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="13220" end="13245" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="13257" end="13280" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250400" start="13311" end="13326" title="9/11 Commission" label="9/11 Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268452" start="13353" end="13365" title="National Security Study Memorandum 200" label="NSS Memo 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834124" start="13367" end="13386" title="2010 Bilderberg Conference" label="Bilderberg attendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q531236" start="13405" end="13434" title="The Trials of Henry Kissinger" label="The Trials of Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="13442" end="13448" title="mentor" label="mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76793" start="13452" end="13464" title="Klaus Schwab" label="Klaus Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="13466" end="13482" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q660745" start="13490" end="13503" title="Max Kohnstamm" label="Max Kohnstamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q769334" start="13505" end="13527" title="European Policy Centre" label="European Policy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q972107" start="13584" end="13603" title="Nicholas D. Kristof" label="Nicholas D. Kristof"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="13643" end="13663" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149762" start="13672" end="13686" title="List of Rhodes Scholars" label="Rhodes scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29139551" start="13688" end="13703" title="Stephanie Kusie" label="Stephanie Kusie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320840" start="13736" end="13750" title="Monique F. Leroux" label="Monique Leroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933350" start="13787" end="13803" title="Desjardins Group" label="Desjardins Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962104" start="13805" end="13820" title="Tove Lifvendahl" label="Tove Lifvendahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504847" start="13851" end="13868" title="Svenska Dagbladet" label="Svenska Dagbladet"/>
<link wikidata="Q234872" start="13870" end="13887" title="Cecilia Malmström" label="Cecilia Malmstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q71920855" start="13950" end="13967" title="Heather McPherson (politician)" label="Heather McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146371" start="14000" end="14033" title="Jami Miscik" label="Judith A. &amp;quot;Jami&amp;quot; Miscik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="14035" end="14038" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="14051" end="14054" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q212900" start="14132" end="14147" title="Lehman Brothers" label="Lehman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402416" start="14159" end="14163" title="President&amp;#x27;s Intelligence Advisory Board" label="PIAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197516" start="14205" end="14225" title="Kissinger Associates" label="Kissinger Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q494466" start="14238" end="14253" title="Andrea Mitchell" label="Andrea Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="14314" end="14322" title="NBC News" label="NBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755192" start="14337" end="14360" title="Andrea Mitchell Reports" label="Andrea Mitchell Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="14385" end="14399" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978229" start="14401" end="14415" title="Susan Molinari" label="Susan Molinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="14432" end="14461" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="14463" end="14477" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="14479" end="14485" title="VPOTUS" label="VPOTUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="14510" end="14536" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904" start="14538" end="14549" title="Mario Monti" label="Mario Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694006" start="14586" end="14605" title="Heather Munroe-Blum" label="Heather Munroe-Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013693" start="14614" end="14650" title="Canada Pension Plan Investment Board" label="Canada Pension Plan Investment Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q453868" start="14652" end="14667" title="John Negroponte" label="John Negroponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301213" start="14674" end="14699" title="Deputy Secretary of State" label="Deputy Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="14711" end="14724" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to the United Nations" label="UN Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154057" start="14742" end="14775" title="Director of National Intelligence" label="Director of National Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11957679" start="14798" end="14825" title="The Ambassador (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Ambassador,&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="14837" end="14850" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q92601" start="14859" end="14878" title="Nicholas Negroponte" label="Nicholas Negroponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324789" start="14880" end="14893" title="Michelle Nunn" label="Michelle Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q699385" start="14914" end="14918" title="Care International" label="CARE"/>
<link wikidata="Q210362" start="14920" end="14930" title="Joseph Nye" label="Joseph Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808976" start="14944" end="15009" title="Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs" label="Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="15011" end="15027" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q54357947" start="15035" end="15049" title="Claudia Olsson" label="Claudia Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809043" start="15088" end="15110" title="Meghan O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Meghan O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="15156" end="15159" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="15167" end="15187" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10711435" start="15189" end="15202" title="Henry D. Owen" label="Henry D. Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="15243" end="15264" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011444" start="15266" end="15278" title="Stephen Peel" label="Stephen Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183253" start="15447" end="15463" title="Edwin O. Reischauer" label="Edwin Reischauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="15465" end="15472" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q120428579" start="15487" end="15511" title="U.S. Ambassador to Japan" label="U.S. Ambassador to Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49971" start="15524" end="15537" title="Ginni Rometty" label="Ginni Rometty"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="15567" end="15570" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018737" start="15572" end="15588" title="David Rubenstein" label="David Rubenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="15590" end="15593" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="15601" end="15614" title="Carlyle Group" label="Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="15636" end="15639" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="HKS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15650" end="15653" title="World Economic Forum#Board of trustees" label="WEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="15663" end="15683" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q51704" start="15685" end="15704" title="Indira Samarasekera" label="Indira Samarasekera"/>
<link wikidata="Q640694" start="15772" end="15793" title="University of Alberta" label="University of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174291" start="15795" end="15810" title="David E. Sanger" label="David E. Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="15866" end="15886" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q92747" start="15888" end="15903" title="Eric E. Schmidt" label="Eric E. Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="15915" end="15921" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834124" start="15923" end="15942" title="2010 Bilderberg Conference" label="Bilderberg attendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q441879" start="15944" end="15959" title="Susan Schwab" label="Susan C. Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574977" start="15968" end="15993" title="Office of the United States Trade Representative" label="U.S. Trade Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q880776" start="15995" end="16011" title="William Scranton" label="William Scranton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="16032" end="16044" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437802" start="16046" end="16064" title="Kristen Silverberg" label="Kristen Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001792" start="16085" end="16104" title="Business Roundtable" label="Business Roundtable"/>
<link wikidata="Q105089555" start="16113" end="16150" title="U.S. Ambassador to the European Union" label="U.S. Ambassador to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026663" start="16152" end="16167" title="Gerard C. Smith" label="Gerard C. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="16174" end="16178" title="SALT" label="SALT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274250" start="16193" end="16203" title="Rajiv Shah" label="Rajiv Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="16205" end="16227" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="16239" end="16255" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169153" start="16263" end="16276" title="Wendy Sherman" label="Wendy Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301213" start="16283" end="16308" title="Deputy Secretary of State" label="Deputy Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059832" start="16395" end="16423" title="Center for Public Leadership" label="Center for Public Leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="16431" end="16453" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="16510" end="16534" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q22290" start="16536" end="16549" title="Olympia Snowe" label="Olympia Snowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="16551" end="16563" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="16569" end="16574" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="16586" end="16598" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="16641" end="16653" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q463641" start="16655" end="16673" title="James B. Steinberg" label="James B. Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301213" start="16675" end="16705" title="U.S. Deputy Secretary of State" label="U.S. Deputy Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="16722" end="16727" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261055" start="16729" end="16761" title="Deputy National Security Advisor" label="Deputy National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="16778" end="16785" title="Presidency of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="16787" end="16797" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR member"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="16799" end="16819" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834124" start="16821" end="16840" title="2010 Bilderberg Conference" label="Bilderberg attendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730147" start="16842" end="16855" title="Jake Sullivan" label="Jake Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978320" start="16862" end="16887" title="National Security Advisor" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044737" start="16900" end="16913" title="Carole Taylor" label="Carole Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478983" start="16976" end="16992" title="Frances Townsend" label="Frances Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q28069466" start="16994" end="17019" title="Homeland Security Advisor" label="Homeland Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17031" end="17034" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations#Board of directors" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807847" start="17042" end="17062" title="Aspen Strategy Group" label="Aspen Strategy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q756373" start="17064" end="17080" title="Atlantic Council" label="Atlantic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059742" start="17107" end="17139" title="Center for Law and Social Policy" label="Center for Law and Social Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q296661" start="17141" end="17156" title="Cyrus Vance Sr." label="Cyrus Vance Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="17158" end="17181" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q121564" start="17193" end="17209" title="Jacob Wallenberg" label="Jacob Wallenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834124" start="17211" end="17230" title="2010 Bilderberg Conference" label="Bilderberg attendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894411" start="17294" end="17329" title="Marcus Wallenberg (born 1956)" label="Marcus &amp;quot;Husky&amp;quot; Wallenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="17358" end="17366" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="17368" end="17381" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387484" start="17383" end="17406" title="S. G. Warburg &amp;amp; Co." label="S. G. Warburg &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="17408" end="17416" title="Citicorp" label="Citicorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q975655" start="17425" end="17434" title="SEB Group" label="SEB Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154239" start="17436" end="17450" title="Paul Warnke" label="Paul C. Warnke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059742" start="17452" end="17484" title="Center for Law and Social Policy" label="Center for Law and Social Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266064" start="17534" end="17548" title="David Willetts" label="David Willetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="17550" end="17576" title="British Conservative Party" label="British Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="17577" end="17584" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674386" start="17586" end="17602" title="Tadashi Yamamoto" label="Tadashi Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156548" start="17604" end="17643" title="Japan Center for International Exchange" label="Japan Center for International Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q312724" start="17645" end="17660" title="Robert Zoellick" label="Robert Zoellick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="17662" end="17672" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814480" start="17694" end="17697" title="Members of the Council on Foreign Relations" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834124" start="17706" end="17725" title="2010 Bilderberg Conference" label="Bilderberg attendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="17754" end="17767" title="Barclays" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="17812" end="17824" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728115" start="17910" end="17933" title="The Crisis of Democracy" label="The Crisis of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="19078" end="19093" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="19478" end="19498" title="conspiracy theorists" label="conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="19553" end="19569" title="world government" label="world government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375737" start="19573" end="19581" title="synarchy" label="synarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273534" start="19694" end="19706" title="Jonathan Kay" label="Jonathan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="19796" end="19815" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q22763" start="19886" end="19915" title="9/11 conspiracy theories" label="orchestrated the 9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q607968" start="19958" end="19975" title="Anthony C. Sutton" label="Anthony C. Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065216" start="20749" end="20768" title="Charles Krauthammer" label="Charles Krauthammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q311135" start="20930" end="20939" title="Karl Rove" label="Karl Rove"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="21007" end="21021" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="21235" end="21251" title="Bilderberg Group" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="21254" end="21274" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q890783" start="21277" end="21291" title="Bohemian Grove" label="Bohemian Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="21294" end="21311" title="Samuel Huntington (political scientist)" label="Samuel Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728115" start="21329" end="21352" title="The Crisis of Democracy" label="The Crisis of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141359" start="21362" end="21384" title="Valdai Discussion Club" label="Valdai Discussion Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="21387" end="21403" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="Internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="21562" end="21587" title="New York University Press" label="New York University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="21620" end="21640" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Brzezinski, Zbigniew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="21670" end="21685" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="21844" end="21864" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Brzezinski, Zbigniew"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="21955" end="21967" title="Viking Press" label="Viking Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q710347" start="21978" end="21991" title="Stephen Gill (political scientist)" label="Gill, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="22101" end="22127" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273534" start="22138" end="22151" title="Jonathan Kay" label="Kay, Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="22266" end="22272" title="Harper (publisher)" label="Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="22290" end="22308" title="David Rockefeller" label="Rockefeller, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="22345" end="22357" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119443" start="22368" end="22380" title="Holly Sklar" label="Sklar, Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492249" start="22488" end="22503" title="South End Press" label="South End Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q607968" start="22513" end="22530" title="Antony C. Sutton" label="Sutton, Antony C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7766865" start="23049" end="23066" title="The Straight Dope" label="The Straight Dope"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150214" wikidata="Q6053" url="?curid=150214" title="Gifhorn (district)">
<text>Gifhorn () is a district in Lower Saxony, Germany.

==Geography==
The district is located at the border of Saxony-Anhalt and extends from the southern edge of the Lüneburg Heath () in the north to the suburbs of Braunschweig and Wolfsburg in the south. The Aller River enters the district in the southeast, runs through the town of Gifhorn, is joined by the Ise and Oker river and leaves the district in the west. The southern terminus of the Elbe Lateral Canal at the Mittellandkanal is at Edesbüttel in the district.

It is bounded by (from the south and clockwise) the district of Helmstedt, the cities of Wolfsburg and Braunschweig, the districts of Peine, Hanover, Celle and Uelzen, and by the state of Saxony-Anhalt (districts of Altmarkkreis Salzwedel and Börde).

The lowest point of the administrative district Gifhorn lies at the Aller near Müden ( above sea level). The highest point lies in the north of the district near Sprakensehl ( above sea level).

==History==
The district was established in 1885 by the Prussian government. In 1932, the former district of Isenhagen became the northern part of the Gifhorn district. The city of Wolfsburg originally was a part of the district, but became a district-free city in 1951. In 1974 the district again lost parts of its territory, when the city of Fallersleben was incorporated into Wolfsburg.

==Coat of arms==

The lion as well as the hearts are heraldic symbols of Lüneburg - Gifhorn was a part of the duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg for many centuries and, briefly the Duchy of Gifhorn. The horn symbolises the syllable &quot;horn&quot; in the word Gifhorn.

==Towns and municipalities==

(numbers of inhabitants from 30 June 2005)

Communities
# Gifhorn, town, autonomous community (42,658)
# Sassenburg (10,946) [seat: Westerbeck]
# Wittingen, town (12,268)

* Seat of Samtgemeinde government

Samtgemeinden with their local communities
Area without community (uninhabited)
* Giebel ()

==See also==
*Metropolitan region Hannover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg

==References==
==External links==

* Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6053" start="0" end="7" title="Gifhorn (district)" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="28" end="40" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="42" end="49" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="107" end="120" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="163" end="177" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967803" start="257" end="262" title="Aller (Germany)" label="Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q14813" start="332" end="339" title="Gifhorn" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q316186" start="358" end="361" title="Ise (river)" label="Ise"/>
<link wikidata="Q701512" start="366" end="370" title="Oker" label="Oker"/>
<link wikidata="Q314162" start="443" end="461" title="Elbe Lateral Canal" label="Elbe Lateral Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48480" start="469" end="484" title="Mittellandkanal" label="Mittellandkanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047" start="584" end="593" title="Helmstedt (district)" label="Helmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014" start="609" end="618" title="Wolfsburg" label="Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="623" end="635" title="Braunschweig (city)" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045" start="654" end="659" title="Peine (district)" label="Peine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963" start="661" end="668" title="Hanover (district)" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919" start="670" end="675" title="Celle (district)" label="Celle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915" start="680" end="686" title="Uelzen (district)" label="Uelzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="708" end="721" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061" start="736" end="758" title="Altmarkkreis Salzwedel" label="Altmarkkreis Salzwedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064" start="763" end="768" title="Börde (district)" label="Börde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967803" start="840" end="845" title="Aller (Germany)" label="Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q684029" start="851" end="856" title="Müden (Aller)" label="Müden"/>
<link wikidata="Q671766" start="934" end="945" title="Sprakensehl" label="Sprakensehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1023" end="1030" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="1431" end="1439" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="1477" end="1495" title="Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165737" start="1532" end="1548" title="Duchy of Gifhorn" label="Duchy of Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14813" start="1710" end="1717" title="Gifhorn" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q475659" start="1757" end="1767" title="Sassenburg" label="Sassenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q552390" start="1798" end="1807" title="Wittingen" label="Wittingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q447523" start="1859" end="1871" title="Samtgemeinde" label="Samtgemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1941" end="1947" title="Giebel (gemfr. Gebiet)" label="Giebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q315065" start="1966" end="2027" title="Metropolitan region Hannover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg" label="Metropolitan region Hannover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150215" wikidata="Q36741" url="?curid=150215" title="Polabian language">
<text>The Polabian language, also known as Drevanian–Polabian language, Drevanian language, and Lüneburg Wendish language, is a West Slavic language that was spoken by the Polabian Slavs () in present-day northeastern Germany around the Elbe, from which the term &quot;Polabian&quot; comes from. It was spoken approximately until the rise to power of Prussia in the mid-18th century – when it was superseded by Low German – in the areas of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, central Mittelmark part of Brandenburg and eastern Saxony-Anhalt (Wittenberg originally part of Bela Serbia), as well as in eastern parts of Wendland (Lower Saxony) and Schleswig-Holstein, Ostholstein and Lauenburg). Polabian was also relatively long (until the 16th century) spoken in and around the cities of Lübeck and Oldenburg. The very poorly attested Slavic dialects of Rügen seemed to have had more in common with Polabian than with Pomeranian varieties. In the south, it bordered on the Sorbian language area in Lusatia.

Polabian is characterized by the preservation of a number of archaic features, such as the presence of nasal vowels, a lack of metathesis of Proto-Slavic &quot;*TorT&quot;; the presence of an aorist and imperfect verb tenses, traces of the dual number, and some prosodic features, as well as by some innovations, including diphthongization of closed vowels, a shift of the vowels o to ö, ü and a to o; a softening of the consonants g, k in some positions to d&#x27;, t&#x27;, an occasional reduction of final vowels, and the formation of complex tenses, many which are associated with the influence of the German language. Polabian also has a large number of Middle Low German borrowings.

By the 18th century, Lechitic Polabian was in some respects markedly different from other Slavic languages, most notably in having a strong German influence. It was close to Pomeranian and Kashubian, and is attested only in a handful of manuscripts, dictionaries and various writings from the 17th and 18th centuries.

==History==
About 2800 Polabian words are known; of prose writings, only a few prayers, one wedding song and a few folktales survive. Immediately before the language became extinct, several people started to collect phrases and compile wordlists, and were engaged with folklore of the Polabian Slavs, but only one of them appears to have been a native speaker of Polabian (himself leaving only 13 pages of linguistically relevant material from a 310-page manuscript). The last native speaker of Polabian, a woman, died in 1756, and the last person who spoke limited Polabian died in 1825.

The most important monument of the language is the so-called &quot;Vocabularium Venedicum&quot; (1679–1719) by .

The language left many traces to this day in toponymy; for example, Wustrow (literally &#x27;island&#x27;, Polabian: ), Lüchow (Polabian: ), Sagard, Gartow, Krakow etc. It is also a likely origin of the name , from the Polabian stem / (&#x27;swamp&#x27;).

Though unorganized language revitalization for the Polabian language is occurring in small groups. As of 2023, the language has few limited speakers, but is growing due to more resources being accessible to learn the language.

==Features==
Polabian retains some archaic features from Proto-Slavic:
* Preservation of the nasal vowels [ǫ], [ą], [ę]: *pętь &gt; pąt
* Preservation of the aorist and imperfect in the conjugation system
* Trace preservation of the dual number
* Absence of metathesis of *TorT 
Polabian also has many innovations, in part due to neighboring German and in part due to being more remote:
* Diphthongization of monophthongs 
* Formation of complex, periphrastic tenses
* Restructuring of the case system
The Proto-Slavic vowels developed thusly:
* Unlike most other Slavic languages, the weak yers &quot;ъ&quot; and &quot;ь&quot; were not lost not only before a syllable with another reduced yer (Proto-Slavic *&quot;mъхъ&quot; &gt; &quot;måx&quot;), but also in initial stressed and pre-stressed syllables: *&quot;dъno&quot; &gt; &quot;dånü&quot; “bottom” &quot;, *&quot;sъpati&quot; &gt; &quot;såpot&quot; &quot;sleep&quot;, *&quot;tъkati&quot; &gt; &quot;tåkat&quot; &quot;weave&quot;, *&quot;tьma&quot; &gt; &quot;tåmă&quot; &quot;darkness&quot;, *&quot;pьsi&quot; &gt; &quot;pasaɪ̯&quot; &quot;dogs&quot;. A. M. Selishchev notes similar phenomena in the dialects of the Bulgarian, Serbian, Slovenian and Slovak languages. In positions before a hard consonant, *&quot;ь&quot; in Polabian shifted to &quot;å&quot; (*&quot;pьsъ&quot; &gt; &quot;ṕås&quot; “dog”), in other positions to a (*&quot;dьnь&quot; &gt; &quot;dan&quot; “day”) and only in some cases between soft consonants to i (*&quot;vьši&quot; &gt; &quot;visi&quot; &quot;All&quot;). *ъ usually gave &quot;å&quot; (*&quot;vъšь&quot; &gt; &quot;vås&quot; “louse”), but after velars (*k , g , x) it turned into ė (*&quot;olkъtь&quot; &gt; &quot;lüťėt&quot; “elbow”, *&quot;nogъtь&quot; &gt; &quot;nüďėt&quot; “(finger/toe)nail”, *&quot;xъmelь&quot; &gt; &quot;x́ėmil&quot; “hop”).
* Reduced vowels arose in Polabian as a result of stress. In stressed syllables, the vowels *&quot;a&quot;, *&quot;ě&quot;, *&quot;ъ&quot;, and *&quot;ь&quot; reduced to &quot;ă&quot;, and the vowels *&quot;i&quot;, *&quot;y&quot;, *&quot;u&quot;, *&quot;o&quot;, *&quot;e&quot; reduced to &quot;ĕ&quot;.
* The vowel *&quot;o&quot; became &quot;ö&quot; before a hard consonant (*&quot;kosa&quot; &gt; &quot;ťösa&quot;, *&quot;kolo&quot; &gt; &quot;ťölü&quot;) and &quot;å&quot; after &quot;v&quot; before a hard consonant (*&quot;oko&quot; &gt; &quot;våťü&quot;, *&quot;voda&quot; &gt; &quot;våda&quot;), in &quot;ü&quot; in other positions (*&quot;sobota&quot; &gt; &quot;süböta&quot;, *&quot;noga&quot; &gt; &quot;nüga&quot;).
* The vowels *&quot;i&quot;, *&quot;y&quot;, and *&quot;u&quot; in Polabian were diphthongized in stressed and pre-stressed syllables: *&quot;zima&quot; &gt; &quot;zai̯mă&quot;, *&quot;nitь&quot; &gt; &quot;nai̯t&quot;, *&quot;byti&quot; &gt; &quot;båi̯t&quot;, *&quot;dymъ&quot; &gt; &quot;dåi̯m&quot;, *&quot;duša&quot; &gt; &quot;daṷsă&quot;, *&quot;ubĕžati&quot; &gt; &quot;ai̯bezăt&quot;, *&quot;jutrě&quot; &gt; &quot;jaṷtră&quot;, &quot;jai̯tră&quot;.
* In the same position, a became o : *&quot;žaba&quot; &gt; &quot;zobo&quot;, *&quot;korva&quot; &gt; &quot;korvo&quot;.
* The vowel *&quot;ě&quot; before hard dental consonants turned into &quot;o&quot; with a softening of the preceding consonant (*&quot;lěto&quot; &gt; &quot;ľotü&quot;), before &quot;j&quot; it turned into &quot;i&quot; (*&quot;sějanьje&quot; &gt; &quot;sijonă&quot;), in other cases - into &quot;e&quot; (*&quot;běliti&quot; &gt; &quot;belĕt&quot;).
The Proto-Slavic consonants developed thusly:
* The sibilant consonants *&quot;č&quot;, *&quot;š&quot;, *&quot;ž&quot; in Polabian underwent masuration, changing into &quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot;, &quot;z&quot;, which, unlike the original &quot;c&quot;, &quot;s&quot;, &quot;z&quot;, were always hard. T. Lehr-Spławiński, based on relative chronological data, originally dated the appearance of masuration in the Polabian language no earlier than the beginning of the 16th century, and that this phenomenon must be a Polabian innovation, and it cannot be explained by the influence of the German language, which has &quot;č&quot; and &quot;š&quot;. A. M. Selishchev dated this process to the 16th-17th centuries, believing that it did not take place in all Polabian dialects, as a few documents have examples with these sibilants, despite the predominance of masurized forms, and associated it with the influence of the Low Saxon and East Low German dialects of German settlers, in which š is missing. Later it was proven that in the dialect presented in the Pfeffinger dictionary, masuration was absent and for it it is necessary to reconstruct sibilants (š , ž , č), absent in other dialects.
* The back-lingual consonants *&quot;k&quot;, *&quot;g&quot;, and *&quot;x&quot; before the front vowels &quot;i&quot; (&lt; *&quot;y&quot;), &quot;ė&quot; (&lt; *&quot;ъ&quot;) &quot;ü&quot; and &quot;ö&quot; (&lt; *&quot;o&quot;) softened to &quot;ḱ&quot;, &quot;ǵ&quot;, &quot;x́&quot;. Subsequently, &quot;ḱ&quot; and &quot;ǵ&quot; became &quot;ť&quot; and &quot;ď&quot; respectively.

==Phonology==
For Polabian the following segments are reconstructable:

===Vowels===



===Consonants===
===Prosody===
The nature of the Polabian accent remains a controversial issue. There are three theories:
* Free stress, supported by A. Schleicher, T. Lehr-Spławiński, and A. M. Selishchev.
* Stress was always initial, i.e. always occurring on the first syllable, supported by E. Kurilovich.
* Final stress if the final vowel was long, and pentulimate stress if the final vowel was short, supported by N. S. Trubetskoy and R. Olesh. K. Polański criticizes this theory asserting that there was not long-short distinction in Polabian, but rather strong-weak.

==Morphology==
Due to the poor attestation of Polabian, it is difficult to reconstruct a full morphology. Presented here is a general overview.

===Nouns===
As in all Slavic languages, Polabian has three grammatical genders: masculine, feminine and neuter. Polabian nouns may also be animate or inanimate, and decline for six cases: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental and the prepositional; the vocative case in Polabian was lost, being replaced by the nominative. Nouns were used mainly only in combination with prepositions, not only in the prepositional case, as in most Slavic languages, but also in the instrumental. Within the inflectional endings, two paradigms exist, one of a masculine-neuter type, the other a feminine type; neither inflectional types are homogeneous.

====Masculine and neuter nouns====
Masculine and neuter nouns are divided into two groups: those ending in -ă in the nominative singular those ending in anything else. Nouns ending in -ă probably took a feminine declension in the singular, as in other Slavic languages, but this is difficult to assert due to the fact that such nouns are known in the documents only in the nominative singular form. The second group of nouns is divided into a number of subtypes. The dual forms of masculine and neuter nouns are not attested.

Within the singular, the following can be seen:
* Masculine nouns in the nominative are characterized by zero endings: &quot;dåzd&quot; (“rain”), in addition, forms with the ending &quot;-ă&quot; are preserved : &quot;l̥ol̥ă&quot; (“father”), &quot;vau̯jă&quot; (“uncle”), and one form with the ending &quot;-åi̯&quot;: &quot;komåi̯&quot; (“stone”). In the neuter gender, there are groups of nouns with endings &quot;-ü&quot;: &quot;l̥otü&quot; (“summer”, “year”), &quot;-i&quot;: &quot;püli&quot; (“field”), &quot;-ĕ&quot;: &quot;gńozdĕ&quot; (“nest”) and &quot;-ą&quot;/&quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;jai̯mą&quot;/&quot;jai̯mă&quot; (“name”).
* The masculine genitive singular endings are &quot;-o&quot; and &quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;bügo&quot; (“god”), &quot;zai̯våtă&quot; (“life”, “belly”), &quot;-au̯&quot;/&quot;-åi̯&quot; or -ĕ: &quot;sned&#x27;au̯&quot; (“snow”), &quot;pelåi̯nĕ&quot; (“wormwood”). The genitive singular neuter endings &quot;-o&quot; or &quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;pöl l̥oto&quot; (“six months”), &quot;mlåkă&quot; (“milk”), &quot;vai̯nă&quot; (“wine”).
* Masculine and neuter nouns in the dative case end in &quot;-au̯&quot; , &quot;-ai̯&quot;, and &quot;-ĕ&quot;: &quot;büd&#x27;au̯&quot; (“to God”), &quot;kå bezońĕ&quot; (“to run”). The first two endings differ by dialects, the third (reduced), unlike the first two, depends on the place of stress in the word. T. Ler-Splavinsky and some other scholars interpreted the endings &quot;-aw&quot; , &quot;-af&quot; , and &quot;-âw&quot; as the ending of the masculine dative case &quot;-åvĕ&quot; (from *&quot;-ovi&quot;), the authors of modern works on the Polabian language (K. Polyansky and others) are inclined to see the diphthong &quot;-au̯&quot; in these endings.
* Animate masculine nouns in the accusative are syncretic with the genitive case, and for inanimate masculine nouns and all neuter nouns, the accusative is syncretic with the nominative case.
* Masculine and neuter nouns in the instrumental singularend in &quot;-åm&quot;: &quot;prid gordåm&quot; (“before the court”), &quot;prid l̥otåm&quot; (“before a year”).
* Most masculine and neuter nouns in the locative singular end in &quot;-e&quot; or &quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;vå хlăde&quot; (“in the shadow”), &quot;vå vetră&quot; (“in the wind”. Velar consonants show alternation in this case: &quot;dek&quot; (“roof”)||&quot;no decă&quot; (“on the roof”), &quot;krig&quot; (“war”)||&quot;no kriʒe&quot; (“at war”). Masculine nouns whose stems end in a soft consonant take the ending &quot;-ĕ&quot;: &quot;no pǫt&#x27;ĕ&quot; (“on the way/path”), &quot;no våtåi̯ńĕ&quot; (“on the fence”). A number of neuter nouns are characterized by the ending &quot;-ai̯&quot;: &quot;no mărai̯&quot; (“at the sea”), &quot;vå pülai̯&quot; (“in the field”).
Within the plural, the following can be seen:
* Nouns in the nominative plural are characterized by a wide variety of endings: &quot;-ai̯&quot;/&quot;-ĕ&quot;, &quot;-e&quot;, &quot;-üvĕ&quot;, &quot;-i&quot;, &quot;-åi̯&quot;/&quot;-ĕ&quot;, and &quot;-ă&quot; - &quot;lesai̯&quot; (“forests”), &quot;ṕåsĕ&quot;/&quot;pasai̯&quot; (“dogs”), &quot;nüze&quot; (“knives”), &quot;polcă&quot; (“fingers”). Since the nominative and accusative plural are syncretic, it is sometimes difficult or impossible to tell which case is attested in texts.
* The masculine genitive plural is characterized by endings &quot;-Ø&quot; and &quot;-üv&quot;: &quot;ai̯ dåvüх gråi̯k&quot; (“at two pears”), &quot;cai̯stĕ priz grех́üv&quot; (“pure (free) from sins”). Neuter nouns only take the ending &quot;-Ø&quot;.
* Only one example of the dative plural of masculine nouns is attested, formed with the ending &quot;-üm&quot;: &quot;gresnărüm&quot; (&quot;sinners&quot;).


====Feminine nouns====
There are three types of declension of feminine nouns. The first includes nouns with endings &quot;-o&quot; or &quot;-ă&quot; in the nominative singular case: &quot;bobo&quot; (“woman”), &quot;zenă&quot; (“wife”, “woman”). The second ends in &quot;-åi̯&quot;, &quot;-ĕ&quot;, or &quot;-ai̯&quot;: &quot;motai̯&quot; (“mother”), &quot;bant&#x27;åi̯&quot; (“bench”). The third has a zero ending: &quot;vås&quot; (“louse”), &quot;t’üst&quot; (“bone”), &quot;vas&quot; (“village”).

Within the singular, the following can be seen:
* Feminine nouns in the nominative singular end in &quot;-o&quot;/&quot;-ă&quot; (the reduced vowel &quot;-ă&quot; is marked in an unstressed position), or &quot;-åi̯&quot;/&quot;-ĕ&quot; (the presence of a full or reduced form also depends on the place of stress in the word), &quot;-ai̯&quot; (except &quot;motai̯&quot; ( “mother”) all words with this ending in Polabian are borrowings from Middle Low German) and &quot;-Ø&quot; (null morpheme).
* Feminine nouns in the genitive singular are characterized by the endings &quot;-ai̯&quot;/&quot;-ĕ&quot; (for nouns with endings &quot;-o&quot;/&quot;-ă&quot; in the nominative case): &quot;slåmåi̯&quot; (“straw”), &quot;pöl t&#x27;üpĕ&quot; (“half a pile”, “thirty”); &quot;-ă&quot;/&quot;ai̯&quot; &quot;zimă&quot; (“near the ground”), &quot;viz viză&quot; (“from the house”), there are no examples with a full vowel in the ending for this group of nouns; &quot;-i&quot; (for nouns ending with a consonant in the nominative case): &quot;råzi&quot; (“rye”), &quot;süli&quot; (“salt”); &quot;-vĕ&quot; (only one example of a noun form with this ending has been preserved): &quot;ai̯ kokvĕ&quot; (“at the pillory”).
* Feminine nouns in the dative singular take the ending &quot;-e&quot;/&quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;kå stărne&quot; (“on the side”, “to the side”) and &quot;-ai̯&quot;: &quot;kå zimai̯&quot; (“to the ground”).
* Feminine nouns in the accusative singular end in &quot;-ǫ&quot;: &quot;korvǫ&quot; (“cow”); &quot;-ą&quot;/&quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;no zimą&quot; (“on the ground”), &quot;zo nidelă&quot; (“per week”); and &quot;-Ø&quot; (for nouns ending in consonant in the nominative case): &quot;t&#x27;üst&quot; (“bone”), &quot;vas&quot; (“village”).
* Feminine nouns in the instrumental singular only have one ending, &quot;-ą&quot;: &quot;så lüdą&quot; (“by boat”), &quot;püd zimą&quot; (“underground”), &quot;så pąstą&quot; (“fist”).
* Feminine nouns in the prepositional singular have endings &quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;vå vidă&quot; (“in the water”); and -ĕ: &quot;no storně&quot; (“on the side”), &quot;no zimĕ&quot; (“on the ground”), &quot;vå vizĕ&quot; (“in the house”).
Within the plural, the following can be seen:
* Feminine nouns in the nominative and accusative plural are syncretic and take the endings &quot;-åi̯&quot;: &quot;sestråi̯&quot; (“sisters”); &quot;-e&quot;/&quot;-ă&quot;: &quot;vüce&quot; (“sheep”), &quot;nidelă&quot; (“weeks”); &quot;-ai̯&quot;/&quot;-ĕ&quot;: &quot;golǫzai̯&quot; (“branches”), &quot;t’üstai̯&quot;/&quot;t’üstĕ&quot; (“bones”); and &quot;-våi̯&quot;: &quot;grai̯svåi̯&quot; (“pears”).
Within the dual, the following can be seen:
* Feminine nouns in the nominative and accusative dual are syncretic and take the ending &quot;-e&quot;: &quot;rǫce&quot; (&quot;two hands/arms&quot;), &quot;nüʒe&quot; (&quot;two feet/legs&quot;).
* Feminine nouns in the genitive dual are syncretic with the genitive plural: &quot;ai̯ dåvüх grau̯k&quot; (“at two pears”).
* Feminine nouns in the dative and instrumental dual are syncretic and are characterized by the ending &quot;-omă&quot;, only one such noun form is attested: &quot;så rǫkomă&quot; (“with two hands”).
===Adjectives===
Adjectives agree in gender, case and number. A few instances of short adjectives are attested. Adjectives can also inflect for the comparative and superlative.

The following adjectival inflections are attested:
Short forms of adjectives are formed from the stems of full adjectives and by adding gender endings in the singular. These forms agrees with the noun to which it refers in case as well:
Among the surviving masculine and neuter forms, the instrumental case (&quot;tai̯xåm&quot; (“quiet”)) and the locative case (&quot;cai̯ste&quot; (“pure”); &quot;dübre&quot; (“good”)) are attested.

The comparative of adjectives is formed with &quot;-i̯sĕ&quot;, &quot;-sĕ&quot;, and &quot;-ésĕ&quot;, and the superlative is formed from the comparative by adding &quot;na-&quot;: &quot;navoi̯sĕ&quot; (“highest”), &quot;lepsĕ&quot; (“better”), &quot;zai̯mnésǎ&quot; (“colder”), &quot;nastăresĕ&quot; (“eldest”).

===Numerals===
Polabian has both cardinal and ordinal numerals, and a few attestations of collective numerals exist:
The endings for -cte / -cti and -dist 11-19 originates from to Proto-Slavic *&quot;desęte&quot; (prepositional of desętе “ten”). The multiple endings are the result of different placements of stress within the numeral, which is motivated by Polabian processes of stress movement.

The numeral &quot;thirty&quot; is attested only by the construction &quot;pöl ťüpĕ&quot;, (“half a pile”), and sixty is attested only as &quot;ťüpă&quot; (“pile”).

The original word for &quot;hundred&quot; (Proto-Slavic *&quot;sъto&quot;) was not preserved; instead it was replaced by &quot;disą(t)diśǫt&quot;, literally, “ten tens,” or &quot;pąt stíďə&quot;, where &quot;stíďə&quot; is a borrowing from the Middle German &quot;stige&quot; (“twenty, two tens”). The remaining terms for hundreds are unattested. The original term for &quot;thousand&quot; (Proto-Slavic *&quot;tysǫti&quot;) was replaced by the construction &quot;disąt pątstiďə&quot;.

===Pronouns===
The following personal and reflexive pronouns are attested:
The pronoun &quot;jai̯&quot; was borrowed from Middle Low German &quot;jī&quot;.

There were two demonstrative pronouns in Polabian: &quot;sǫ&quot;, &quot;so&quot;, &quot;sü&quot; (“this”) and &quot;tǫ&quot;, &quot;to&quot;, &quot;tü&quot; (“that”).

The attested possessive pronouns are: &quot;müj&quot;, &quot;müjă&quot;, &quot;müji&quot; (“mine”); &quot;tüj&quot;, &quot;tüjă&quot;, &quot;tüji&quot; (“yours (singular)”); &quot;süji&quot; (&quot;one&#x27;s own (reflexive possessive pronoun&quot;); &quot;nos&quot; (&quot;our&quot;); &quot;vosă&quot; (“yours” (plural)).

The interrogative pronouns are: kåtü (“who”); cü (“what”); koťĕ (“which”, “what”, “what kind”).

The determinative pronouns are: vis (“all”), visoťă (“anything”), kozdümĕ (“everyone” (dative)).

The negative pronouns are: &quot;nĕkătü&quot; (“nobody”), &quot;nic&quot; (“nothing”), &quot;nijadån&quot; (“not one, no”), &quot;niťidĕ&quot; (“nowhere”); all were formed using the prefix &quot;nĕ&quot;-/&quot;ni&quot;- , which phonetically cannot continue the Proto-Slavic *&quot;ni&quot;-, which would have developed as *&quot;nai&quot;-. K. Polański believed that &quot;nai&quot;- was supplanted by &quot;ni&quot;- under the influence of the negative particle &quot;ni&quot; (“not”).

===Verbs===
As with other inflections, complete verb paradigms cannot be reconstructed due to a lack of attestation. Below is a general overview.

====Aspect====
Verbs may be either perfective or imperfective in aspect, expressed by different structures of the verb stem: &quot;zarăt&quot; (imperfective) and &quot;vizrăt&quot; (perfective) (“look, see”); &quot;dvai̯zĕ&quot; (imperfective) and &quot;dvai̯gnǫt&quot; (perfective) (“to move”); &quot;våzdet-să&quot; (imperfective) and &quot;våzdevot-să&quot; (perfective) (“to dress”).

====Tense====
Polabian verbs may inflect for present tense, future tense and three forms of the past tense: imperfect, aorist, as well as two perfect tenses, called perfect I and perfect II.

The stress in present tense verbs always falls on the penultimate syllable, with the exception of verbs with enclitics, in which the stress goes to the last syllable. This type of stress explains the presence of conjugations formed with &quot;-ĕ-&quot;||&quot;-i-&quot; (from *&quot;-e-&quot; ) and with &quot;-o-&quot;||&quot;-ă-&quot; (from *&quot;-a(je)-&quot;). The alternation in the verbs of these conjugations of full vowels and reduced vowels depends both on the presence or absence of enclitics, and on the presence of consonants or whole syllables after the vowel. The differences in the types of conjugations concern only the forms of the 1st person singular.
The future tense is formed by adding the auxiliary verb &quot;cą&quot; (“I want”) to the infinitive of the main verb of the present tense form: &quot;ci sneg ai̯t&quot; (“it will snow”), &quot;vån ci-să sḿot&quot; (“he will laugh”). According to T. Lehr-Spławiński, A. E. Suprun and some other scholars, forms of the future tense could also be formed with the auxiliary verb &quot;met&quot; (“to have”): &quot;joz mom sijot&quot; (“I will sew”), K. Polyansky considered the verb &quot;met&quot; in these cases is a modal verb - “I must sew.”

The use of the imperfect &quot;joz tех&quot; (“I wanted”), &quot;mes&quot; (“had”), &quot;ni-băs&quot; (“I wasn&#x27;t”) and the aorist (&quot;sådĕ&quot; (“went”), &quot;våzą&quot; (“took”), &quot;påci&quot; (“fell”)) attested by a few examples.

The perfect I tense is formed by adding the past participle form with *&quot;-lъ&quot; from the main verb and the present tense form of the verb “to be”: &quot;ją plokol&quot; (“cried”), &quot;ją våi̯ai̯dål&quot; (“went out”). Not many such complex perfect forms are attested, and were replaced by forms formed by combining participial forms with their corresponding personal pronouns: &quot;joz plokol&quot; (“I cried”), &quot;joz sijol&quot; (“I sat down”), &quot;vån jedål&quot; (“he ate”). The perfect II was probably formed under the influence of the perfect of the German language (formed using the verbs haben (“to have”) or sein (“to be”): &quot;ich habe geschrieben&quot; (“I wrote”)), as in Polabian it is also formed by the combination of the auxiliary verbs &quot;met&quot; (“to have”) and &quot;båi̯t&quot; (“to be”) and the passive participle: &quot;vån mo nodenă&quot; (“he found”), &quot;ją våpodenă&quot; (“fell”), &quot;ją ai̯ḿartĕ&quot; (“died”).

====Mood====
The indicative and imperative moods are attested. The subjunctive mood is not found in any of the surviving texts. The imperative may be formed with a null morpheme or with &quot;-ai̯&quot;, which may be followed by an enclitic: &quot;ai̯plot&quot; (“pay”), &quot;püd&quot; (“go”), &quot;ricai̯-mĕ&quot; (“tell him”), &quot;jimai̯&quot; jĕg (“catch him”), &quot;ai̯plotai̯- mĕ&quot; (“pay me”).

====Voice====
The passive voice form is formed mainly with the help of the auxiliary verb &quot;vardot&quot;, borrowed from German &quot;werden&quot; (become): &quot;kǫsonĕ vardol&quot; (&quot;was bitten&quot;), &quot;vårdă zazonă&quot; (&quot;was lit&quot;). There are several examples of forms formed by combining the passive participle with the verb &quot;båi̯t&quot; (“to be”), perhaps also being forms of the passive voice. Also, forms of the passive voice are formed using reflexive verbs with the particle &quot;să&quot;,: &quot;vinai̯ biją-să&quot; (“they are being hit”).

====Other verb forms====
In Polabian, forms such as the infinitive, the active present participle, the passive participle and the gerund are attested. T. Lehr-Spławiński, based on the fact that most infinitive forms have stress on the penultimate syllable and several other forms have stress on the last syllable, did not exclude the possibility that supine could have existed in Polabian.

Infinitives are formed with &quot;-t&quot;: &quot;voi̯vist&quot; (“to bring out”), &quot;vist&quot; (“to carry”).

Active participles are formed with &quot;-ąc-&quot;: &quot;kǫ̇săjącĕ&quot; (“biting”), &quot;l&#x27;otojącă&quot; (“flying”).

Passive participles are formed from the verb stem using one of three suffixes: &quot;-tĕ&quot; (&quot;-tă&quot;), &quot;-nĕ&quot; (-nă), &quot;-enĕ&quot; (-enă): &quot;nopücǫ̇tă&quot; (“begun”), &quot;ai̯ḿortĕ&quot; (“put to death”, “killed”)

Gerunds, or verbal nouns, are formed on the basis of the passive participle and extended with &quot;-ĕ/-ă&quot; (from *&quot;-ьje&quot;), due to the reduction of the vowel in the ending in an unstressed position, it is not always possible to distinguish between a verbal noun and a passive participle. Most often in texts, the gerund appears in the form of the nominative singular, but forms are also found in other cases, in particular in the dative: &quot;strai̯zinĕ&quot; (from the verb “to cut”), &quot;zomăcenă&quot; (from the verb “to soak”), &quot;vecenĕ&quot; (from the verb “to shout”), &quot;(kå) voi̯gărnińĕ&quot; (“to stop”, from the verb “to stop”).

===Syntax===
The word order in Polabian appeared to be as in other Slavic languages, that is, free.

==The Lord&#x27;s Prayer==
; Hennig&#x27;s version

; Buchholtz&#x27;s version

; Mitthoff&#x27;s version


==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==See also==

*Wends
*Polabians (tribe)
*House of Griffins
*Pomeranian language
*Kashubian language
*Slovincian language</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="4" end="21" title="Polabian language" label="Polabian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="37" end="64" title="Polabian language" label="Drevanian–Polabian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="66" end="84" title="Polabian language" label="Drevanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="90" end="115" title="Polabian language" label="Lüneburg Wendish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="122" end="133" title="West Slavic languages" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="166" end="180" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="212" end="219" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="231" end="235" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="345" end="352" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="405" end="415" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="434" end="460" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-West Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q875422" start="470" end="480" title="Mittelmark" label="Mittelmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="489" end="500" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="513" end="526" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075" start="528" end="538" title="Wittenberg (district)" label="Wittenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991084" start="558" end="569" title="White Serbia" label="Bela Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149731" start="603" end="611" title="Wendland" label="Wendland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="613" end="625" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="631" end="649" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975" start="651" end="662" title="Ostholstein" label="Ostholstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000" start="667" end="676" title="Herzogtum Lauenburg" label="Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="773" end="779" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q496435" start="784" end="793" title="Oldenburg in Holstein" label="Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="839" end="844" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q149588" start="903" end="913" title="Pomeranian language" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25442" start="958" end="974" title="Sorbian languages" label="Sorbian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="983" end="990" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="1096" end="1107" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191090" start="1120" end="1130" title="Metathesis (linguistics)" label="metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="1185" end="1191" title="aorist" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="1196" end="1205" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q110022" start="1233" end="1244" title="Dual (grammatical number)" label="dual number"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="1255" end="1263" title="Prosody (linguistics)" label="prosodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665529" start="1316" end="1332" title="diphthongization" label="diphthongization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1599" end="1614" title="German language" label="German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="1652" end="1669" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="1704" end="1712" title="Lechitic languages" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="1773" end="1789" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q149588" start="1857" end="1867" title="Pomeranian language" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33690" start="1872" end="1881" title="Kashubian language" label="Kashubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="2287" end="2301" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q572549" start="2774" end="2781" title="Wustrow, Lower Saxony" label="Wustrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q705643" start="2826" end="2832" title="Lüchow" label="Lüchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q551205" start="2847" end="2853" title="Sagard" label="Sagard"/>
<link wikidata="Q656665" start="2855" end="2861" title="Gartow" label="Gartow"/>
<link wikidata="Q536858" start="2863" end="2869" title="Krakow am See" label="Krakow"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="2982" end="3005" title="language revitalization" label="language revitalization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3449" end="3468" title="Slavic_liquid_metathesis_and_pleophony#TeRT_and_ToRT" label="metathesis of *TorT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="3638" end="3650" title="periphrasis" label="periphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221651" start="3782" end="3785" title="yer" label="yer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412778" start="5033" end="5046" title="Reduced vowel" label="Reduced vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077384" start="6832" end="6842" title="masuration" label="masuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="8488" end="8499" title="Free stress" label="Free stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="9143" end="9161" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250335" start="9223" end="9230" title="Animacy" label="animate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="9265" end="9270" title="Case (linguistics)" label="cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="9272" end="9282" title="Nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="9284" end="9292" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="9294" end="9300" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="9302" end="9312" title="Accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="9314" end="9326" title="Instrumental case" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q117226378" start="9335" end="9348" title="Prepositional case" label="prepositional"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="9618" end="9627" title="Linguistic paradigm" label="paradigms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789027" start="10371" end="10383" title="Null morpheme" label="zero endings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004759" start="12043" end="12052" title="Syncretism (linguistics)" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q577714" start="17832" end="17843" title="Comparison (grammar)" label="comparative"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="19713" end="19720" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="21207" end="21213" title="Aspect (linguistics)" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="21584" end="21589" title="Tense (grammar)" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="21639" end="21648" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="21650" end="21656" title="aorist" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="21673" end="21680" title="Perfect (grammar)" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="22483" end="22493" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="25198" end="25208" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="25229" end="25239" title="participle" label="participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="25272" end="25278" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q548470" start="25493" end="25499" title="supine" label="supine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="26973" end="26978" title="Wends" label="Wends"/>
<link wikidata="Q162974" start="26980" end="26997" title="Polabians (tribe)" label="Polabians (tribe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q655723" start="26999" end="27016" title="House of Griffins" label="House of Griffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q149588" start="27018" end="27037" title="Pomeranian language" label="Pomeranian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33690" start="27039" end="27057" title="Kashubian language" label="Kashubian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36822" start="27059" end="27078" title="Slovincian language" label="Slovincian language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150216" wikidata="Q1254630" url="?curid=150216" title="Spartan hegemony">
<text>Spartan hegemony refers to the period of dominance by Sparta in Greek affairs from 404 to 371 BC. Even before this period the polis of Sparta was the greatest military land power of classical Greek antiquity and governed, dominated or influenced the entire Peloponnese. The defeat of the Athenians and the Delian League in the Peloponnesian War in 431–404 BC resulted in a short-lived Spartan dominance of the southern Greek world from 404 to 371 BC. Due to their mistrust of others, Spartans discouraged the creation of records about their internal affairs. The only histories of Sparta are from the writings of Xenophon, Thucydides, Herodotus and Plutarch, none of whom were Spartans. Plutarch was writing several centuries after the period of Spartan hegemony had ceased. This creates difficulties in understanding the Spartan political system, which was distinctly different from any other Greek polis.

==History and rise to power==
The Spartans had conquered the southern Peloponnese and incorporated the territory into the enlarged Sparta state. Spartan society functioned within three classes: &quot;homoioi&quot; or &quot;spartiates&quot;, &quot;perioeci&quot;, and the &quot;helots&quot;. The &quot;helots&quot; were captives of war and were state-owned slaves of Sparta. They powered the city-state&#x27;s agrarian economy and were the work force. Additionally, the other class of working population in Spartan society were the &quot;perioeci&quot; meaning “dwellers around” who were free peoples of conquered territories. The &quot;perioeci&quot; were allowed to maintain their own infrastructures, administrative arrangements and local economy, but had to pay tribute to Sparta and provide soldiers for the military. The &quot;homoioi&quot; were the citizens of Sparta. They were the elite class and were the only deserving of the title Spartan. As a result, the Spartan population was very small in comparison with the working classes. There was a ratio of 7 or 8 helots to every Spartan citizen. These three populations performed complementary functions that distinguished Sparta with a unique economic and social organization. While the &quot;helots&quot; and the &quot;perioeci&quot; were the workforce in agriculture and industry, the Spartans could devote themselves to training, maintaining, and operating the military. The reason for the continual strong military existence was to preserve order in Sparta and hold the large enslaved populations in check.

==Sparta&#x27;s post Peloponnesian War regime==
Lysander was the Spartan who after the end of the Peloponnesian War in 404 BC established many of the foreign pro-Spartan governments throughout the Aegean. He also established many Spartan garrisons. Most of the polis ruling systems he set up were ten man oligarchies called decarchies. Harmosts, Spartan military governors, were left as the head of the decarchies. As the men appointed were loyal to Lysander rather than Sparta, this system has been described as Lysander&#x27;s private empire. In this establishment of a new Aegean order, many lost their lives or were exiled but on the other hand Aegina and Melos were restored to their former inhabitants.

Sparta was divided over what to do about Athens itself. Lysander and King Agis were for total destruction as were Sparta&#x27;s leading allies Corinth and Thebes. However, a more moderate faction led by Pausanias gained the upper hand. Athens was spared but her long walls and the fortifications of Piraeus were demolished. Lysander did manage to insert the significant condition that Athens recall her exiles.

The return of the exiles to Athens contributed to the political instability of Athens allowing Lysander to establish shortly the oligarchy that has come to be known as Thirty Tyrants, composed of men beholden to him. The danger of so much power being in the hands of one person had become sufficiently clear that both King Agis and King Pausanias agreed that Lysander&#x27;s wings needed to be clipped. The decarchies were declared abolished and Athens quickly benefited when Sparta permitted democracy to be restored at Athens.

==Agesilaus and his campaigns==

Agesilaus II was one of the two kings of Sparta during Sparta&#x27;s hegemony. Plutarch later wrote that Agesilaus was a king of the traditional Spartan ideals, often seen wearing his traditional cloak which was threadbare. He began his kingship after the end of the Peloponnesian war after his brother Agis II died and was left without an heir (Agis’ son Leotychidas was rumored to be the illegitimate son of the Athenian Alcibiades). One of Agesilaus’ biggest supporters was the famous Spartan naval commander Lysander, who was previously Agesilaus’ &quot;erastēs&quot;, or mentor.

;The Campaigns
Agesilaus’ first campaign was one which trekked into the eastern Aegean and Persian territories via the Hellespont. He first descended upon the Phrygians and their leader Tissaphernes who had broken a “solemn league” with the Greeks and had earned the “downright contempt of the gods.” He followed Tissaphernes into Persian territory. The Persian king, fearing further plundering of his country ordered Tissaphernes beheaded. He then attempted to bribe Agesilaus with money to leave Asia Minor.

Remaining true to the Spartan ideals of austere living practices, Agesilaus rejected the gold saying “he would rather see it in his soldier’s hands than his own.” Agesilaus did, however, remove his army into Phrygia, grateful for the death of Tissaphernes.
Agesilaus soon began another campaign into the western regions of the Persian Empire. Plutarch states that he wished to march his armies all the way to the Persian capital of Susa. He was unfortunately deterred by unpleasant news from Epicydidas that the mainland Greek poleis were starting war once again. This would later become known as the Corinthian War (395–387 BC) and featured an alliance between the Argives, Corinthians, Athenians and Thebans against Sparta. The Corinthian war took place between 395 and 386 BC.

In Greece, the Spartans under Agesilaus met the numerous rebelling poleis. Among the most important battles that the Spartans fought in this war was that of Coronea, which was fought against a coalition of Greeks but especially the Thebans. The Spartans sought the aid of the Persians, asking them to cut off their support of the Thebans, Corinthians and Athenians. The resulting Peace of Antalcidas, named for the Spartan who negotiated it, was established in 386 BC and resulted in Sparta&#x27;s loss of its Asian territories.

==The Boeotian War==

During the winter of 379/378 BC, a group of Theban exiles were able to sneak into the city and, despite the 1500-strong Spartan garrison, succeed in liberating Thebes. During the next few years, Sparta mounted four expeditions against Thebes, which completely failed to bring Thebes to heel. In 375 BC, Sparta suffered a symbolically significant defeat at the hands of Thebes in the Battle of Tegyra. Finally, the Greek city-states attempted a peace on the mainland by sending diplomats to meet with Agesilaus in Sparta. Epaminondas, the Theban diplomat, angered Agesilaus by arguing for the freedom of the non-Spartans of Laconia. Agesilaus then struck the Thebans out of the treaty. The ensuing Battle of Leuctra in 371 BC marked the end of Spartan hegemony. Agesilaus himself did not fight at Leuctra so as not to appear too belligerent.

==Sparta after hegemony==
During the Spartan hegemony in Athens there is evidence of criticism of democracy. A document in the 420s BC by a political writer known as the &quot;Old Oligarch&quot; demonstrates the anti-democratic sentiments in Athens. The “Old Oligarch’s” political outlook is shaped by his belief that the economic classes were the source to political motivation; this view is a direct rejection of democracy&#x27;s efforts to establish civil unity. The “Old Oligarch” argues that the polis by nature is a battlefield rather than a site of public dialogue because individuals side with their socio-economic rank. Yet, despite this anti-democratic feeling, democracy eventually returned to Athens after the expulsion of the Thirty Tyrants.

The importance of Sparta in politics largely drops off after Sparta&#x27;s defeat at Leuctra. Following Agesilaus’ death in 360 BC, Archidamus III became king and practiced a policy of non-conflict between Athens and the Second Naval Confederacy (357–355 BC). Between 355 and 346 BC, they allied with Athens against Thebes and the Amphictyonic Council effectively pulling Theban attention away from the Peloponnese.

== See also == 
* Laconophilia
* Palingenesis 
* &quot;Translatio imperii&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1254630" start="0" end="16" title="Spartan hegemony" label="Spartan hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="126" end="131" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="135" end="141" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418190" start="159" end="178" title="Spartan army" label="military land power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="192" end="207" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="257" end="268" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="288" end="297" title="Athenians" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="306" end="319" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="327" end="344" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="613" end="621" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="623" end="633" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="635" end="644" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="649" end="657" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q369194" start="1131" end="1141" title="spartiates" label="spartiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q288216" start="1155" end="1163" title="perioeci" label="perioeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q462484" start="1185" end="1191" title="helots" label="helots"/>
<link wikidata="Q143559" start="2526" end="2534" title="Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q14762" start="2814" end="2822" title="Harmosts" label="Harmosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q643488" start="3768" end="3782" title="Thirty Tyrants" label="Thirty Tyrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q271850" start="4163" end="4175" title="Agesilaus II" label="Agesilaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q202826" start="4466" end="4473" title="Agis II" label="Agis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="4586" end="4596" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="4867" end="4877" title="Hellespont" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q149386" start="4907" end="4916" title="Phrygians" label="Phrygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q355727" start="4934" end="4946" title="Tissaphernes" label="Tissaphernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5246" end="5256" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="5586" end="5600" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="5691" end="5695" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q651008" start="5860" end="5874" title="Corinthian War" label="Corinthian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="5925" end="5932" title="Argives" label="Argives"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="5934" end="5941" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="5961" end="5968" title="Thebans" label="Thebans"/>
<link wikidata="Q733113" start="6197" end="6204" title="Battle of Coronea (394 BC)" label="Coronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132922" start="6420" end="6439" title="Peace of Antalcidas" label="Peace of Antalcidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174253" start="6975" end="6991" title="Battle of Tegyra" label="Battle of Tegyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190436" start="7113" end="7124" title="Epaminondas" label="Epaminondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q461599" start="7289" end="7306" title="Battle of Leuctra" label="Battle of Leuctra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435425" start="7519" end="7541" title="criticism of democracy" label="criticism of democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305939" start="7610" end="7622" title="Old Oligarch" label="Old Oligarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q643488" start="8173" end="8187" title="Thirty Tyrants" label="Thirty Tyrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q448580" start="8322" end="8336" title="Archidamus III" label="Archidamus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="8521" end="8541" title="Amphictyonic Council" label="Amphictyonic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468810" start="8625" end="8637" title="Laconophilia" label="Laconophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228412" start="8640" end="8652" title="Palingenesis" label="Palingenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q693981" start="8662" end="8680" title="Translatio imperii" label="Translatio imperii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150217" wikidata="Q384672" url="?curid=150217" title="East Stour, Kent">
<text>The River East Stour is one of the tributaries of the Great Stour in Kent. The East Stour, 10.3 miles (16.5 km) long,) rises on the Greensand ridge at Postling north of Hythe as a number of small streams. It then flows under the M20 motorway to continue in a westward direction: the river meanders across the Low Weald plain, passing Mersham on the way. The East Stour&#x27;s confluence with the Great Stour is on both sides of Pledge&#x27;s Mill at the foot of &quot;East Hill&quot;, Ashford.

The South Willesborough Dykes are on the banks of the East Stour in Willesborough, Ashford and helps form part of the Ashford Green Corridor.
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q384672" start="4" end="20" title="East Stour, Kent" label="River East Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="35" end="46" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="54" end="65" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="69" end="73" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="132" end="141" title="Greensand (geology)" label="Greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309424" start="151" end="159" title="Postling" label="Postling"/>
<link wikidata="Q967166" start="169" end="174" title="Hythe, Kent" label="Hythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q608504" start="229" end="241" title="M20 motorway" label="M20 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298322" start="313" end="318" title="Weald" label="Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616287" start="334" end="341" title="Mersham" label="Mersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="376" end="386" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="442" end="446" title="Watermill" label="Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="485" end="492" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="499" end="524" title="Willesborough Dykes#South Willesborough Dykes" label="South Willesborough Dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003679" start="563" end="576" title="Willesborough" label="Willesborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804998" start="613" end="635" title="Ashford Green Corridor" label="Ashford Green Corridor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150220" wikidata="Q312630" url="?curid=150220" title="Théodore de Banville">
<text>Théodore Faullain de Banville (; 14 March 1823 – 13 March 1891) was a French poet and writer. His work was influential on the Symbolist movement in French literature in the late 19th century.

==Biography==
Banville was born in Moulins in Allier, Auvergne, the son of a captain in the French navy. His boyhood, by his own account, was cheerlessly passed at a &quot;lycée&quot; in Paris; he was not harshly treated, but took no part in the amusements of his companions. On leaving school with but slender means of support, he devoted himself to letters, and in 1842 published his first volume of verse (&quot;Les Cariatides&quot;), which was followed by &quot;Les Stalactites&quot; in 1846. The poems encountered some adverse criticism, but secured for their author the approbation and friendship of Alfred de Vigny and Jules Janin.

From then on, Banville&#x27;s life was steadily devoted to literary production and criticism. He printed other volumes of verse, among which the &quot;Odes funambulesques&quot; (1857) received unstinted praise from Victor Hugo, to whom they were dedicated. Later, several comedies in verse were produced at the Théâtre Français and on other stages; and from 1853 onwards a stream of prose flowed from his industrious pen, including studies of Parisian manners, sketches of well-known persons, and a series of tales, most of which were republished in his collected works (1875–1878). He also wrote freely for reviews, and acted as dramatic critic for more than one newspaper. Throughout a life spent mainly in Paris, Banville&#x27;s genial character and cultivated mind won him the friendship of the chief men of letters of his time. 
==Legacy==
In 1858 Banville was made a Chevalier de la Légion d&#x27;honneur, and was promoted to an Officier de la Légion d&#x27;honneur in 1886. He died in Paris in 1891 at the age of 68, and was buried in Montparnasse Cemetery.

There is a street named after him in the 17th &quot;Arrondissement&quot; in Paris. There is also a street named Theodore de Banville in Nice, France.

French Impressionist composer Claude Debussy used many of Banville&#x27;s poems for his art songs, including &quot;Nuit d&#x27;étoiles&quot; and &quot;Zéphyr.&quot;

German composer Georgina Schubert (1840-1878) used Banville’s text for her lieder “L’ame d’un ange.”

== References ==
==External links==
*
* 
* Complete Poetic Works</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312630" start="0" end="29" title="Théodore de Banville" label="Théodore Faullain de Banville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661198" start="126" end="144" title="Symbolist Manifesto" label="Symbolist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q184883" start="228" end="235" title="Moulins, Allier" label="Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113" start="239" end="245" title="Allier" label="Allier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="247" end="255" title="Auvergne (region)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="365" end="370" title="lycée" label="lycée"/>
<link wikidata="Q309702" start="799" end="814" title="Alfred de Vigny" label="Alfred de Vigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q956459" start="819" end="830" title="Jules Janin" label="Jules Janin"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="1048" end="1059" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61460498" start="1144" end="1160" title="Théâtre Français" label="Théâtre Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q272208" start="1875" end="1896" title="Cimetière du Montparnasse" label="Montparnasse Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="2057" end="2070" title="Impressionist" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="2080" end="2094" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381025" start="2232" end="2249" title="Georgina Schubert" label="Georgina Schubert"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150221" wikidata="Q6652070" url="?curid=150221" title="Little Stour">
<text>The Little Stour is one of the tributaries of the River Stour in the English county of Kent. The upper reaches of the river is known as the Nailbourne, whilst the lower reaches were once known as the Seaton Navigation.

The intermittent source of the Nailbourne is at Lyminge, and in its early reaches from Lyminge to Bekesbourne it forms a chalk stream and winterbourne. Below Bekesbourne it joins the Little Stour, which in turn joins with the Great Stour at Plucks Gutter near East Stourmouth.

==Course==

===Nailbourne===

The Nailbourne flows from Lyminge, through the Elham Valley until it joins the Little Stour at Bekesbourne.

The Nailbourne bubbles up beneath St Ethelburga&#x27;s Well in Tayne Field in the centre of Lyminge. Whilst the stream often holds a plentiful supply of water from Lyminge to Elham throughout the year, it rarely holds any water from Elham to Bishopsbourne even in the winter months. However, in wet years the normally dry ditch can turn into a fast flowing torrent, flooding roads, fields and houses. An example of this was in 2001 when there was extensive flooding throughout the Elham Valley.

There are a number of minor tributaries that flow into the Nailbourne throughout the Elham Valley. Most are nameless although Ordnance Survey maps do mark a stream known as the East Brooke which runs from Etchinghill and joins the Nailbourne at Lyminge.

===Little Stour===
The Little Stour starts at the springs near Well Chapel, Bekesbourne, after the watercress beds the Nailbourne joins the Little Stour (when it is running) and then joins with the Great Stour at Plucks Gutter near West Stourmouth. The merged river is usually known as the River Stour.

==Settlements==

The river flows through the following settlements -
*Lyminge
*Elham
*Barham
*Kingston
*Bishopsbourne
*Bridge
*Patrixbourne
*Bekesbourne
*Littlebourne
*Wickhambreaux
*Ickham
*West Stourmouth

==Economy==

===Water mills===

The Little Stour powered four watermills, at Littlebourne, Wickhambreaux and Ickham.

===Navigation===
The stretch of the river downstream from the mills and wharf at Seaton, in the parish of Ickham, was made navigable at some time prior to 1831. As a consequence it was sometimes referred to as the Seaton Navigation.

==Environment==
On 28 September 2007 Environment Secretary, Phil Woolas, announced that the Little Stour would be one of 24 additional sensitive areas in England that have been identified as at risk from excessive nutrients from sewage treatment works. This means that Southern Water will be obliged under the Urban Waste Water Treatment Regulations to take action by 2014 to reduce phosphorus and nitrates in the discharges from their sewage treatment works which discharge into the Little Stour.

In early 2007 it was revealed that an application had been made by a company called Newater to discharge treated sewage into the Nailbourne at Elham. The sewage would be piped from the Broomfield Banks treatment works near Dover into the Nailbourne at North Elham with the intention of addressing the water supply deficit in South East England. Whilst the Environment Agency has given assurance that the scheme is safe the application has raised concerns including those of the Little Stour &amp; Nailbourne River Management Group. The application is one of nine similar applications by Newater PLC in the Southern part of England. The Environment Agency is expected to make a decision on the Nailbourne application later in the year.

== Legend ==
According to legend it was Saint Augustine who performed a miracle and brought water to the Elham Valley. When there is a drought and the stream runs dry it is because of Woden and Thor (whom the local people had previously worshipped) who were displeased with what St Augustine had done. It is also local superstition that the Nailbourne only flows once every seven years and that when it does flow it is a sign of bad luck.

==In popular culture==

Author Russell Hoban repurposes the Nailbourne as &quot;Nellys Bum&quot; in his 1980, post apocalyptic novel &quot;Riddley Walker&quot;.

==External links==
*Pictures of the 2000-2001 floods
*Pictures of the 2000-2001 floods at Barham

==Governance==
Although Little Stour is known for the river an electoral ward exists in the same name. This ward includes Littlebourne and surrounding villages. At the 2011 Census the ward had a population of 2,718.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="4" end="16" title="Little Stour" label="Little Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="31" end="42" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="50" end="61" title="River Stour, Kent" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="69" end="76" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="87" end="91" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="140" end="150" title="Little Stour" label="Nailbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="200" end="217" title="Little Stour" label="Seaton Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870143" start="268" end="275" title="Lyminge" label="Lyminge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881598" start="318" end="329" title="Bekesbourne" label="Bekesbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068817" start="341" end="353" title="chalk stream" label="chalk stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026426" start="358" end="370" title="winterbourne (stream)" label="winterbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="446" end="457" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392603" start="461" end="474" title="Plucks Gutter" label="Plucks Gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220240" start="480" end="495" title="East Stourmouth" label="East Stourmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870143" start="554" end="561" title="Lyminge" label="Lyminge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360119" start="575" end="587" title="Elham Valley" label="Elham Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881598" start="623" end="634" title="Bekesbourne" label="Bekesbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981740" start="812" end="817" title="Elham, Kent" label="Elham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255618" start="1338" end="1349" title="Etchinghill, Kent" label="Etchinghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="1586" end="1597" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392603" start="1601" end="1614" title="Plucks Gutter" label="Plucks Gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220240" start="1620" end="1635" title="West Stourmouth" label="West Stourmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="1678" end="1689" title="River Stour, Kent" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870143" start="1762" end="1769" title="Lyminge" label="Lyminge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981740" start="1771" end="1776" title="Elham, Kent" label="Elham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836548" start="1778" end="1784" title="Barham, Kent" label="Barham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749435" start="1786" end="1794" title="Kingston, Kent" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q866348" start="1796" end="1809" title="Bishopsbourne" label="Bishopsbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302642" start="1811" end="1817" title="Bridge, Kent" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148079" start="1819" end="1831" title="Patrixbourne" label="Patrixbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881598" start="1833" end="1844" title="Bekesbourne" label="Bekesbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680610" start="1846" end="1858" title="Littlebourne" label="Littlebourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092462" start="1860" end="1873" title="Wickhambreaux" label="Wickhambreaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344796" start="1875" end="1881" title="Ickham" label="Ickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220240" start="1883" end="1898" title="West Stourmouth" label="West Stourmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="2481" end="2497" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="3107" end="3125" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="3527" end="3542" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="3671" end="3676" title="Woden" label="Woden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="3681" end="3685" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353673" start="3958" end="3971" title="Russell Hoban" label="Russell Hoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332458" start="4066" end="4080" title="Riddley Walker" label="Riddley Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="4250" end="4264" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680610" start="4309" end="4321" title="Littlebourne" label="Littlebourne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150222" wikidata="Q6516274" url="?curid=150222" title="River Wantsum">
<text>The River Wantsum is a tributary of the River Stour, in Kent, England. Formerly, the River Wantsum and the River Stour together formed the Wantsum Channel, which separated the Isle of Thanet from the mainland of Kent. Now the River Wantsum is little more than a drainage ditch starting at Reculver, and ending where it joins the Stour.

Bede, in the 8th century, said that the Wantsum – meaning Wantsum Channel – was &quot;about three furlongs broad [], and is fordable only in two places, for both ends run into the sea&quot;. In 1414 there was still a ferry crossing the Wantsum at Sarre, but by 1550 Thanet was no longer an island. At Reculver, the Romans built a fort that was about from the sea, whereas Leland, in the early 16th century, described Reculver as being from the sea, and the great storm of 1809 carried away half of the fort. It is postulated that the eroded material was carried along the shore and blocked the northern mouth of the Wantsum.

The River Wantsum now joins the Great Stour from the north as a small tributary, just before the Little Stour enters it from the south to form what is thereafter known simply as the River Stour.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6516274" start="4" end="17" title="River Wantsum" label="River Wantsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="40" end="51" title="River Stour, Kent" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="56" end="60" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426237" start="139" end="154" title="Wantsum Channel" label="Wantsum Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q590422" start="176" end="190" title="Isle of Thanet" label="Isle of Thanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="337" end="341" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q494083" start="435" end="442" title="furlong" label="furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424565" start="584" end="589" title="Sarre, Kent" label="Sarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307700" start="638" end="646" title="Reculver" label="Reculver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="709" end="715" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="995" end="1006" title="River Stour, Kent" label="Great Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652070" start="1060" end="1072" title="Little Stour" label="Little Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540243" start="1145" end="1156" title="River Stour, Kent" label="River Stour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150223" wikidata="Q2955376" url="?curid=150223" title="East Stour, Dorset">
<text>East Stour is a village and civil parish in the ceremonial county of Dorset in southern England. It lies within the Dorset administrative district, about south of the town of Gillingham. The village is from the east bank of the River Stour in the Blackmore Vale and west of the broadly conical local landmark Duncliffe Hill (with a summit elevation of ). Above the west bank of the river, about away, is the village of West Stour. The A30 London to Penzance road passes through the village. In the 2011 census the civil parish had a population of 573.

==History==

Part of the shaft of a cross, probably dating from the late 10th or early 11th century, was found in 1939 when a house in the village was demolished. The stone fragment has a cross-section a little under square and is about high; its faces are embellished with vine-scroll, interlace and palmette ornament. It was transferred to the British Museum.

In the Domesday Book of 1086 East Stour and West Stour together were recorded as &quot;Stur&quot; or &quot;Sture&quot;, which had 73 households and administratively was in Gillingham Hundred. A 1695 map shows the village name as Stower Estover.

East Stour village was the original settlement in the parish, with study of field boundaries suggesting that encroachment on the &quot;waste&quot; or common land subsequently occurred eastwards, initially immediately east of the village, then further east in post-medieval times. The farms at New House and Cole Street in the northeast of the parish date from settlement in the late 18th century, and in the southeast the waste was enclosed in 1804.

The parish church was rebuilt in 1841–42 near the site of its predecessor, from which the Norman stone font was retrieved.

==Governance==

East Stour is in the electoral ward called The Stours, which extends southeast as far as East Orchard and in the 2011 census had a population of 1,786. The ward is part of the constituency of North Dorset, and is currently represented in the UK parliament by the Conservative Simon Hoare.

In local government East Stour is governed by Dorset County Council at the county level and North Dorset District Council at the district level. At the parish level East Stour is one of four parishes—the others being Todber, Stour Provost and West Stour—under the governance of The Stours Parish Council, which is a grouped parish council.

==Geography==

The underlying geology of the parish is Corallian Limestone in the west and Kimmeridge clay in the east, with gault clay around the greensand of Duncliffe Hill. The village is on the limestone.

==Demography==

In the 2011 census East Stour civil parish had 267 dwellings, 251 households and a population of 573. 26.2% of residents were age 65 or over, compared to 16.4% for England as a whole.

==Amenities==

East Stour has a village hall and two public houses: The Crown Inn on the B3092 towards Gillingham and The Kings Arms at East Stour Common.

==Notable residents==
The writer and magistrate Henry Fielding (1707–1754), who also founded the Bow Street Runners, lived in the manor house for three years, after inheriting it. During this time he spent his fortune and consequently became a professional writer. The house, sited west of the church, was demolished in 1835, though its mullioned windows were probably incorporated into its replacement, which previously was called Fielding&#x27;s Farm but in 1919 became Church Farm.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2955376" start="0" end="10" title="East Stour, Dorset" label="East Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="28" end="40" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="69" end="75" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q55231693" start="116" end="122" title="Dorset (district)" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234847" start="175" end="185" title="Gillingham, Dorset" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771580" start="228" end="239" title="River Stour, Dorset" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="247" end="261" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215377" start="309" end="323" title="Duncliffe Hill" label="Duncliffe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254490" start="419" end="429" title="West Stour, Dorset" label="West Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="435" end="438" title="A30 road" label="A30"/>
<link wikidata="Q208209" start="449" end="457" title="Penzance" label="Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="498" end="509" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046828" start="840" end="849" title="Interlace (art)" label="interlace"/>
<link wikidata="Q677655" start="854" end="862" title="palmette" label="palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="899" end="913" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="923" end="936" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="1312" end="1323" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1426" end="1434" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="1594" end="1602" title="Enclosure" label="enclosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q26404142" start="1617" end="1630" title="Christ Church, East Stour" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="1703" end="1709" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="1774" end="1788" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734354" start="1842" end="1854" title="East Orchard" label="East Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="1929" end="1941" title="Electoral district" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032537" start="1945" end="1957" title="North Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2016" end="2028" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958093" start="2029" end="2040" title="Simon Hoare" label="Simon Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="2089" end="2110" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752494" start="2135" end="2164" title="North Dorset District Council" label="North Dorset District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="2195" end="2207" title="Parish council (England)" label="parish level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296165" start="2260" end="2266" title="Todber" label="Todber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115143" start="2268" end="2281" title="Stour Provost" label="Stour Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254490" start="2286" end="2296" title="West Stour, Dorset" label="West Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511163" start="2439" end="2458" title="Corallian Limestone" label="Corallian Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250537" start="2475" end="2490" title="Kimmeridge clay" label="Kimmeridge clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861004" start="2509" end="2519" title="gault" label="gault clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="2531" end="2540" title="greensand (geology)" label="greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q367885" start="2827" end="2839" title="village hall" label="village hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="2848" end="2860" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q34190" start="2999" end="3013" title="Henry Fielding" label="Henry Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341687" start="3048" end="3066" title="Bow Street Runners" label="Bow Street Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031967" start="3288" end="3295" title="mullion" label="mullion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150227" wikidata="Q2254490" url="?curid=150227" title="West Stour, Dorset">
<text>West Stour is a village and civil parish situated in the Blackmore Vale area of North Dorset, England. It is one of a group of villages known as The Stours, located in the River Stour Valley, south of Gillingham. West Stour has a village hall, one public house and a service station on the main A30 road.

West Stour is one of four parishes—the others being East Stour, Stour Provost and Todber—under the governance of The Stours Parish Council. It has a population of about 200.

The nearest railway station is at Gillingham. Trains run on the Exeter to Waterloo line.

==History==
In 1086 in the Domesday Book two settlements were recorded in the parish: West Stour and Little Kington. The latter remained small but West Stour developed into a village. West Stour&#x27;s open fields were enclosed in 1779.

==St Mary&#x27;s Church==

St Mary&#x27;s Church, at the north end of Church Street, is a Grade II* listed building.

The chancel dates from the 13th century, with some alterations in the late 18th century. The nave and the tower (south of the nave) were rebuilt in 1840; the rebuilding used the original foundations, and so the chancel is not quite aligned with the nave, being slightly to the south. The stone font is of the 13th century. The tiled floor and seating were fitted in 1912.

There are three bells in the tower, one of the late 15th century, the others dated 1635 and 1733.

A commemorative plaque in the north wall records the names of three men from the village – George Beale, Charlie Trim and Tom Wilson – who died in the Great War.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2254490" start="0" end="10" title="West Stour, Dorset" label="West Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="16" end="23" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="28" end="40" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="57" end="71" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="86" end="92" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771580" start="172" end="183" title="River Stour, Dorset" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234847" start="201" end="211" title="Gillingham, Dorset" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="248" end="260" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="295" end="303" title="A30 road" label="A30 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955376" start="358" end="368" title="East Stour, Dorset" label="East Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115143" start="370" end="383" title="Stour Provost" label="Stour Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296165" start="388" end="394" title="Todber" label="Todber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731470" start="515" end="525" title="Gillingham (Dorset) railway station" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="598" end="611" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142845" start="773" end="784" title="open field system" label="open fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847085" start="790" end="798" title="Inclosure Acts" label="enclosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="909" end="924" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="931" end="938" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="1020" end="1024" title="nave" label="nave"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150228" wikidata="Q3014" url="?curid=150228" title="Wolfsburg">
<text>Wolfsburg (; Eastphalian: &quot;Wulfsborg&quot;) is the fifth-largest city in the German state of Lower Saxony, located on the river Aller. It lies about east of Hanover and west of Berlin.

Wolfsburg is famous as the location of Volkswagen AG&#x27;s headquarters and, until it was overtaken by Tesla Gigafactory Texas in 2022, the world&#x27;s biggest car plant. The Autostadt is a visitor attraction next to the Volkswagen factory that features the company&#x27;s model range: Audi, Bentley, Bugatti, Ducati, Lamborghini, MAN, Neoplan, Porsche, Scania, SEAT, Škoda Auto and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles. Wolfsburg is one of the few German cities built during the first half of the 20th century as a planned city. From its founding on 1 July 1938 as a home for workers producing the KdF-Wagen until 25 May 1945, the city was called Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben. In 1972, the population first exceeded 100,000. In 2019, the GRP was €188,453 per capita.

==History==
The &quot;Wolfsburg&quot; Castle was first mentioned in 1302 in a document as the domicile of the noble lineage of Bartensleben. Originally a keep next to the Aller, it was protected by a moat some centuries later. In 1372, the first documentary reference to the &quot;Burg Neuhaus&quot; (&quot;castle of Neuhaus&quot;) near Wolfsburg appeared. After the extinction of the Bartensleben line in 1742, the property and its &quot;Schloss Wolfsburg&quot; (Wolfsburg castle) passed on to the Counts of Schulenburg. The communal manor was an important employer for the nearby settlements &quot;Rothenfelde&quot; and &quot;Heßlingen&quot;.

Some of today&#x27;s urban districts, including &quot;Vorsfelde&quot; and the villages transferred to Wolfsburg from the county of Helmstedt, belonged to the Principality of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel. &quot;Fallersleben&quot; and other villages belonged to the Electorate of Braunschweig-Lüneburg, which later developed into the Kingdom of Hanover and became a Prussian province in 1866. Other urban districts, including &quot;Heßlingen&quot;, belonged to the Prussian Duchy of Magdeburg. In 1932, these districts were detached from the Prussian Province of Saxony and integrated into the Province of Hanover.

Wolfsburg was founded on 1 July 1938 as the &quot;Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben,&quot; (&quot;&quot;&quot;City of the Strength Through Joy car at Fallersleben), a planned town centred around the village of Fallersleben, built to house workers of the Volkswagen factories erected to assemble what would be later known as the Volkswagen Beetle. During World War II, military cars, aeroplanes, and other military equipment were built there, mainly by forced workers and prisoners-of-war. In 1942, German authorities established the Arbeitsdorf concentration camp in the city for a few months. At least six individuals died while working at this camp.

The city and Volkswagen factory were captured on April 11, 1945, by US troops, and about 7,700 forced labourers were liberated from the Volkswagen factory. The US troops occupied the city until the end of June, during which time the city was renamed Wolfsburg on 25 May 1945, after the eponymous castle located there. The American occupation ended at the end of June 1945 when the region became part of the British occupation zone. In 1951, Wolfsburg was separated from the District of Gifhorn, and became an urban district.

In 1955, the one-millionth VW Beetle was manufactured in Wolfsburg. Postwar Beetle production ended in Wolfsburg in 1974, though Beetle production continued within Germany at Emden until 1978. The factories in Wolfsburg remain a key part of Volkswagen&#x27;s production capacity.

During the German economic miracle Wolfsburg experienced a large influx of immigrant workers, especially from Italy.

In 1958, the city hall was built. In 1960 the Volkswagenwerk GmbH (limited partnership with a limited liability) was changed into an AG (public limited company).

In the course of a land reform in Lower Saxony in 1972, 20 localities were added to the city through the &quot;Wolfsburg-Act&quot;. Wolfsburg gained the status of major city with nearly 131,000 inhabitants. The city&#x27;s area grew from 35 to nearly . In 1973, the city&#x27;s population peaked at 131,971.

In 1982, the A39, a side road of the A2 (Oberhausen - Hannover - Werder), was built as a direct freeway to Wolfsburg.

In 1988, the city became a university town with the establishment of the University of Applied Science Braunschweig/Wolfenbüttel. Today its name is Ostfalia University of Applied Sciences.

As a launch promotion for the 5th generation of the Volkswagen Golf the city of Wolfsburg welcomed visitors on the internet, on the official stationery, and on every city limit sign with the name &quot;Golfsburg&quot; from 25 August to 10 October 2003. This campaign gained the nationwide attention of press, radio, and TV broadcasting.

In the summer of 2009, Wolfsburg gained nationwide attention when their football team, VfL Wolfsburg, won the German football league. A party was held in the city centre with about 100,000 people, the first in the history of the city.

==Geography==
Wolfsburg is located at the Southern edge of the ancient river valley of the Aller at the &quot;Mittellandkanal&quot; (). It is bordered by the districts of Gifhorn and Helmstedt.

===Climate===
The total annual precipitation is about which is quite low as it belongs to the lowest tenth of the measured data in Germany. Only 7% of all observation stations of the &quot;Deutscher Wetterdienst&quot; (German weather service) record lower measurements. The warmest month is July and the driest month is April, while the wettest are July and August.

==Culture and attractions==

The centre of Wolfsburg is unique in Germany. Instead of a medieval city centre, Wolfsburg features a new and modern attraction called the Autostadt. The old part of the city Alt Wolfsburg (de) shows some manor buildings in traditional framework style. Atop a hill by the River Aller is the Wolfsburg Castle.

The Autostadt is an open-air museum-theme park dedicated to automobiles owned and operated by Volkswagen. In the center of the park are the pavilions featuring Volkswagen&#x27;s major brands: Volkswagen and Audi to the north, further south are SEAT, Škoda Auto, Lamborghini, Bentley, Bugatti, and the Premium Clubhouse. Right next to the lagoon is the Porsche pavilion. The striking Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles pavilion is in the south-east of the park.
The Autostadt also includes a planetarium, a Ritz-Carlton hotel, the Phaeno Science Center, the largest hands-on science museum in Germany, a water skiing resort, and a private art museum (&quot;Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg&quot;) specialising in modern and contemporary art.

Another major attraction is the Wolfsburg Water Show, the world&#x27;s largest water-flame-laser-video fountain show with its up to 70-meter high fountains which was in the Autostadt complex in 2014. The event sometimes can be seen when there are special events in the complex.

Besides the Autostadt, another well-known and distinctive attraction is BadeLand, a beautiful wellness and relaxation centre with a bathing area and various saunas.

==Population==
From about 1,000 inhabitants in 1938, the population of the city increased to 25,000 in 1950 and doubled to 50,000 until 1958. On 1 July 1972, the population of Wolfsburg first went beyond the mark of 100,000 because several adjacent suburbanized villages were incorporated into the city with the &quot;Wolfsburg law&quot; which made Wolfsburg a major city (&quot;Großstadt&quot;). In 1973, the population reached its highest level: 131,971. At the end of December 2010, 121,451 people were registered with their principal residence in Wolfsburg. By the end of 2012, this number had climbed to 123,144. 43.3% of Wolfsburg has a migration background with these parts of the city having the highest shares: 

Westhagen(71.2%), Rothenfelde(64.6%), Stadtmitte(59.4%), Heßlingen(55.5%), Hohenstein(51.2%), Köhlerberg(51.2%), Schillerteich (51.0%)


==Organization==
The city of Wolfsburg is organized into 41 districts. One or more districts make up one of the total of 16 localities which are represented by their own councils. Every council has a local official as its mayor.

First the councils were only established in the 11 localities annexed in 1972. They partly took over the functions of the former city councils of each of the districts. In 1991 and 2001 some of the localities were split into smaller areas so that today there are 16 localities, each with its own council which are directly elected by the citizens.

The only exception from this organization is the Allerpark (&quot;Aller Park&quot;), a local recreation area surrounding the Allersee lake, and the area of the Volkswagen factory which are both located in the central city area.

The administrative area of Wolfsburg includes six nature reserves. Five of them are located in the ancient Aller river valley.

==Politics==

The first mayor of the young Stadt des KdF-Wagens was the government assessor Karl Bock, on enactment #145 of the chief president of the government of Lüneburg effective from 1 July 1938. His allies were also deployed by the government.

In 1946, the military government of the British zone of occupation established a communal constitution following the British example. After this, citizens voted for a council that elected a volunteer mayor/lord mayor as the city&#x27;s leader and representative. After 1946, the council elected a full-time director to lead the city council. In 2001, the city council&#x27;s dual leadership was abolished. It is led by a full-time lord mayor who is also the city&#x27;s representative. Since 2001, citizens directly elect the lord mayor. The council still has its own chairperson elected by the council&#x27;s constitutive conference after every local election. The current Bürgermeister (mayor) of Wolfsburg is Dennis Weilmann.

The city has been described as a &quot;social democratic utopia&quot;.

===City council===
The city council is made up of the fractions of the different parties (47 seats) and the lord mayor with one seat. The lord mayor is head of administration, thus the superior of all employees of the city council. The lord mayor is supported by four departmental heads who are voted in by the council on his suggestion. Together, they make up the board of directors of the city administration where the most important decisions concerning administration are deliberated weekly.

Results of the local elections on 11 September 2011:

Voter participations: 49.4%

===Emblems===
Wolfsburg&#x27;s emblem shows a silver two-tower castle with a closed gate on red ground over a green base with silver waved timbers. A golden wolf with a blue tongue paces over the castle&#x27;s battlement. The city&#x27;s flag is green and white.

Lower Saxony&#x27;s Department of the Interior awarded the city of Wolfsburg&#x27;s emblem in 1952 after it had been constituted in the association articles in 1947. In 1961, it was improved heraldically and newly awarded by the governmental executive committee of Lüneburg. The symbols of the wolf and the castle reflect the city&#x27;s name (canting arm) and do not have a historical, directly conveyed reference. The flag was adopted in 1955.

Volkswagen used a modified version of the Wolfsburg coat of arms as its steering wheel emblem, (and occasionally as a hood ornament, on classic Beetles) until the early 1980s, when it was replaced by the VW roundel.

===Regional authorities===
The city of Wolfsburg is a member of the association &quot;Braunschweigische Landschaft e.V&quot;, with a registered office in Braunschweig and in the &quot;Lüneburgischen Landschaftsverband e.V&quot;, with a registered office in Uelzen. These associations were founded to foster cultural establishments in the regions.

==Architecture==

===Historical castles===
* The Schloss Wolfsburg (castle of Wolfsburg), a Weser renaissance castle of the 13th century, was first documented as the domicile of the noble lineage of Bartensleben in 1302. As the city is named after this castle, it is Wolfsburg&#x27;s landmark.
* The Burg Neuhaus (castle of Neuhaus) is a medieval moat from the 14th century which has been owned by the city government since 1981.
* The Schloss Fallersleben (castle of Fallersleben) was completed in 1551. Since 1991 it has housed the Hoffmann-von-Fallersleben-Museum.

===Museums===
* The Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg (Art museum Wolfsburg) is internationally renowned and has shown contemporary and modern international art since 1994.
* The Städtische Galerie (Municipal Gallery), located in the Schloss Wolfsburg, shows multifarious pieces of contemporary art.
* The AutoMuseum Volkswagen was opened in an old textile factory in Heßlingen in 1985.
* The Stadtmuseum Wolfsburg &quot;(City Museum&quot;) is a modern museum with an exhibition about the history of the castle, the region and the city. It is located inside the castle of Wolfsburg.
* The Hoffmann-von-Fallersleben-Museum in the castle of Fallersleben shows the history of German poetry and democracy, especially focused on the life of Hoffmann von Fallersleben between 1798 and 1874.
* The Heinrich-Büssing-Haus in Nordsteimke was opened on the initiative of the MAN-group in the house of Büssing&#x27;s birth in 1988. It shows the life of Büssing and the development from craft to industry.
* The Burg Neuhaus (castle of Neuhaus) is a moat showing an exhibition of models of the castle and the water mill, late medieval weapons and documents concerning the life of people of the time before 1800.
* The Autostadt is, after Disneyland Paris, the most visited theme park in Europe. The theme is (auto) mobility.
* The Phæno is a science center with 250 experiment stations on an exhibition space of nearly 6,000 square meters. The unique architecture was designed by Zaha Hadid.
* The Romantikpark Landleben (theme park Romantik Park Landleben) in Kästorf shows a historical Lower Saxon village combined with parks and restaurants.

===Alvar Aalto designs===
*&quot;Heilig Geist Kirche&quot; or Church of the Holy Spirit
*&quot;Stephanuskirche&quot; or the Church of St. Stephen, also known as Detmerode Church
*&quot;Alvar-Aalto-Kulturhaus&quot; or Alvar Aalto Cultural Centre

==Sport==

The most famous professional sports club in the city is VfL Wolfsburg, established in 1945. The men&#x27;s football team won the Bundesliga in 2009, the DFB-Pokal in 2015 and the DFL-Supercup in 2015. The women&#x27;s football team has been even more successful, winning six Bundesliga titles and seven DFB-Pokal titles. The women&#x27;s team has also succeeded in winning the UEFA Women&#x27;s Champions League in two consecutive years, 2013 and 2014.

Wolfsburg is also the home of the ice hockey team Grizzlys Wolfsburg, which since 2007 has made it to a leading position in the first-tier Deutsche Eishockey Liga, where it was runner-up in 2011, 2016 and 2017.

Also based in city is the tennis tournament Volkswagen Challenger, which has been held annually in Wolfsburg since 1993.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Wolfsburg is twinned with:

* Marignane, France (1963)
* Province of Pesaro and Urbino, Italy (1975)
* Halberstadt, Germany (1989)
* Tolyatti, Russia (1991)
* Bielsko-Biała, Poland (1998)
* Jiading (Shanghai), China (2007)
* Jendouba, Tunisia (2010)
===Friendly cities===
Wolfsburg also has friendly relations with:

* Popoli, Italy
* Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (1985)
* Changchun, China (2006)
* Puebla, Mexico (2010)
* Toyohashi, Japan (2011)
* Chattanooga, United States (2011)
* Dalian, China (2011)
* Nanhai (Foshan), China (2015)
==Notable people==

*August Heinrich Hoffmann von Fallersleben (1798–1874), poet, writer of the German national anthem.
*Hanns Kerrl (1887–1941), politician (NSDAP), Reich Ministry for Church Affairs
*Hartwig Hohnsbein (born 1937), political scientist, retired pastor, author
*Rolf-Dieter Postlep (born 1946), economist, president of the University of Kassel in 2000–2015
*Günter Lach (1954–2021), politician, member of the Bundestag and mayor of Vorsfelde and Wolfsburg.
*Gabriele von Lutzau (born 1954), artist and sculptor, stewardess on Lufthansa Flight 181, kidnapped in 1977
*Wolfgang Müller (born 1957), artist, musician and writer
*Peter Bialobrzeski (born 1961), photographer
*Edward Berger (born 1970), film director and screenwriter
*Dero Goi (born 1970), musician, founder and lead vocalist of Oomph!
*Sascha Paeth (born 1970), musician; guitarist, bassist, record producer and mixer
* Heidi Schmidt, (DE Wiki) (1972–2010), novelist, children&#x27;s author
*Sunhild Kleingärtner (born 1974), historian and archaeologist, specialising in maritime history and archaeology
*Amanda Somerville (born 1979), an American singer-songwriter and musician; lives locally
*Anna-Katharina Samsel (born 1985), figure skater, model and actress, grew up in Wolfsburg

=== Sport ===

*Liane Winter (1942–2021), marathon runner, record breaking local marathon run in 1974
*Siegfried Reich (born 1959), footballer, played 434 games
*Petra Damm (born 1961), footballer, played 43 games for Germany women
*Eckhardt Schultz (born 1964), rower, team gold medal in the men&#x27;s eight at the 1988 Summer Olympics
*Michael Knauth (born 1965), field hockey player, team gold medallist at the 1992 Summer Olympics
*Jan Schanda (born 1977), footballer, played over 260 games
*Stefanie Gottschlich (born 1978), footballer, played 45 games for Germany women
*Janne Schaefer (born 1981), swimmer, grew up in Wolfsburg
*Andrzej Rybski (born 1985), footballer who played over 375 games
*Oliver Kragl (born 1990), footballer who has played over 350 games
*Kevin Wolze (born 1990), footballer who has played over 350 games
*Sophie Scheder (born 1997), artistic gymnast, the 2016 Summer Olympics bronze medalist on the uneven bars.

==See also==
*Metropolitan region Hannover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3014" start="0" end="9" title="Wolfsburg" label="Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q505687" start="13" end="24" title="Eastphalian language" label="Eastphalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="82" end="88" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="98" end="110" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967803" start="133" end="138" title="Aller (Germany)" label="Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="162" end="169" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="182" end="188" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="230" end="243" title="Volkswagen AG" label="Volkswagen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379480" start="295" end="318" title="Gigafactory Texas" label="Tesla Gigafactory Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q878315" start="328" end="362" title="Wolfsburg Volkswagen Plant" label="the world&amp;#x27;s biggest car plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q702661" start="368" end="377" title="Autostadt" label="Autostadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="479" end="483" title="Audi AG" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="485" end="492" title="Bentley Motors" label="Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308012" start="494" end="501" title="Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S." label="Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q271812" start="503" end="509" title="Ducati" label="Ducati"/>
<link wikidata="Q35886" start="511" end="522" title="Automobili Lamborghini S.p.A." label="Lamborghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q35953" start="524" end="527" title="MAN SE" label="MAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q326013" start="529" end="536" title="Neoplan" label="Neoplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="538" end="545" title="Porsche AG" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q219960" start="547" end="553" title="Scania AB" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188217" start="555" end="559" title="SEAT, S.A." label="SEAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="561" end="571" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q699709" start="576" end="606" title="Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles" label="Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="703" end="715" title="planned community" label="planned city"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="755" end="771" title="company town" label="home for workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157329" start="786" end="789" title="Strength Through Joy" label="KdF"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="790" end="795" title="VW Beetle" label="Wagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014" start="835" end="872" title="Wolfsburg" label="Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q882569" start="981" end="1009" title="Wolfsburg Castle" label="&amp;quot;Wolfsburg&amp;quot; Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q699074" start="1092" end="1104" title="Bartensleben" label="Bartensleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="1165" end="1169" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q486562" start="1742" end="1751" title="Helmstedt" label="Helmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q830084" start="1769" end="1807" title="Principality of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel" label="Principality of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="1937" end="1955" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1969" end="1976" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q702012" start="2077" end="2095" title="Duchy of Magdeburg" label="Duchy of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q340210" start="2154" end="2172" title="Province of Saxony" label="Province of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q819125" start="2197" end="2216" title="Province of Hanover" label="Province of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q157329" start="2345" end="2365" title="Strength Through Joy" label="Strength Through Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451053" start="2373" end="2385" title="Fallersleben" label="Fallersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="2477" end="2487" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="2551" end="2568" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="2675" end="2689" title="forced labour in Germany during World War II" label="forced workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2694" end="2710" title="prisoners-of-war" label="prisoners-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q683104" start="2756" end="2786" title="Arbeitsdorf concentration camp" label="Arbeitsdorf concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="2971" end="2984" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q55306" start="3283" end="3306" title="British Occupation zone in Germany" label="British occupation zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83393" start="3385" end="3399" title="list of German urban districts" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174" start="3577" end="3582" title="Emden" label="Emden"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="3694" end="3717" title="German economic miracle" label="German economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q460178" start="3862" end="3866" title="GmbH" label="GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084735" start="3934" end="3936" title="Aktiengesellschaft" label="AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010" start="4310" end="4312" title="Bundesautobahn 2" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035460" start="4540" end="4579" title="Ostfalia University of Applied Sciences" label="Ostfalia University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428988" start="4612" end="4626" title="Volkswagen Golf Mk5" label="5th generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q247" start="4634" end="4649" title="Volkswagen Golf" label="Volkswagen Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q101859" start="5007" end="5020" title="VfL Wolfsburg" label="VfL Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967803" start="5247" end="5252" title="Aller (Germany)" label="Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q48480" start="5266" end="5281" title="Mittellandkanal" label="Mittellandkanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053" start="5327" end="5334" title="Gifhorn (district)" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047" start="5339" end="5348" title="Helmstedt (district)" label="Helmstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q325859" start="5540" end="5562" title="Deutscher Wetterdienst" label="Deutscher Wetterdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q702661" start="5886" end="5895" title="Autostadt" label="Autostadt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5922" end="5935" title="Alt Wolfsburg" label="Alt Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5936" end="5940" title=":de:Alt-Wolfsburg" label="(de)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967803" start="6019" end="6030" title="Aller (Germany)" label="River Aller"/>
<link wikidata="Q882569" start="6038" end="6054" title="Wolfsburg Castle" label="Wolfsburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="6117" end="6127" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="6307" end="6317" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27401" start="6341" end="6348" title="Bugatti" label="Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="6409" end="6416" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="6544" end="6555" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="6559" end="6571" title="Ritz-Carlton" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q265695" start="6583" end="6604" title="Phaeno Science Center" label="Phaeno Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792556" start="6709" end="6730" title="Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg" label="Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7951" end="7960" title="Westhagen" label="Westhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186168" start="7969" end="7980" title="Rothenfelde" label="Rothenfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q243779" start="7989" end="7999" title="Stadtmitte" label="Stadtmitte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8008" end="8017" title="Heßlingen" label="Heßlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362143" start="8026" end="8036" title="Hohenstein" label="Hohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8045" end="8055" title="Köhlerberg" label="Köhlerberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8064" end="8077" title="Schillerteich" label="Schillerteich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648605" start="8716" end="8725" title="Allerpark" label="Allerpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q523628" start="8792" end="8800" title="Allersee" label="Allersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="8946" end="8960" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="9189" end="9197" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989" start="11843" end="11849" title="Uelzen" label="Uelzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q882569" start="11983" end="12000" title="Wolfsburg Castle" label="Schloss Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12234" end="12246" title="Burg Neuhaus (Wolfsburg)" label="Burg Neuhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240953" start="12370" end="12390" title="Schloss Fallersleben" label="Schloss Fallersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q451053" start="13130" end="13142" title="Fallersleben" label="Fallersleben"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13490" end="13502" title="Burg Neuhaus (Wolfsburg)" label="Burg Neuhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q702661" start="13696" end="13705" title="Autostadt" label="Autostadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47780" start="13958" end="13968" title="Zaha Hadid" label="Zaha Hadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722210" start="14186" end="14211" title="Church of the Holy Spirit, Wolfsburg" label="Church of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722211" start="14219" end="14234" title="Stephanuskirche (Wolfsburg)" label="Stephanuskirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q319194" start="14341" end="14368" title="Alvar Aalto Cultural Centre" label="Alvar Aalto Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q101859" start="14437" end="14450" title="VfL Wolfsburg" label="VfL Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="14510" end="14520" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="14534" end="14543" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="14560" end="14572" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q285131" start="14586" end="14612" title="VfL Wolfsburg (women)" label="women&amp;#x27;s football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q283414" start="14684" end="14693" title="DFB-Pokal (women)" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q748389" start="14758" end="14792" title="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League" label="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q696805" start="14885" end="14903" title="Grizzlys Wolfsburg" label="Grizzlys Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q169519" start="14974" end="14997" title="Deutsche Eishockey Liga" label="Deutsche Eishockey Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151287" start="15091" end="15112" title="Volkswagen Challenger" label="Volkswagen Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="15214" end="15221" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q243317" start="15231" end="15240" title="Marignane" label="Marignane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241" start="15258" end="15287" title="Province of Pesaro and Urbino" label="Province of Pesaro and Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072" start="15304" end="15315" title="Halberstadt" label="Halberstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341" start="15334" end="15342" title="Tolyatti" label="Tolyatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q106583" start="15360" end="15373" title="Bielsko-Biała" label="Bielsko-Biała"/>
<link wikidata="Q662101" start="15391" end="15409" title="Jiading District" label="Jiading (Shanghai)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27064" start="15426" end="15434" title="Jendouba" label="Jendouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q51384" start="15520" end="15526" title="Popoli" label="Popoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="15536" end="15544" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="15578" end="15587" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="15604" end="15610" title="Puebla (city)" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q336431" start="15628" end="15637" title="Toyohashi" label="Toyohashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="15654" end="15665" title="Chattanooga" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="15690" end="15696" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023893" start="15713" end="15728" title="Nanhai District" label="Nanhai (Foshan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q76938" start="15764" end="15805" title="August Heinrich Hoffmann von Fallersleben" label="August Heinrich Hoffmann von Fallersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q68721" start="15864" end="15875" title="Hanns Kerrl" label="Hanns Kerrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q451205" start="15909" end="15942" title="Reich Ministry for Church Affairs" label="Reich Ministry for Church Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15944" end="15961" title="Hartwig Hohnsbein" label="Hartwig Hohnsbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163173" start="16020" end="16039" title="Rolf-Dieter Postlep" label="Rolf-Dieter Postlep"/>
<link wikidata="Q833822" start="16081" end="16101" title="University of Kassel" label="University of Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560738" start="16116" end="16127" title="Günter Lach" label="Günter Lach"/>
<link wikidata="Q545984" start="16216" end="16235" title="Gabriele von Lutzau" label="Gabriele von Lutzau"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="16284" end="16304" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Lufthansa Flight 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q896354" start="16325" end="16340" title="Wolfgang Müller (artist)" label="Wolfgang Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q107870" start="16383" end="16401" title="Peter Bialobrzeski" label="Peter Bialobrzeski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291686" start="16429" end="16442" title="Edward Berger" label="Edward Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760949" start="16488" end="16496" title="Dero Goi" label="Dero Goi"/>
<link wikidata="Q572174" start="16549" end="16555" title="Oomph!" label="Oomph!"/>
<link wikidata="Q63068" start="16557" end="16569" title="Sascha Paeth" label="Sascha Paeth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16641" end="16665" title=":de:Heidi Schmidt" label="Heidi Schmidt, (DE Wiki)"/>
<link wikidata="Q52698704" start="16713" end="16733" title="Sunhild Kleingärtner" label="Sunhild Kleingärtner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516975" start="16792" end="16808" title="maritime history" label="maritime history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265179" start="16813" end="16824" title="maritime archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q24064" start="16826" end="16843" title="Amanda Somerville" label="Amanda Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q97704" start="16916" end="16937" title="Anna-Katharina Samsel" label="Anna-Katharina Samsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q138065" start="17023" end="17035" title="Liane Winter" label="Liane Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q317798" start="17110" end="17125" title="Siegfried Reich" label="Siegfried Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080144" start="17169" end="17179" title="Petra Damm" label="Petra Damm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154408" start="17225" end="17238" title="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Germany women"/>
<link wikidata="Q824075" start="17240" end="17256" title="Eckhardt Schultz" label="Eckhardt Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="17324" end="17344" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q825200" start="17346" end="17360" title="Michael Knauth" label="Michael Knauth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="17422" end="17442" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682190" start="17444" end="17455" title="Jan Schanda" label="Jan Schanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q508708" start="17504" end="17524" title="Stefanie Gottschlich" label="Stefanie Gottschlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154408" start="17570" end="17583" title="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Germany women"/>
<link wikidata="Q75493" start="17585" end="17599" title="Janne Schaefer" label="Janne Schaefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759698" start="17644" end="17658" title="Andrzej Rybski" label="Andrzej Rybski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087652" start="17710" end="17722" title="Oliver Kragl" label="Oliver Kragl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740283" start="17778" end="17789" title="Kevin Wolze" label="Kevin Wolze"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847987" start="17845" end="17859" title="Sophie Scheder" label="Sophie Scheder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="17895" end="17915" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q315065" start="17967" end="18028" title="Metropolitan region Hannover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg" label="Metropolitan region Hannover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150230" wikidata="Q7029495" url="?curid=150230" title="Nicolas Anselme Baptiste">
<text>Nicolas Anselme Baptiste, more commonly known as Baptiste aîné (June 18, 1761 – December 1, 1835), was a French actor.

He was born in Bordeaux, the elder son of Joseph François Anselme, a popular actor. His mother played leading parts in tragedy, and both his parents enjoyed the protection of Voltaire and the friendship of Lekain. It was probably under the auspices of the latter that Nicolas Anselme made his first appearance as de Belloy in &quot;Gaston et Bayard&quot;; and shortly afterwards, under the name of Baptiste, he made a contract to play young lover parts at Arras, where he also appeared in opera and even in pantomime. From Rouen, where he had three successful years, his reputation spread to Paris and he was summoned to the new theatre which the comedian Langlois Courcelles had just founded, and where he succeeded, not only in making an engagement for himself, but in bringing all his family, father, mother, wife and brother. They were thus distinguished in the playbills: Baptiste, ainé, Baptiste père, Baptiste cadet, Madame Baptiste mère, Madame Baptiste bru. This resulted in the pun of calling a play in which they all appeared une pièce de baptistes.

Nicolas soon obtained the public favour, specially in La Martellière&#x27;s &quot;Robert&quot;, &quot;chef de brigands&quot;, and as Count Almaviva in Bèaumarchais’ &quot;La Mere coupable&quot;. His success in this was so great that the directors of the Théâtre de la République—who had already secured Talma, Dugazon and Madame Vestris—hastened to obtain his services, and, in order to get him at once (1793), paid the 20,000 francs forfeit which he was obliged to surrender on breaking his contract. Nicolas took all the leading parts in comedy and tragedy. As he grew older his special forte lay in noble fathers. After a brilliant career of thirty-five years of uninterrupted service, he retired in 1828. But, after the revolution of 1830, when the Théâtre Français was in dire straits, the brothers Baptiste came to the rescue, reappeared on the stage and helped to bring back its prosperity. Nicolas died in Paris.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7029495" start="0" end="24" title="Nicolas Anselme Baptiste" label="Nicolas Anselme Baptiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029495" start="49" end="62" title="Nicolas Anselme Baptiste" label="Baptiste aîné"/>
<link wikidata="Q21013749" start="105" end="117" title="French actor" label="French actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="135" end="143" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="162" end="185" title="Joseph François Anselme" label="Joseph François Anselme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="295" end="303" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372557" start="326" end="332" title="Lekain" label="Lekain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="627" end="636" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="643" end="648" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="712" end="717" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="776" end="795" title="Langlois Courcelles" label="Langlois Courcelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q61460498" start="1436" end="1460" title="Théâtre de la République" label="Théâtre de la République"/>
<link wikidata="Q393983" start="1485" end="1490" title="François-Joseph Talma" label="Talma"/>
<link wikidata="Q939370" start="1492" end="1499" title="Dugazon" label="Dugazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442410" start="1504" end="1518" title="Rose Vestris" label="Madame Vestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q61460498" start="1935" end="1951" title="Théâtre Français" label="Théâtre Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2096" end="2101" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150231" wikidata="Q5493448" url="?curid=150231" title="François de Bar">
<text>François de Bar (1538 – 25 March 1606) was a French Benedictine monk and scholar.

He was born at Seizencourt, near Saint-Quentin, and having studied at the University of Paris entered the Order of Saint Benedict. He soon became prior of Anchin Abbey, near Pecquencourt, and passed much of his time in the valuable monastery library, studying ecclesiastical history, especially that of Flanders. He also made a catalogue of the manuscripts at Anchin Abbey and annotated many of them. During the French Revolution his manuscripts passed to the library at Douai.

Bar died at Anchin on 25 March 1606.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5493448" start="0" end="15" title="François de Bar" label="François de Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q852724" start="52" end="63" title="Rule of St. Benedict" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="73" end="80" title="scholar" label="scholar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98" end="109" title="Seizencourt" label="Seizencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182744" start="116" end="129" title="Saint-Quentin, Aisne" label="Saint-Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="157" end="176" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="189" end="212" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Order of Saint Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971381" start="238" end="250" title="Anchin Abbey" label="Anchin Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q532525" start="257" end="269" title="Pecquencourt" label="Pecquencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="386" end="394" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971381" start="443" end="455" title="Anchin Abbey" label="Anchin Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="495" end="512" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193826" start="554" end="559" title="Douai" label="Douai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150235" wikidata="Q6645273" url="?curid=150235" title="List of windmills">
<text>The List of windmills is a link page for any windmill or windpump.

==Africa==

===South Africa===
*See List of windmills in South Africa

==Asia==

===Indonesia===

The Dutch colonists in Batavia built at least four wind-powered sawmills around the Bay of Batavia, many years after founding Batavia (now Jakarta) in 1619, but these were not entirely successful. People and animals (water buffalo) powered mills also and previously (introduced by the Chinese). Out of about 25 Dutch-designed mills in the area, their water-powered mills were the most successful. Specifically, around 1675 a first wind-powered sawmill was built on the island of De Kuyper (now Pulu Burung) to support the Onrust Island (Pulu Kapal) dockyard that repaired Dutch East India Company ships. By 1685 there were two built in Onrust and around 1705 another was built on the island of Edam (Pulu Damar.

All four were destroyed by British bombardment on 9 November 1800. Under Napoleon, the Dutch nation which was named the Batavian Republic from 17xx to 18xx) had become part of the French empire, and Batavia in the East Indies was included. The bombardment was near the end of the War of the Second Coalition that pitted Britain and almost all of Europe against the First French Republic. This must have been part of the East Indies theatre of the French Revolutionary Wars. 


===Israel===
*See List of windmills in Israel

===Japan===
===Syria===
===Taiwan===
===Thailand===
==Oceania==

=== Australia ===
* See List of windmills in Australia

===New Zealand===
==Europe==

===Austria===
===Belarus===
===Belgium===
*See List of windmills in Belgium

===Bulgaria===
===Czech Republic===
*See List of windmills in the Czech Republic

===Denmark===
*See List of windmills in Denmark

===Estonia===
*See List of windmills in Estonia

===Finland===
=== France ===
*See List of windmills in France

===Germany===
*See List of windmills in Germany

===Greece===
*See List of windmills in Greece

===Hungary===
===Ireland===
*See List of windmills in Ireland

===Italy===
===Latvia===
===Lithuania===
===Malta===
*See List of windmills in Malta

=== Netherlands ===
* See List of windmills in the Netherlands

Virtually every small town and polder in the Netherlands has one or more windmills. The Zaanstreek alone has had over a thousand industrial windmills, each with a name and well-documented history (see list of windmills at Zaanse Schans). Other well-known windmills are the windmills at Kinderdijk.

===Poland===
*See List of windmills in Poland

===Portugal===
*See List of windmills in Portugal

===Romania===
=== Russia ===
===Slovakia===
===Spain===
*See List of windmills in Spain

===Sweden===
*See List of windmills in Sweden

===Turkey===
===Ukraine===
===United Kingdom===
*See List of windmills in the United Kingdom

====Channel Islands====
*See Windmills in Guernsey and Windmills in Jersey

====Isle of Man====
*See Windmills in the Isle of Man

==North America==

===Antigua===

===Barbados===
===Canada===
*See List of windmills in Canada

===Guadeloupe===
===Saint Kitts and Nevis===
=== United States ===
*See List of windmills in the United States

In the United States, there are some traditional windmills, but the American usage of the word &quot;windmill&quot; includes some that are actually windpumps.

==South America==

===Brazil===

===Uruguay===
==References==
==See also==
* Windpump
* Watermill
* Horse mill
* Moulin Rouge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6645273" start="4" end="21" title="List of windmills" label="List of windmills"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="45" end="53" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730505" start="57" end="65" title="windpump" label="windpump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645353" start="104" end="137" title="List of windmills in South Africa" label="List of windmills in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q546796" start="250" end="264" title="Bay of Batavia" label="Bay of Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="292" end="299" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="305" end="312" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862122" start="645" end="654" title="De Kuyper" label="De Kuyper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="660" end="671" title="Pulu Burung" label="Pulu Burung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675109" start="688" end="701" title="Onrust Island" label="Onrust Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="703" end="713" title="Pulu Kapal" label="Pulu Kapal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="738" end="762" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="866" end="876" title="Pulu Damar" label="Pulu Damar"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="952" end="960" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26749" start="1159" end="1186" title="War of the Second Coalition" label="War of the Second Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="1244" end="1265" title="First French Republic" label="First French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639061" start="1299" end="1351" title="East Indies theatre of the French Revolutionary Wars" label="East Indies theatre of the French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949003" start="1374" end="1401" title="List of windmills in Israel" label="List of windmills in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645280" start="1492" end="1522" title="List of windmills in Australia" label="List of windmills in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578565" start="1601" end="1629" title="List of windmills in Belgium" label="List of windmills in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053783" start="1672" end="1711" title="List of windmills in the Czech Republic" label="List of windmills in the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645297" start="1732" end="1760" title="List of windmills in Denmark" label="List of windmills in Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645302" start="1781" end="1809" title="List of windmills in Estonia" label="List of windmills in Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645308" start="1845" end="1872" title="List of windmills in France" label="List of windmills in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q257794" start="1893" end="1921" title="List of windmills in Germany" label="List of windmills in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1941" end="1968" title="List of windmills in Greece" label="List of windmills in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645319" start="2003" end="2031" title="List of windmills in Ireland" label="List of windmills in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645331" start="2091" end="2117" title="List of windmills in Malta" label="List of windmills in Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299922" start="2145" end="2181" title="List of windmills in the Netherlands" label="List of windmills in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q106259" start="2214" end="2220" title="polder" label="polder"/>
<link wikidata="Q136660" start="2271" end="2281" title="Zaanstreek" label="Zaanstreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q136661" start="2405" end="2418" title="Zaanse Schans" label="Zaanse Schans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12012965" start="2456" end="2479" title="windmills at Kinderdijk" label="windmills at Kinderdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645343" start="2500" end="2527" title="List of windmills in Poland" label="List of windmills in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48811885" start="2549" end="2578" title="List of windmills in Portugal" label="List of windmills in Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011139" start="2641" end="2667" title="List of windmills in Spain" label="List of windmills in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2687" end="2714" title="List of windmills in Sweden" label="List of windmills in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645372" start="2769" end="2808" title="List of windmills in the United Kingdom" label="List of windmills in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066594" start="2839" end="2860" title="Windmills in Guernsey" label="Windmills in Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066602" start="2865" end="2884" title="Windmills in Jersey" label="Windmills in Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024314" start="2911" end="2939" title="Windmills in the Isle of Man" label="Windmills in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645290" start="3008" end="3035" title="List of windmills in Canada" label="List of windmills in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12808236" start="3109" end="3147" title="List of windmills in the United States" label="List of windmills in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730505" start="3297" end="3306" title="windpumps" label="windpumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730505" start="3386" end="3394" title="Windpump" label="Windpump"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="3397" end="3406" title="Watermill" label="Watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q252189" start="3409" end="3419" title="Horse mill" label="Horse mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q151030" start="3422" end="3434" title="Moulin Rouge" label="Moulin Rouge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150236" wikidata="Q6645372" url="?curid=150236" title="List of windmills in the United Kingdom">
<text>This is a list of windmills and windpumps in the United Kingdom.

==England==
The list is divided into the current ceremonial counties of England:

===Bedfordshire===

See List of windmills in Bedfordshire

===Berkshire===

;Mock mill
===Buckinghamshire===

See List of windmills in Buckinghamshire

===Cambridgeshire===

See List of windmills in Cambridgeshire

===Cheshire===

Windmills in Cheshire, including those now within Merseyside.

===Cornwall===

See List of windmills in Cornwall

===Cumbria===

===Derbyshire===
See List of windmills in Derbyshire

===Devon===

See List of windmills in Devon.

===Dorset===

;Maps
*1710 John Hutchins

===Durham===

===East Riding of Yorkshire===

See List of windmills in the East Riding of Yorkshire

===East Sussex===

See List of windmills in East Sussex

===Essex===

See List of windmills in Essex

===Gloucestershire===

===Greater London===

See List of windmills in Greater London

===Greater Manchester===

Windmills that survive today within Greater Manchester. Historic windmills will be listed under Lancashire.

===Hampshire===

See List of windmills in Hampshire

===Herefordshire===

===Hertfordshire===

See List of windmills in Hertfordshire

===Isle of Wight===

See List of windmills in the Isle of Wight

===Kent===

See List of windmills in Kent

===Lancashire===

See List of windmills in Lancashire

===Leicestershire===

See List of windmills in Leicestershire

===Lincolnshire===

See List of windmills in Lincolnshire, and Lincolnshire&#x27;s windmills

===Merseyside===
Historical mills can be found under Cheshire and Lancashire.
;Mock mill
===Norfolk===

See List of windmills in Norfolk and List of drainage windmills in Norfolk

===North Yorkshire===

See List of windmills in North Yorkshire

===Northamptonshire===
===Northumberland===

;Mock mill
===Nottinghamshire===

See List of windmills in Nottinghamshire

===Oxfordshire===
See List of windmills in Oxfordshire

===Rutland===

===Shropshire===

See List of windmills in Shropshire

===Somerset===

See List of windmills in Somerset

===South Yorkshire===

See List of windmills in South Yorkshire

===Staffordshire===

See List of windmills in Staffordshire

===Suffolk===

See List of windmills in Suffolk

===Surrey===

See List of windmills in Surrey

===Tyne and Wear===
Windmills standing today in Tyne and Wear, historic windmills are listed under Co Durham or Northumberland as appropriate.
===Warwickshire===

See List of windmills in Warwickshire

===West Midlands===

Windmills standing today in the West Midlands. Historical mills can be found under Staffordshire, Warwickshire and Worcestershire
;Maps
*1818 C &amp; G Greenwood

===West Sussex===

See List of windmills in West Sussex

===West Yorkshire===

See List of windmills in West Yorkshire

===Wiltshire===

See List of windmills in Wiltshire

===Worcestershire===

;Maps
*1821 C &amp; G Greenwood
*1832 Ordnance Survey

==Northern Ireland==

*See List of windmills in Northern Ireland

==Scotland==

See List of windmills in Scotland

==Wales==
See List of windmills in Wales

==See also==

*Windmills in the Channel Islands
*Windmills in the Isle of Man
*Watermills in the United Kingdom

==References==
==External links==

*Windmill World Extensive and well-researched site run by Mark Berry.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6645372" start="10" end="63" title="List of windmills in the United Kingdom" label="list of windmills and windpumps in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="115" end="145" title="ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial counties of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645276" start="172" end="205" title="List of windmills in Bedfordshire" label="List of windmills in Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645281" start="262" end="298" title="List of windmills in Buckinghamshire" label="List of windmills in Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645283" start="326" end="361" title="List of windmills in Cambridgeshire" label="List of windmills in Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="429" end="439" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645287" start="462" end="491" title="List of windmills in Cornwall" label="List of windmills in Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588059" start="529" end="560" title="List of windmills in Derbyshire" label="List of windmills in Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645295" start="579" end="605" title="List of windmills in Devon" label="List of windmills in Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645368" start="699" end="748" title="List of windmills in the East Riding of Yorkshire" label="List of windmills in the East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034079" start="773" end="805" title="List of windmills in East Sussex" label="List of windmills in East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645300" start="824" end="850" title="List of windmills in Essex" label="List of windmills in Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645322" start="901" end="936" title="List of windmills in Greater London" label="List of windmills in Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645311" start="1094" end="1124" title="List of windmills in Hampshire" label="List of windmills in Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645309" start="1172" end="1206" title="List of windmills in Hertfordshire" label="List of windmills in Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645311" start="1233" end="1271" title="List of windmills in the Isle of Wight" label="List of windmills in the Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645316" start="1289" end="1314" title="List of windmills in Kent" label="List of windmills in Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864755" start="1338" end="1369" title="List of windmills in Lancashire" label="List of windmills in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645317" start="1397" end="1432" title="List of windmills in Leicestershire" label="List of windmills in Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645320" start="1458" end="1491" title="List of windmills in Lincolnshire" label="List of windmills in Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645372" start="1581" end="1589" title="List of windmills in Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864755" start="1594" end="1604" title="List of windmills in Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153880" start="1636" end="1664" title="List of windmills in Norfolk" label="List of windmills in Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153269" start="1669" end="1706" title="List of drainage windmills in Norfolk" label="List of drainage windmills in Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645336" start="1735" end="1771" title="List of windmills in North Yorkshire" label="List of windmills in North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645337" start="1856" end="1892" title="List of windmills in Nottinghamshire" label="List of windmills in Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645339" start="1916" end="1948" title="List of windmills in Oxfordshire" label="List of windmills in Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645345" start="1987" end="2018" title="List of windmills in Shropshire" label="List of windmills in Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247958" start="2040" end="2069" title="List of windmills in Somerset" label="List of windmills in Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645347" start="2098" end="2134" title="List of windmills in South Yorkshire" label="List of windmills in South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645348" start="2161" end="2195" title="List of windmills in Staffordshire" label="List of windmills in Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645352" start="2216" end="2244" title="List of windmills in Suffolk" label="List of windmills in Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645355" start="2264" end="2291" title="List of windmills in Surrey" label="List of windmills in Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23080" start="2341" end="2354" title="Tyne and Wear" label="Tyne and Wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645359" start="2460" end="2493" title="List of windmills in Warwickshire" label="List of windmills in Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="2548" end="2561" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645348" start="2599" end="2612" title="List of windmills in Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645359" start="2614" end="2626" title="List of windmills in Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2631" end="2645" title="List of windmills in the United Kingdom#Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645361" start="2702" end="2734" title="List of windmills in West Sussex" label="List of windmills in West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645362" start="2762" end="2797" title="List of windmills in West Yorkshire" label="List of windmills in West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645363" start="2820" end="2850" title="List of windmills in Wiltshire" label="List of windmills in Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="2912" end="2927" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645319" start="2956" end="2993" title="List of windmills in Northern Ireland" label="List of windmills in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645342" start="3013" end="3042" title="List of windmills in Scotland" label="List of windmills in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645358" start="3058" end="3084" title="List of windmills in Wales" label="List of windmills in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645273" start="3101" end="3133" title="Windmills in the Channel Islands" label="Windmills in the Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024314" start="3135" end="3163" title="Windmills in the Isle of Man" label="Windmills in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645095" start="3165" end="3197" title="Watermills in the United Kingdom" label="Watermills in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150237" wikidata="Q56019" url="?curid=150237" title="Military rank">
<text>Military ranks are a system of hierarchical relationships within armed forces, police, intelligence agencies and other institutions organized along military lines. Responsibility for personnel, equipment and missions grows with each advancement. The military rank system defines dominance, authority and responsibility within a military hierarchy. It incorporates the principles of exercising power and authority into the military chain of command—the succession of commanders superior to subordinates through which command is exercised. The military chain of command is an important component for organized collective action.

Uniforms denote the bearer&#x27;s rank by particular insignia affixed to the uniforms of a number of countries. Ranking systems have been known for most of military history to be advantageous for military operations, in particular with regards to logistics, command, and coordination. As time went on and military operations became larger and more complex, more ranks were created and the systems of ranking became more complex.

Rank is not only used to designate leadership, but to establish pay-grade as well. As rank increases, pay-grade follows, but so does the amount of responsibility. 

In modern armed forces, the use of ranks is almost universal. Communist states have, on several occasions, abolished the use of ranks (e.g., the Soviet Red Army 1918–1935, the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army 1965–1988, and the Albanian People&#x27;s Army 1966–1991), but they have had to re-establish them after encountering operational difficulties in command and control.

== Ancient ==

=== Greek ===
From 501 BC, the Athenians annually elected ten individuals to the rank of &quot;strategos&quot;, one for each of the ten &quot;tribes&quot; that had been created with the founding of the democracy. &quot;Strategos&quot; means &quot;army leader&quot; and is usually translated as &quot;general&quot;. Originally these generals worked together with the old &quot;polemarchos&quot; (&quot;warlord&quot;) but over time the latter figure was absorbed into the generalship: each of the ten generals would rotate as &quot;polemarch&quot; for one day, and during this day his vote would serve as tie-breaker if necessary.

As an elected official a Strategos is by definition not a military rank. Strategos is a Political Rank in a Hierarchical Position above the military, politically similar in nature to a modern-day Sheriff or Police Commissioner. This is completely different from a modern day Commissioned Military General who never stands for election at any point in their careers. Historically it is unclear whether there was any badge of office granted to a Strategos though given current customs one should suspect that there was such a badge of office. 

The confusion regarding the &quot;Ranking&quot; of Strategos surely stems from the modern custom of granting Police Commissioners and Sheriff&#x27;s, both Political Ranks, a badge-of-office that happens to be in the shape of what is commonly understood to be a very high rank within the traditional military hierarchy. This &quot;rank-shaped&quot; badge-of-office a formal representation of Public Civilian (political) authority over military matters. 

The ten generals were equal to one another; there was no hierarchy among them. However, a basic form of democracy was in effect: for example, at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, the generals determined the battle plan by majority vote. Particular assignments might have been given to individual generals; inevitably there was a regular division of responsibilities.

The rank that was subordinate to a top general was a &quot;taxiarchos&quot; or &quot;taxiarhos&quot;, something akin to the modern brigadier. In Sparta, however, the title was &quot;polemarchos&quot;. Below this was the &quot;syntagmatarchis&quot;, which can be translated as &quot;leader of a regiment&quot; (&quot;syntagma&quot;) and was therefore like a modern colonel. Below him was the &quot;tagmatarches&quot;, a commanding officer of a &quot;tagma&quot; (near to the modern battalion). The rank was roughly equivalent to the &quot;legatus&quot; of a Roman legion. Next was the &quot;lokhagos&quot;, an officer who led an infantry unit called a &quot;lokhos&quot; that consisted of roughly a hundred men, much the same as in a modern company led by a captain.

A Greek cavalry (&quot;hippikon&quot;) regiment was called a &quot;hipparchia&quot; and was commanded by an &quot;epihipparch&quot;. The unit was split into two and led by two &quot;hipparchos&quot; or hipparch, but Spartan cavalry was led by a &quot;hipparmostes&quot;. A &quot;hippotoxotès&quot; was a mounted archer. A Greek cavalry company was led by a &quot;tetrarchès&quot; or &quot;tetrarch&quot;.

The rank and file of the military in most of the Greek city states was composed of ordinary citizens. Heavily armed foot soldiers were called &quot;hoplitès&quot; or &quot;hoplites&quot; and a &quot;hoplomachos&quot; was a drill or weapons instructor.

Once Athens became a naval power, the top generals of the land armies had authority over the naval fleets as well. Under them, each warship was commanded by a &quot;trièrarchos&quot; or &quot;trierarch&quot;, a word which originally meant &quot;trireme officer&quot; but persisted when other types of vessels came into use. Moreover, as in modern navies, the different tasks associated with running a ship were delegated to different subordinates. Specifically, the &quot;kybernètès&quot; was the helmsman, the &quot;keleustēs&quot; managed the rowing speed, and the &quot;trièraulès&quot; was the flute player who maintained the strike rate for the oarsmen. Following further specialization, the naval &quot;strategos&quot; was replaced by a &quot;nauarchos&quot;, a sea officer equating to an admiral.

With the rise of Macedonia under Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great, the Greek military became professional, tactics became more sophisticated and additional levels of ranking developed. Foot soldiers were organized into heavy infantry phalanxes called &quot;phalangites&quot;. These were among the first troops ever to be drilled, and they fought packed in a close rectangular formation, typically eight men deep, with a leader at the head of each column (or file) and a secondary leader in the middle so that the back rows could move off to the sides if more frontage was needed.

A &quot;tetrarchia&quot; was a unit of four files and a &quot;tetrarchès&quot; or &quot;tetrarch&quot; was a commander of four files; a &quot;dilochia&quot; was a double file and a &quot;dilochitès&quot; was a double-file leader; a lochos was a single file and a &quot;lochagos&quot; was a file leader; a &quot;dimoiria&quot; was a half file and a &quot;dimoirites&quot; was a half-file leader. Another name for the half file was a &quot;hèmilochion&quot; with a &quot;hèmilochitès&quot; being a half-file leader.

Different types of units, however, were divided differently and therefore their leaders had different titles. For example, under a numbering system by tens, a &quot;dekas&quot; or &quot;dekania&quot; was a unit of ten led by a &quot;dekarchos&quot;, a &quot;hekatontarchia&quot; was a unit of one hundred led by a &quot;hekatontarchos&quot; and a &quot;khiliostys&quot; or &quot;khiliarchia&quot; was a unit of a thousand led by a &quot;khiliarchos&quot;.

The cavalry, for which Alexander became most famous (in a military sense), grew more varied. There were heavy cavalry and wing cavalry (&quot;ilè&quot;) units, the latter commanded by an &quot;ilarchos&quot;.

=== Roman ===

The use of formalized ranks came into widespread use with the Roman legions after the reforms by Marius. Comparisons to modern ranks, however, can only be loose because the Roman army&#x27;s command structure was very different from the organizational structure of its modern counterparts, which arose from the early modern, Thirty Years&#x27; War mercenary companies, rather than from the writings of fourth-century Roman writer Vegetius and Caesar&#x27;s commentaries on his conquest of Gaul and the civil war.

Military command properly so-called was a political office in Rome. A commander needed to be equipped with imperium, a politico-religious concept. The king who possessed it (the &quot;rex sacrorum&quot;) was strictly forbidden to have it to avoid a return to the monarchy. In the republic, commanding was confined to consuls or (seldom) to &quot;praetors&quot;, or in cases of necessity a dictator. &quot;Proconsuls&quot;, after the establishment of the office, were used. In imperial times, each legion was commanded by the emperor, who was technically either consul or proconsul.

The commander could appoint a deputy, a so-called &quot;legate&quot; (&quot;legatus&quot;). The association of &quot;legatus&quot; with &quot;legion&quot; is folk etymology, as the meaning of &quot;legatus&quot; is &quot;proxy&quot; or &quot;envoy&quot;. Legates were typically drawn from the Roman Senate for three-year terms. The political nature of high military command was even reflected here, in that legions were always subordinate to the governor, and only the second and further legions stationed in a province had their own &quot;legatus legionis&quot;. The real commanders and the legates together were, in modern terms, the general officers.

Immediately beneath the commander (or his legate) were six military tribunes (&quot;tribuni militum&quot;), five of whom were young men of equestrian rank and one of whom was a nobleman who was headed for the senate. The latter is called &quot;laticlavian&quot; tribune (&quot;tribunus laticlavius&quot;) and was second in command. If in modern divisions the deputy commander is a brigadier general, the &quot;laticlavian tribune&quot; can perhaps be translated with this rank, though he commanded no formation of his own. The other tribunes are called &quot;tribuni angusticlavii&quot; and are equivalent to staff officers in both senses of the term: of ranks major, lieutenant colonel, colonel, and with administrative duties. They did not command a formation of their own. The term &quot;military tribune&quot; is even sometimes translated into English as &quot;colonel&quot;—most notably by the late classicist Robert Graves in his &quot;Claudius&quot; novels and his translation of Suetonius&#x27; &quot;Twelve Caesars&quot;—to avoid confusion with the political &quot;tribunes of the people&quot;; in addition, they must not either be confused with the &quot;military tribunes with consular authority&quot;, who in early republican times could replace the consuls.

The third highest officer of a legion, above the &quot;angusticlavian&quot; tribunes, was the &quot;praefectus castrorum&quot;. He, too, would have a colonel&#x27;s rank in modern armies, yet he differed much from the tribunes in that his office was not part of the rather administrative &quot;cursus&quot;, but normally filled by former centurions. (Modern armies have a similar distinction on a lower scale—i.e., between commissioned and non-commissioned officers.)

The fighting men in the legion were formed into &quot;ranks&quot;, rows of men who fought as a unit. Under Marius&#x27;s new system, legions were divided into ten cohorts (&quot;cohortes&quot;) (roughly equivalent to battalions and immediately subject to the legion), each consisting of three &quot;manipula&quot;, each of them of two centuries (a rather small company in modern terms), each consisting of between 60 and 160 men. Each century was led by a centurion (&quot;centurio&quot;, traditionally translated as captain), who was assisted by a number of junior officers, such as an &quot;optio&quot;. Centuries were further broken into ten &quot;contubernia&quot; of eight soldiers each. The &quot;manipula&quot; were commanded by one of their two centurions, the cohorts by one of their three &quot;manipulum&#x27;s&quot; centurions; the most senior cohort-commanding centurions was called &quot;primus pilus&quot;. The ranks of centurions in the individual cohorts were, in descending order, &quot;pilus prior&quot;, &quot;pilus posterior&quot;, &quot;princeps prior&quot;, &quot;princeps posterior&quot;, &quot;hastatus prior&quot;, and &quot;hastatus posterior&quot;. Individual soldiers were referred to as soldiers (&quot;milites&quot;) or legionaries (&quot;legionarii&quot;).

===Mongol===

See Mongol military tactics and organization.

=== Turk ===

There were no ranks in the modern sense of a hierarchy of titles, although the army was organized into a hierarchical command. The organization of the army was based on the decimal system, employed by Modun Chanyu. The army was built upon a squad of ten (&quot;aravt&quot;) led by an appointed chief. Ten of these would then compose a company of a hundred (&quot;zuut&quot;), also led by an appointed chief. The next unit was a regiment of a thousand (&quot;myangat&quot;) led by an appointed &quot;noyan&quot;. The largest organic unit was a ten thousand man unit (&quot;tumen&quot;) also led by an appointed &quot;noyan&quot;.

=== Persian ===
The army of ancient Persia consisted of manageable military groupings under the individual commands. Starting at the bottom, a unit of 10 was called a &quot;dathabam&quot; and was led by a &quot;dathapatis&quot;. A unit of 100 men was a &quot;satabam&quot; led by a &quot;satapatis&quot;. A unit of 1,000 was a &quot;hazarabam&quot; and was commanded by a &quot;hazarapatis&quot;. A unit of 10,000 was a &quot;baivarabam&quot; and was commanded by a &quot;baivarapatis&quot;. The Greeks called such masses of troops a &quot;myrias&quot; or &quot;myriad&quot;. Among mounted troops, an &quot;asabam&quot; was a cavalry unit led by an &quot;asapatis&quot;.

Historians have discovered the existence of the following ranks in Parthian and Sassanian armies:

* Commander-in-chief: &quot;Eran spahbod&quot; (to be replaced with four &quot;spahbods&quot;, one for each frontier of the empire during the reign of Khosrau I)
* Commander of the cavalry: &quot;Aspwargan salar&quot; (Parthian) or &quot;aswaran salar&quot; (Sassanian)
* Commander of the archers: &quot;Tirbodh&quot;
* Commander of the infantry: &quot;paygan salar&quot;
* Castellan: &quot;Argbadh&quot; or &quot;argbod&quot;
* Commander of a frontier march: &quot;Marzpawn&quot; (Parthian) or &quot;marzban&quot; (Sassanian)
* Marzban of Central Asian marches was called &quot;kanarang&quot;

== Post-classical ==
Post-classical militaries did not have a unified rank structure; while the feudal lords were in some ways equivalent to modern officers, they did not have a strict hierarchy—a king was conceived of as first among equals, not a monarch as later or ancient societies understood the concept, and all nobles were theoretically equals (hence &quot;peers&quot;). A nobleman was obligated to bring a set number of troops when asked by his liege-lord, a king or merely a higher-ranked noble who had obtained his service by the gift of land. The troops&#x27; lord retained at least nominal control over them—many post-classical military planning sessions involved negotiating each lord&#x27;s role in the coming battle—and each lord was allowed to leave after a predetermined amount of time had passed.

=== High command in post-classical armies ===
The command structure of armies was generally loose and varied considerably. Typically, the king and high-ranking lords would call out for all lords to gather their troops for a campaign. They would appoint a renowned noble to organize the assembling forces, the marshal. The term &quot;field marshal&quot; came from the marshal then leading the army on the march, and being in charge of organizing camps and logistics. Tactics for an upcoming battle were often decided by councils of war among the nobles leading the largest forces. Outside of campaigns, the high constable had authority over the local constables, and commanders of the garrisons of major castles. The high constable might have authority in the army due to his role of head of the regular cavalry.

=== Origins of modern ranks ===
As the European and Asian Middle Ages came to an end, the rank structure of post-classical armies became more formalized. The top officers were known as commissioned officers because their rank came from a royal commission. Army commissions were usually reserved for those of high stature—the aristocracy of mainland Europe and the aristocracy and gentry of Great Britain.

The basic unit of the post-classical army was the company, a band of soldiers assigned (or raised) by a vassal lord on behalf of &quot;his lord&quot; (in later times the king himself). The vassal lord in command of the company was a commissioned officer with the rank of captain. Captain was derived from the Late Latin word &quot;capitaneus&quot; (meaning &quot;head man&quot; or chief).

The commissioned officer assisting the captain with command of the company was the lieutenant. Lieutenant was derived from the French language; the &quot;lieu&quot; meaning &quot;place&quot; as in a position; and &quot;tenant&quot; meaning &quot;holding&quot; as in &quot;holding a position&quot;; thus a &quot;lieutenant&quot; is somebody who holds a position in the absence of their superior. When he was not assisting the captain, the lieutenant commanded a unit called a platoon, particularly a more specialized platoon. The word is derived from the 17th-century French &quot;peloton&quot;, meaning a small ball or small detachment of men, which came from &quot;pelote&quot;, a ball.

The commissioned officer carrying the (infantry) company&#x27;s flag was the ensign. The word &quot;ensign&quot; was derived from the Latin word &quot;insignia&quot;. In cavalry companies the equivalent rank was cornet. In English usage, these ranks were merged into the single rank of second lieutenant in the 19th century.

Not all officers received a commission from the king. Certain specialists were granted a warrant, certifying their expertise as craftsmen. These warrant officers assisted the commissioned officers but ranked above the non-commissioned officers (NCOs). They received their authority from superior officers rather than the king. The first NCOs were the armed servants (men-at-arms) of the aristocracy, assigned to command, organize and train the militia units raised for battle. After years of commanding a squad, an NCO could be promoted to sergeant, the highest NCO rank. While a sergeant might have commanded a squad upon promotion, he usually became a staff officer. While commissioned staff officers assisted their commander with personnel, intelligence, operations and logistics, the sergeant was a jack of all trades, concerning himself with all aspects of administration to maintain the enlisted men serving under his commander. Over time, sergeants were differentiated into many ranks as various levels of sergeants were used by the commanders of various levels of units.

A corporal commanded a squad. &quot;Squad&quot; derived from the Italian word for a &quot;square&quot; or &quot;block&quot; of soldiers. In fact, &quot;corporal&quot; was derived from the Italian &quot;caporal de squadra&quot; (head of the squad). Corporals were assisted by lancepesades. Lancepesades were veteran soldiers; &quot;lancepesade&quot; was derived from the Italian &quot;lancia spezzata&quot; meaning broken spear—the broken spear being a metaphor for combat experience, where such an occurrence was likely. The first lancepesades were simply experienced privates; who either assisted their corporal or performed the duties of a corporal themselves. It was this second function that made armies increasingly regard their lancepesades as a grade of corporal rather than a grade of private. As a result, the rank of lance corporal was derived from combining lancepesade and corporal.

As the post-classical came to an end, kings increasingly relied on professional soldiers to fill the bottom ranks of their armies instead of militiamen. Each of these professionals began their careers as a private. The private was a man who signed a private contract with the company commander, offering his services in return for pay. The money was raised through taxation; those yeomen (smallholding peasants) who did not fulfill their annual 40-day militia service paid a tax that funded professional soldiers recruited from the yeomanry. This money was handed to the company commanders from the royal treasury, with the company commanders using the money to recruit the troops.

=== Origins of higher ranks ===
As armies grew larger, composed of multiple companies, one captain was granted general (overall) authority over the field armies by the king. (National armies were the armies of the kings. Field armies were armies raised by the king to enter the battle field in preparation for major battles.) In French history, &quot;lieutenant du roi&quot; was a title borne by the officer sent with military powers to represent the king in certain provinces. A &quot;lieutenant du roi&quot; was sometimes known as a &quot;lieutenant général&quot; to distinguish him from lieutenants subordinate to mere captains. The sergeant acting as staff officer to the captain general was known as the sergeant major general. This was eventually shortened to major general, while captain general began to be addressed, depending on the military branch, as general of the infantry, general of the cavalry or general of the artillery, and these ones, over time, were shortened to simply general. This is the reason a major outranks a lieutenant, but a lieutenant general outranks a major general.

In modern times recruits attending basic training, also referred to as boot camp by some branches, are instructed in the hierarchical structure of military rank. Many new enlisted civilians find it difficult to understand the structure of general staff ranks as stated before, it becomes somewhat complicated to understand when applying basic rationale.

As armies grew bigger, heraldry and unit identification remained primarily a matter of the regiment. Brigades headed by brigadier generals were the units invented as a tactical unit by the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus II (&quot;Gustav II Adolf&quot;, who was killed at the battle of Lützen 1632). It was introduced to overcome the normal army structure, consisting of regiments. The so-called &quot;brigada&quot; was a mixed unit, comprising infantry, cavalry and normally artillery, designated for a special task. The size of such &quot;brigada&quot; was a reinforced company up to two regiments. The &quot;brigada&quot; was a 17th-century form of the modern &quot;task force&quot;. In some armies &quot;brigadier general&quot; has been shortened to &quot;brigadier&quot;.

Around the end of the 16th century, companies were grouped into regiments. The officers commissioned to lead these regiments were called &quot;colonels&quot; (column officers). They were first appointed in Spain by King Ferdinand II of Aragon where they were also known as &quot;coronellos&quot; (crown officers) since they were appointed by the Crown. Thus the English pronunciation of the word &quot;colonel&quot;.

The first colonels were captains granted command of their regiments by commission of the king. The lieutenants of the colonel were the lieutenant colonels. In the 17th century, the sergeant of the colonel was the sergeant major. These were field officers, third in command of their regiments (after their colonels and lieutenant colonels), with a role similar to the older, army-level sergeants major (although on a smaller scale). The older position became known as sergeant major general to distinguish it. Over time, the &quot;sergeant&quot; was dropped from both titles since both ranks were used for commissioned officers. This gave rise to the modern ranks of major and major general.

The full title of sergeant major fell out of use until the latter part of the 18th century, when it began to be applied to the senior non-commissioned officer of an infantry battalion or cavalry regiment.

Regiments were later split into battalions with a lieutenant colonel as a commanding officer and a major as an executive officer.

== Modern ==
Modern military services recognize three broad categories of personnel.
These are codified in the Geneva Conventions, which distinguish &quot;officers&quot;, &quot;non-commissioned officers&quot;, and &quot;enlisted men&quot;.

Apart from conscripted personnel one can distinguish:

=== Commissioned officers ===

Officers are distinguished from other military members (or an &quot;officer in training&quot;) by holding a commission; they are trained or training as leaders and hold command positions.

Officers are further generally separated into four levels:
* General, flag, or air officers
* Field or senior officers
* Company grade or junior officers
* Subordinate officer (naval cadet or officer cadet in the Canadian forces, for example)

==== General, flag, and air officers ====

Officers who typically command units or formations that are expected to operate independently for extended periods of time (i.e., brigades and larger, or flotillas or squadrons of ships), are referred to variously as general officers (in armies, marines, and some air forces), flag officers (in navies and coast guards), or air officers (in some Commonwealth air forces).

General-officer ranks typically include (from the most senior) general, lieutenant general, major general, and brigadier general, although there are many variations like division general or (air-, ground-) force general.

Flag-officer ranks, named after the traditional practice of showing the presence of such an officer with a flag on a ship and often land, typically include (from the most senior) admiral, vice admiral and rear admiral. In some navies, such as Canada&#x27;s, the rank of commodore is a flag rank.

In the United Kingdom and most other Commonwealth air forces, air-officer ranks usually include air chief marshal, air marshal, air vice-marshal and air commodore. For some air forces, however, such as those of Canada, United States and many other air forces, general officer rank titles are used. In the case of the United States Air Force, that service was once part of the U.S. Army and evolved as a separate service in 1947, carrying over its extant officer rank structure. Brazil and Argentina use a system of general officer ranks based on the term brigadier.

In some forces, there may be one or more superior ranks to the common examples, above, that are given distinguishing titles, such as field marshal (most armies of the world, notably excluding the United States) or general of the army (mainly the United States because &quot;marshal&quot; is used as a peace officer&#x27;s designation), fleet admiral (U.S. Navy), Marshal of the Royal Air Force, or other national air force. These ranks have often been discontinued, such as in Germany and Canada, or limited to wartime or honorific promotion, such as in the United Kingdom and the United States.

In various countries, particularly the United States, these may be referred to as &quot;star ranks&quot; for the number of stars worn on some rank insignia: typically one-star for brigadier general or equivalent with the addition of a star for each subsequent rank. In the United States, five stars has been the highest rank regularly attainable (excluding the marines and coast guard, which have traditionally served as branches of the navy in times of war and thus under the command of a fleet admiral). There also exists the specialty ranks of General of the Armies of the United States and Admiral of the Navy which at their inception were considered senior four star officers but came to be considered six-star rank after the creation of five star officers. To date only one officer has held a six star rank in his lifetime, John J. Pershing. George Washington was posthumously promoted to the post in 1976. Additionally, Admiral George Dewey was promoted to admiral of the navy but died well before statute made it senior to an admiral of the fleet upon the latter&#x27;s inception.

Some titles are not genuine ranks, but either functions assumed by generals or honorific titles. For instance, in the French Army &quot;général de corps d&#x27;armée&quot; is a function assumed by some &quot;généraux de division&quot;, and &quot;maréchal de France&quot;, which is a distinction denoting the most superior military office, but one that has often neutered the practical command powers of those on whom it is conferred. In the United States Navy, a commodore currently is a senior captain commanding a squadron, air group, or air wing that is too small for a rear admiral to command, although that name has historically been used as a rank. The title (not rank) of commodore can also indicate an officer who is senior to a ship&#x27;s captain (since only the ship&#x27;s commanding officer is addressed as captain while under way). Marine captains are sometimes referred to as major to distinguish themselves while shipboard, although this reference is not employed in the U.S. Navy or U.S. Marine Corps.

==== Field or senior officers ====

Field officers, also called &quot;field-grade officers&quot; or &quot;senior officers&quot;, are officers who typically command units that can be expected to operate independently for short periods of time (i.e., infantry battalions, cavalry or artillery regiments, warships, air squadrons). Field officers also commonly fill staff positions of superior commands.

The term &quot;field(-grade) officer&quot; is primarily used by armies and marines; air forces, navies and coast guards generally prefer the term &quot;senior officer.&quot; The two terms are not necessarily synonymous because the former is frequently used to describe any officer who holds a command position from a platoon to a theater.

Typical army and marine field officer ranks include colonel, lieutenant colonel, major and, in the British army, captains holding an adjutant&#x27;s or operations officer appointment. In many Commonwealth countries the field rank of brigadier is used, although it fills the position held by brigadier general in other countries. In the United States Army, warrant officers who hold the rank of CW3–CW4 are field grade officers; CW5s are senior field grade officers.

Naval and coast guard senior officer ranks include captain and commander. In some countries, the more senior rank of commodore is also included. In others lieutenant commanders, as equivalents to army and marine majors, are considered senior officers.

Commonwealth air force senior officer ranks include group captain, wing commander, and squadron leader, where such ranks are still used.

==== Company grade or junior officers ====

The ranks of junior officers are the three or four lowest ranks of officers. Units under their command are generally not expected to operate independently for any significant length of time. Company grade officers also fill staff roles in some units. In some militaries, however, a captain may act as the permanent commanding officer of an independent company-sized army unit, for example a signal or field engineer squadron, or a field artillery battery.

Typical army company officer ranks include captain and various grades of lieutenant. Typical naval and coast guard junior officer ranks include grades of lieutenant commander, lieutenant, lieutenant junior grade, sub-lieutenant and ensign. Commonwealth (excluding Canada) air force junior officer ranks usually include flight lieutenant, flying officer, and pilot officer.

==== Subordinate or student officer ====
Officers in training in the Canadian Armed Forces are either naval cadet for naval training or officer cadet for army or air force training.

In the US and several other western forces, officers in training are referred to as student officers, and carry the rank of cadet (army and air force) or midshipman (navy, and in some countries, marines). These officers may be serving at a military academy, or, as common in the United States, as members of a military training unit attached to a civilian college or university, such as an ROTC unit. This is due to a requirement that commissioned officers have at least a four-year collegiate undergraduate degree.

The British Army refers to its trainee officers as officer cadets, who rank as private soldiers at the start of their training, with no authority over other ranks (except when appointed to carry out a role as part of training). Officer cadets are addressed to as &quot;Mister&quot; or &quot;Miss&quot; until the completion of the early stages of their training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (at which point cadets &quot;pass out&quot; and formally gain their commissions), thereafter other ranks (non-officers) will address them as &quot;Sir&quot; or &quot;Ma&#x27;am&quot;.

While cadet has always been a rank of limited authority and prestige (cadets and US Navy midshipmen have no authority over commissioned personnel, warrants, or officers, only subordinate cadets), midshipman has historically been a rank with limited leadership responsibility, particularly in the Royal Navy (where cadets are commissioned at the start of their training, unlike their army counterparts). This tradition was continued by the US Navy after its original adoption of the rank, but now US Navy midshipmen are limited in the same manner as cadets in the other US services. Additionally, US Marine officers in training are also midshipmen, trained and educated alongside their naval counterparts, and wear distinctive insignia to indicate their branch of service.

US Coast Guard Academy students are referred to as &quot;cadets&quot;, while those attending the military branch&#x27;s officer candidate school are &quot;officer candidates&quot;.

In the US an alternative to spending four years as a cadet or midshipmen is for college graduates with a four-year degree to attend officer candidate school, an intensive twelve-week training course designed to convert college graduates into military officers. Each service has at least one, and usually several, officer candidate school facilities. Students at these programs are called officer candidates.

=== Warrant officers ===

Warrant officers (as receiving authority by virtue of a warrant) are a hybrid rank treated slightly differently in each country or service. Warrant officers may either be effectively senior non-commissioned officers or an entirely separate grade between commissioned and non-commissioned officers, usually held by specialist personnel.

In the United States, warrant officers are appointed by warrant then commissioned by the President of the United States at the rank of chief warrant officer. Warrant officers range from WO1–CW5. A warrant officer is not a chief warrant officer until they reach W2. CW3–CW4 are field grade officers. Warrant officers in the rank or grade of CW5 are senior field grade officers.

=== Enlisted personnel ===
Enlisted personnel are personnel below commissioned rank and make up the vast majority of military personnel. They are known by different names in different countries, such as other ranks (ORs) in the United Kingdom and some Commonwealth countries, and non-commissioned members (NCMs) in Canada.

==== Non-commissioned officers ====

Non-commissioned officers (NCOs) are enlisted personnel, under the command of an officer, granted delegated authority to supervise other military members or assigned significant administrative responsibilities. They are responsible for the care and direct control of junior military members, often functioning in the smaller field units as executive officers.

Even the most senior NCO officially ranks beneath the most junior commissioned officer or warrant officer. However, most senior NCOs have more experience, possibly including combat, than junior officers. In many armies, because junior officers have a great amount of responsibility and authority but little operational experience, they are paired with senior NCO advisers. In some organizations, senior NCOs may have formal responsibility and informal respect beyond that of junior officers, but less than that of warrant officers. Many warrant officers come from the ranks of mid-career NCOs. In some countries warrant ranks replace senior enlisted ranks.

NCO ranks typically include a varying number of grades of sergeant and corporal (air force, army and marines), or chief petty officer and petty officer (navy and coast guard). In many navies the term &#x27;rating&#x27; is used to designate specialty, while &quot;rank&quot; denotes pay grade.

In some countries warrant officers come under the non-commissioned officer branch (senior non-commissioned officiers).

==== Other enlisted ====
Personnel with no command authority usually bear titles such as private, airman or aircraftman, or seaman (starting with seaman recruit in the United States Navy and Coast Guard). In the United States Marine Corps individuals of all ranks regardless of command status may be referred to as &quot;marine&quot;. In the United States Air Force individuals of all ranks regardless of command status may be referred to as &quot;airman&quot;. Shortly after the Sailor&#x27;s Creed was formally instituted, Secretary of the Navy John Dalton directed that the word &quot;sailor&quot; should be capitalized when referring to any uniformed member of the Navy. In some countries and services, personnel in different branches have different titles. These may have a variety of grades, such as private first class, but these usually only reflect variations in pay, not increased authority. These may or may not technically be ranks, depending on the country or service. Each rank gives the individual an indication of how long and how well they have served in combat and training.

== Appointment ==
Appointment is the instrument by virtue of which the person exercises their authority. Officers are appointed by a royal commission in most monarchies or a presidential commission in many other countries. In the Commonwealth, warrant officers hold a royal or presidential warrant. In the United States, officers are appointed by the president, with the advice and consent of the United States Senate. Most officers are approved &quot;en bloc&quot; by voice vote, but flag officers are usually required to appear before the Armed Services Committee and answer questions to the satisfaction of its members, prior to a vote on their commission.

NCOs are appointed by an instrument of appointment, a written document, often a certificate, usually from the service head. Entry into service is often referred to as enlistment throughout the English-speaking world, even in countries where soldiers do not technically enlist.

Sometimes personnel serve in an appointment which is higher than their actual rank. For instance, commodore used to be an appointment of captain in the Royal Navy and lance corporal used to be an appointment of private in the British Army.

== Types of rank ==
There are a number of different forms of rank; from highest to lowest degree, they are:
* &quot;Substantive&quot; or &quot;permanent&quot;: the fully paid and confirmed rank, with eligibility for the corresponding pension and benefits
**&quot;Retired&quot; or &quot;retained&quot;: usually granted to those officers of the rank of &quot;lieutenant&quot; in the navy, or &quot;captain&quot; in the army, or above, and enlisted, who have reached the end of their service obligation and have not been dishonorably discharged or dismissed from the service. A retired rank is usually kept for life, if the officer concerned so wishes. In the Commonwealth of Nations, such an officer will also hold the style of Esquire, if they do not hold a higher title. In the United Kingdom, an officer of the regular service placed on the retired list or on the reserve will be shown in his/her substantive rank. An officer of the rank of lieutenant, captain, flight lieutenant or above leaving the reserve, or having no reserve liability is permitted to use their rank a courtesy title if they have completed 3 years service in the active list.
** &quot;Veterans&quot; rank is different in each country. Members of the United States military maintain their highest rank after discharge or retirement. 10 U.S. Code § 772(e) states: A person not on active duty who served honorably in time of war in the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps may bear the title and wear the uniform of the highest grade held by him during that war. After a war, regular serving members of the military holding war substantive or temporary rank often revert to their former, substantive rank and all others often end their service. However, the holder may be granted permission to permanently &quot;retain&quot; the rank they held when the conflict ended.
* &quot;Temporary&quot;: usually granted for a specific task or mission. The holder holds the rank while occupying that position. Despite the name, temporary rank may be held for a considerable period of time, perhaps even years. In wartime, temporary ranks are often common. In the United Kingdom, the rank of brigadier was long considered a temporary rank; while its holder was addressed as &quot;brigadier,&quot; he would retain the substantive rank of colonel or lieutenant-colonel if not selected for promotion to general officer rank. Sub-classes of temporary rank (from highest to lowest) include:
**&quot;War substantive&quot;: a temporarily confirmed rank only held for the duration of that war, though war substantive rank may be treated as substantive when considering the holder&#x27;s eligibility for subsequent promotions and appointments.
** &quot;Acting&quot; is where the holder assumes the pay and allowances appropriate to the acting rank, but a higher commanding officer may revert the holder to previous rank held. This is normally for a short period of time while the permanent occupant of the office is absent. During wartime, acting ranks are frequently held on an emergency basis, while peacetime holders of acting ranks are often those who must hold their permanent rank for a sufficient period before being confirmed in their new higher rank.
** &quot;Brevet&quot;: an honorary promoted rank, without the full official authority or pay appropriate to the rank.
** &quot;Local&quot; or &quot;theater&quot;: a form of temporary rank restricted to a specific location instead of a specific duty.
*Honorary: Often granted on retirement, or in certain special cases to honour a deserving civilian. Generally, honorary rank is treated as if it were substantive, but usually does not grant a corresponding wage or pension (increase). Certain members of the British royal family that serve in the military have honorary ranks in other services, but retain their original rank. Prince Harry, the Duke of Sussex, is a major in the British Army, but has an honorary rank of lieutenant commander in the Royal Navy, and squadron leader in the Royal Air Force.

== Size of command ==

=== Rank and unit size ===

To get a sense of the practical meaning of these ranks—and thus to be able to compare them across the different armed services, different nations, and the variations of titles and insignia—an understanding of the relative levels and sizes of each command is helpful. The ranking and command system used by U.S. Marine ground forces or U.S. Army infantry units can serve as a template for this purpose. Different countries will often use their own systems that do not match the presentation here.

Under this system, starting from the bottom and working up, a corporal leads a fireteam consisting of three other individuals. A sergeant leads a squad consisting of three fireteams. As a result, a full squad numbers 13 individuals. Squads usually have numbered designations (e.g., 1st Squad).

Generally, in most armies and marine units, a lieutenant or equivalent rank leads a platoon, which can consist of three or four squads. For example, in U.S. Marine infantry units, rifle platoons usually consist of three rifle squads of 13 men each, with a Navy corpsman, the platoon leader, and a platoon sergeant (i.e., a staff sergeant who serves as second-in-command). An infantry platoon can number from 42 to 55 individuals, depending on the service. Platoons are usually numbered (e.g., 1st Platoon) or named after their primary function (e.g., service platoon).

A captain or equivalent rank commands a company, usually consisting of four platoons (three line platoons and one heavy weapons platoon). His headquarters can include a first sergeant and as many as seven others. As such, a company can comprise from roughly 175 to 225 individuals. Equivalent units also commanded by captains are batteries (for field artillery units) and detachments. In English speaking countries, a company (or troop in the cavalry, and battery in the artillery) is usually designated by a letter (e.g., &quot;A Company&quot;). In non-English speaking countries, they are usually numbered. In most Commonwealth armies a company is commanded by a major, assisted by a captain.

A lieutenant colonel or equivalent rank commands a battalion or a squadron, often consisting of four companies, plus the various members of his headquarters. A battalion is around 500–1,500 men and usually consists of between two and six companies.

A colonel or equivalent commands a regiment or group, often consisting of two or more battalions (for an infantry unit) or five to six air groups (for a wing). Battalions and regiments are usually numbered, either as a separate battalion or as part of a regimental structure (e.g., 1-501st Infantry in the US Army).

The next level has been a brigade, commanded by a brigadier general, and containing two or more regiments or three to eight battalions. In the U.S. Army, a brigade is roughly equal to or a little larger than a regiment, consisting of three to seven battalions. Strength typically ranges from 1,500 to 3,500 personnel. In the U.S. Marines, brigades are only formed for certain missions. In size and nature they are larger and more varied collections of battalions than is common for a regiment, fitting them for their traditional role as the smallest formation able to operate independently on a battlefield without external logistical tactical support. Brigades are usually numbered (e.g., 2nd Brigade).

The level above regiment and brigade is the division, commanded by a major general and consisting of from 10,000 to 20,000 persons. The 1st Marine Division, for example, is made up of four marine regiments (of the type described above), one assault amphibian battalion, one reconnaissance battalion, two light armored reconnaissance battalions, one combat engineer battalion, one tank battalion, and one headquarters battalion—totalling more than 19,000 marines. (Within the headquarters battalion are one headquarters company, one service company, one military police company, one communications company, and one truck company.) An equivalent elsewhere within the same marine expeditionary force (MEF) might be an MEF logistics group (MLG), which is not a regimental-sized unit (as the word &quot;group&quot; implies), but rather a large support unit consisting of several battalions of support personnel. Divisions are normally numbered, but can be named after a function or personage.

The command sizes for any given rank will vary widely. Not all units are as troop intensive as infantry forces need to be. Tank and artillery crews, for example, involve far fewer personnel. Numbers also differ for non-combat units such as quartermasters, cooks, and hospital staff. Beyond this, in any real situation, not all units will be at full strength and there will be various attachments and detachments of assorted specialists woven throughout the system.

In the U.S. Army, the level above division is a corps. It is commanded by a lieutenant general. In many armies, a corps numbers around 60,000, usually divided into three divisions. Corps (and similar organizations) are normally designated with Roman numerals and their nationality when operating in a combined (international) force—e.g., V (US) Corps, VIII (ROK) Corps, II MEF, I Canadian Corps.

During World War II, due to the large scale of combat, multiple corps were combined into field armies commanded in theory by a general (four stars), but often by a lieutenant general (three stars), and comprising as many as 240,000 troops. Armies are numbered by spelled-out numerals or functional titles, using their nationality in &quot;combined&quot; forces (e.g., Eighth United States Army, Third ROK Army, British Army of the Rhine). These were in their turn formed into army groups, these being the largest field organization handled by a single commander in modern warfare. Army groups included between 400,000 and 1,500,000 troops. Army groups received Arabic numeral designations and national designations when combined- e.g. 21st Army Group.

=== Military ranks and insignia of various nations ===
== See also ==
* List of comparative military ranks
* Ranks of nobility and peerage
* UK and US military ranks compared
* Shoulder mark

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* &quot;Oxford Classical Dictionary&quot;, 2nd edition, 1996: &quot;strategoi.&quot;
* Warry, John Gibson (1980). &quot;Warfare in the classical world: an illustrated encyclopedia of weapons, warriors, and warfare in the ancient civilisations of Greece and Rome&quot;. New York, St. Martin&#x27;s Press.
== External links ==
* United States Military Rank Insignia, Background, &amp; Description
* Glossary of Ancient Greek Military Terms
* US Military Ranks, Ratings, and Grades by Branch (with insignia)
* Military rank
* US Military ranks and rank insignia
* British Army ranks and responsibilities
* Military ranks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56019" start="0" end="14" title="Military rank" label="Military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="31" end="43" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="65" end="77" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="79" end="85" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="87" end="108" title="Intelligence agency" label="intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="290" end="299" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q729832" start="304" end="318" title="Professional responsibility" label="responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="393" end="398" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="431" end="447" title="Command hierarchy" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="729" end="738" title="countries" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q526719" start="740" end="747" title="Ranking system" label="Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="824" end="842" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="1285" end="1301" title="Communist state" label="Communist states"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1368" end="1374" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="1375" end="1383" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1399" end="1406" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="1407" end="1436" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27779816" start="1456" end="1483" title="Albanian People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Albanian People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="1582" end="1601" title="command and control" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1650" end="1659" title="Athenians" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="1714" end="1723" title="strategos" label="strategos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1821" end="1830" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="1919" end="1926" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q947374" start="1995" end="2004" title="polemarch" label="polemarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q31900" start="3395" end="3413" title="Battle of Marathon" label="Battle of Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960960" start="3699" end="3708" title="taxiarhos" label="taxiarhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="3745" end="3754" title="brigadier" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="3759" end="3765" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040430" start="3840" end="3855" title="syntagmatarchis" label="syntagmatarchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="3908" end="3916" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="3978" end="3985" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675294" start="4011" end="4023" title="tagmatarches" label="tagmatarches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="4095" end="4104" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="4152" end="4159" title="legatus" label="legatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="4171" end="4183" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38228" start="4204" end="4212" title="lokhagos" label="lokhagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="4354" end="4361" title="company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="4371" end="4378" title="Captain (OF-2)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382945" start="4495" end="4506" title="epihipparch" label="epihipparch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971328" start="4583" end="4591" title="Hipparchos (cavalry officer)" label="hipparch"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="4959" end="4966" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="5045" end="5051" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="5061" end="5066" title="Navy" label="naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="5172" end="5179" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770133" start="5232" end="5241" title="trierarch" label="trierarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="5285" end="5292" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q185878" start="5783" end="5804" title="navarch" label="&amp;quot;nauarchos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="5835" end="5842" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="5862" end="5869" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="5878" end="5898" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="5903" end="5922" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="6091" end="6100" title="phalanx formation" label="phalanxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340305" start="6114" end="6125" title="phalangites" label="phalangites"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="7697" end="7709" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="7732" end="7738" title="Gaius Marius" label="Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298" start="8065" end="8073" title="Vegetius" label="Vegetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="8078" end="8084" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="8124" end="8128" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="8256" end="8264" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55375123" start="8300" end="8304" title="King of Rome" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q427972" start="8333" end="8345" title="rex sacrorum" label="rex sacrorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="8466" end="8472" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="8495" end="8503" title="praetors" label="praetors"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="8538" end="8546" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="8554" end="8564" title="Proconsuls" label="Proconsuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="8788" end="8794" title="legatus" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="8890" end="8904" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="9025" end="9037" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190123" start="9178" end="9186" title="Roman governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="9368" end="9384" title="general officers" label="general officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="9446" end="9462" title="military tribune" label="military tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="9526" end="9536" title="Equestrian (Roman)" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="9732" end="9741" title="Division (military)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="9768" end="9785" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q612499" start="9797" end="9816" title="tribunus laticlavius" label="laticlavian tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="10048" end="10053" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="10055" end="10073" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="10075" end="10082" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="10302" end="10315" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="10329" end="10337" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="10374" end="10383" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="10461" end="10468" title="tribune" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107431" start="10759" end="10779" title="Praefectus Castrorum" label="praefectus castrorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="11031" end="11050" title="Warrant officer" label="similar distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q202167" start="11291" end="11298" title="Cohort (military unit)" label="cohorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="11345" end="11354" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="11489" end="11496" title="company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="11584" end="11593" title="centurion" label="centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="11645" end="11652" title="Captain (OF-2)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299234" start="12436" end="12476" title="Mongol military tactics and organization" label="Mongol military tactics and organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q382816" start="12694" end="12706" title="Modun Chanyu" label="Modun Chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q946868" start="13065" end="13070" title="Tumen (unit)" label="tumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q301102" start="13109" end="13114" title="noyan" label="noyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="13159" end="13165" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="13749" end="13756" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="13862" end="13869" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735480" start="13875" end="13884" title="Sassanid army" label="Sassanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064908" start="13922" end="13934" title="Spahbod" label="Eran spahbod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064908" start="13973" end="13980" title="spahbod" label="spahbod"/>
<link wikidata="Q207381" start="14045" end="14054" title="Khosrau I" label="Khosrau I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="14075" end="14082" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="14231" end="14239" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505781" start="14268" end="14277" title="Castellan" label="Castellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q684131" start="14285" end="14292" title="Argbadh" label="Argbadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q684131" start="14308" end="14314" title="Argbadh" label="argbod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906548" start="14395" end="14402" title="marzban" label="marzban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906548" start="14423" end="14430" title="Marzban" label="Marzban"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="14434" end="14446" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="14585" end="14591" title="Feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="14711" end="14729" title="Primus inter pares" label="first among equals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="14737" end="14744" title="Monarchy" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="14853" end="14858" title="Peerage" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="15025" end="15041" title="Fief" label="the gift of land"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="15443" end="15447" title="Monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837" start="15614" end="15621" title="marshal" label="marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="15638" end="15651" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574878" start="15824" end="15839" title="Council of war" label="councils of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q165654" start="15916" end="15925" title="constable" label="constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="16303" end="16324" title="commissioned officers" label="commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="16443" end="16454" title="aristocrat" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="16498" end="16504" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="16574" end="16581" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="16635" end="16639" title="lord" label="lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="16795" end="16802" title="Captain (OF-2)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="16833" end="16843" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="16905" end="16910" title="tribal chief" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="16997" end="17007" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17041" end="17056" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="17389" end="17396" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="17680" end="17686" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q694613" start="17815" end="17821" title="cornet (rank)" label="cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="17889" end="17906" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="18074" end="18090" title="warrant officers" label="warrant officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889457" start="18296" end="18307" title="men-at-arms" label="men-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="18469" end="18477" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207063" start="19032" end="19037" title="squad" label="squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="19284" end="19295" title="lancepesade" label="lancepesade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="19836" end="19850" title="lance corporal" label="lance corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="20111" end="20118" title="Private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="20294" end="20306" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="21129" end="21147" title="lieutenant général" label="lieutenant général"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453414" start="21297" end="21319" title="sergeant major general" label="sergeant major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="21354" end="21367" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="21375" end="21390" title="captain general" label="captain general"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="21431" end="21446" title="military branch" label="military branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261962" start="21451" end="21474" title="general of the infantry" label="general of the infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624074" start="21476" end="21498" title="general of the cavalry" label="general of the cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261874" start="21502" end="21526" title="general of the artillery" label="general of the artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="21580" end="21587" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="21610" end="21615" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="22147" end="22154" title="Brigade" label="Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="22166" end="22184" title="brigadier generals" label="brigadier generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="22248" end="22268" title="Gustavus Adolphus II" label="Gustavus Adolphus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="22521" end="22530" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="22805" end="22814" title="brigadier" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="22966" end="22974" title="colonels" label="colonels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="23043" end="23065" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="23376" end="23394" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="23454" end="23468" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453414" start="23708" end="23730" title="sergeant major general" label="sergeant major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="24171" end="24180" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="24213" end="24231" title="commanding officer" label="commanding officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="24250" end="24267" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="24381" end="24399" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="24522" end="24533" title="conscription" label="conscripted"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="24597" end="24605" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="Officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60918" start="24705" end="24715" title="Commission (document)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156796" start="24907" end="24920" title="Company-grade officer" label="Company grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="24963" end="24974" title="naval cadet" label="naval cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="24978" end="24991" title="officer cadet" label="officer cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="25113" end="25122" title="formation (military)" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="25203" end="25210" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q549276" start="25227" end="25235" title="flotilla" label="flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="25240" end="25249" title="Squadron (naval)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="25290" end="25305" title="general officer" label="general officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q977459" start="25350" end="25362" title="flag officer" label="flag officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="25397" end="25408" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="25419" end="25431" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="25509" end="25516" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="25518" end="25536" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="25538" end="25551" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="25557" end="25574" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="25847" end="25854" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="25856" end="25868" title="vice admiral" label="vice admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="25873" end="25885" title="rear admiral" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="25911" end="25924" title="Canadian Forces Maritime Command" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="25938" end="25947" title="Commodore (rank)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q977459" start="25953" end="25962" title="flag rank" label="flag rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="25972" end="25986" title="Royal Air Force" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="26002" end="26014" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="26027" end="26038" title="air officer" label="air-officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828191" start="26061" end="26078" title="air chief marshal" label="air chief marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="26080" end="26091" title="air marshal" label="air marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106078" start="26093" end="26109" title="air vice-marshal" label="air vice-marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="26114" end="26127" title="air commodore" label="air commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="26176" end="26182" title="RCAF" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="26184" end="26197" title="United States Air Force" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="26282" end="26305" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26470" end="26529" title="Brigadier#Officer rank in Latin America" label="system of general officer ranks based on the term brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="26665" end="26678" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842486" start="26868" end="26881" title="fleet admiral" label="fleet admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="26883" end="26892" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452755" start="26895" end="26925" title="Marshal of the Royal Air Force" label="Marshal of the Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q888238" start="27490" end="27497" title="United States Marine Corps rank insignia" label="marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="27502" end="27513" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="coast guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100539" start="27676" end="27718" title="General of the Armies of the United States" label="General of the Armies of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q359150" start="27723" end="27742" title="Admiral of the Navy" label="Admiral of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532605" start="27836" end="27849" title="six-star rank" label="six-star rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="27959" end="27975" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="27977" end="27994" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="28056" end="28076" title="George Dewey" label="Admiral George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="28337" end="28348" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q122212771" start="28355" end="28384" title="général de corps d&amp;#x27;armée" label="général de corps d&amp;#x27;armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="28427" end="28447" title="Major General" label="généraux de division"/>
<link wikidata="Q474485" start="28465" end="28483" title="Marshal of France" label="maréchal de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="28660" end="28678" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="28682" end="28691" title="Commodore (USN)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="28714" end="28721" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="28735" end="28743" title="Squadron (naval)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="28792" end="28804" title="rear admiral" label="rear admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053745" start="29275" end="29288" title="Field officer" label="Field officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="29551" end="29564" title="Squadron (aviation)" label="air squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="29970" end="29977" title="theater (warfare)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="30032" end="30039" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="30041" end="30059" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="30061" end="30066" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="30113" end="30121" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41685" start="30213" end="30222" title="brigadier" label="brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="30498" end="30505" title="Captain (Navy)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30510" end="30519" title="Commander#Commander as a naval and air force rank" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="30564" end="30573" title="Commodore (rank)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q837582" start="30602" end="30622" title="lieutenant commander" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="30752" end="30765" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="30767" end="30781" title="wing commander" label="wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="30787" end="30802" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="31298" end="31306" title="Squadron (cavalry)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="31382" end="31389" title="Captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="31412" end="31422" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q837582" start="31493" end="31513" title="lieutenant commander" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31515" end="31525" title="Lieutenant (Navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="31527" end="31550" title="lieutenant junior grade" label="lieutenant junior grade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31552" end="31566" title="Sub-lieutenant#Naval rank)" label="sub-lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="31571" end="31577" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="31658" end="31675" title="flight lieutenant" label="flight lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="31677" end="31691" title="flying officer" label="flying officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="31697" end="31710" title="pilot officer" label="pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="31815" end="31826" title="naval cadet" label="naval cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="31849" end="31862" title="officer cadet" label="officer cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="32020" end="32025" title="cadet" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="32050" end="32060" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="32136" end="32152" title="military academy" label="military academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="32286" end="32290" title="ROTC" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="32781" end="32813" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="33772" end="33794" title="US Coast Guard Academy" label="US Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12622609" start="33892" end="33916" title="officer candidate school" label="officer candidate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q329741" start="34342" end="34359" title="officer candidate" label="officer candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="34389" end="34404" title="Warrant officer" label="Warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="34579" end="34603" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840830" start="34748" end="34764" title="Warrant officer (United States)" label="warrant officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108620" start="35307" end="35318" title="Other ranks (UK)" label="other ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314178" start="35384" end="35408" title="non-commissioned members" label="non-commissioned members"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="35465" end="35489" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="Non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="35805" end="35822" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="36542" end="36550" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="36555" end="36563" title="corporal" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q461167" start="36598" end="36617" title="chief petty officer" label="chief petty officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q322749" start="36622" end="36635" title="petty officer" label="petty officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="36987" end="36994" title="Private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q408832" start="36996" end="37002" title="airman" label="airman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698576" start="37006" end="37017" title="aircraftman" label="aircraftman"/>
<link wikidata="Q707995" start="37022" end="37028" title="Seaman (rank)" label="seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q99438637" start="37044" end="37058" title="seaman recruit" label="seaman recruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352637" start="37704" end="37723" title="private first class" label="private first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="38131" end="38141" title="Letters patent" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="38389" end="38409" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147134" start="38461" end="38471" title="voice vote" label="voice vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q508577" start="38533" end="38557" title="United States Senate Committee on Armed Services" label="Armed Services Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257199" start="39029" end="39038" title="Commodore (RN)" label="commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036514" start="39068" end="39075" title="captain (Royal Navy)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="39083" end="39093" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="39098" end="39112" title="lance corporal" label="lance corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="39157" end="39169" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="39690" end="39713" title="dishonorably discharged" label="dishonorably discharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="39829" end="39852" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q286449" start="39898" end="39905" title="Esquire" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="39950" end="39964" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="40247" end="40261" title="courtesy title" label="courtesy title"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="40330" end="40337" title="Veteran" label="Veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676842" start="41876" end="41882" title="Acting rank" label="Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="42392" end="42398" title="Brevet (military)" label="Brevet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42634" end="42642" title="Titular and honorary rank#Honorary rank" label="Honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="42890" end="42910" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q152316" start="43009" end="43021" title="Prince Harry" label="Prince Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="43061" end="43073" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832151" start="43103" end="43123" title="Lieutenant commander (Royal Navy)" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="43131" end="43141" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="43170" end="43185" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="43545" end="43556" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="43574" end="43583" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="43584" end="43592" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q506246" start="43815" end="43823" title="fireteam" label="fireteam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207063" start="43882" end="43887" title="squad" label="squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="44115" end="44122" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="44195" end="44203" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034117" start="44292" end="44300" title="corpsman" label="corpsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337825" start="44354" end="44368" title="staff sergeant" label="staff sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="44641" end="44648" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711404" start="44770" end="44784" title="first sergeant" label="first sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080137" start="45031" end="45036" title="troop" label="troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="45057" end="45064" title="Artillery battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="45348" end="45357" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="45363" end="45371" title="Squadron (army)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="45582" end="45590" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="45594" end="45599" title="Group (air force)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="45890" end="45897" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="46007" end="46016" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="46613" end="46621" title="Division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="47122" end="47137" title="military police" label="military police"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="47681" end="47685" title="Tank" label="Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="47690" end="47699" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q975834" start="47798" end="47811" title="quartermaster" label="quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="48072" end="48077" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q51977" start="48510" end="48522" title="Field army" label="field armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q163098" start="48789" end="48814" title="Eighth United States Army" label="Eighth United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="48832" end="48857" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208109" start="48897" end="48907" title="army group" label="army group"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="49156" end="49171" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="49246" end="49280" title="List of comparative military ranks" label="List of comparative military ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q355567" start="49283" end="49312" title="Ranks of nobility and peerage" label="Ranks of nobility and peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428051" start="49315" end="49348" title="United Kingdom and United States military ranks compared" label="UK and US military ranks compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q10423740" start="49351" end="49364" title="Shoulder mark" label="Shoulder mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q430486" start="49426" end="49453" title="Oxford Classical Dictionary" label="Oxford Classical Dictionary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150238" wikidata="Q3047169" url="?curid=150238" title="Ed Emshwiller">
<text>Edmund Alexander Emshwiller (February 16, 1925 – July 27, 1990) was an American visual artist notable for his science fiction illustrations and his pioneering experimental films. He usually signed his illustrations as Emsh but sometimes used Ed Emsh, Ed Emsler, Willer and others.

== Background and early career ==
Born February 16, 1925, in Lansing, Michigan, He graduated from the University of Michigan in 1947, and then studied at École des Beaux Arts (1949–1950) in Paris with his wife, novelist Carol Emshwiller (née Fries), whom he married on August 30, 1949. He also studied at the Art Students League of New York (1950–1951).

== Illustrator ==
From 1951 to 1979, while living in Levittown, New York, Emshwiller created covers and interior illustrations for dozens of science fiction paperbacks and magazines, notably &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot; and &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;. He debuted in the pulp magazines with about 50 interior illustrations and four cover paintings for the May to December 1951 issues of &quot;Galaxy&quot;, a monthly edited by H. L. Gold. In that year or 1952 he also did his first book cover for the U.S. paperback edition of &quot;Odd John&quot; (Galaxy Publishing Corp.) Because he experimented with a diversity of techniques, there is no typical Emsh cover. His painterly treatment for the August 1951 cover of &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot; prefigures later work by Leo and Diane Dillon.

== Film and video ==
&quot;Thanatopsis&quot; (1962), featuring brother Mac Emshwiller and sharing the title with William Cullen Bryant&#x27;s 1817 poem, was his first five-minute film. In 1964, a Ford Foundation grant allowed Emshwiller to pursue his interest in film. Active in the New American Cinema movement of the 1960s and early 1970s, he created multimedia performance pieces and did cine-dance and experimental films, such as the 38-minute &quot;Relativity&quot; (1966). He also was a cinematographer on documentaries, such as Emile de Antonio&#x27;s &quot;Painters Painting&quot; (1972), and feature films, such as &quot;Time of the Heathen&quot; (1962) and Adolfas Mekas&#x27; &quot;Hallelujah the Hills&quot; (1963). Emshwiller&#x27;s footage of Bob Dylan singing &quot;Only a Pawn in Their Game&quot; on July 6, 1963, at a Voters&#x27; Registration Rally in Greenwood, Mississippi, was shot for Jack Willis&#x27; 1963 documentary &quot;The Streets of Greenwood&quot; and appears in D. A. Pennebaker&#x27;s Dylan documentary, &quot;Dont Look Back&quot; (1967). For the US Information Agency, he directed &quot;Faces of America&quot; (1965) and &quot;The 21st Century: The Shape of Films to Come&quot; (1968), a film that presents examples of films shown at Expo &#x27;67 that feature startling new visual effects and innovations. &quot;Filme with Three Dancers&quot; was made in 1970.

His films of the 1960s were mostly shot in 16mm color, and some of these included double exposures created simply by rewinding the cameras. He was one of the earliest video artists. With &quot;Scape-Mates&quot; (1972), he began his experiments in video, combining computer animation with live-action. In 1979, he produced &quot;Sunstone&quot;, a groundbreaking three-minute 3-D computer-generated video made at the New York Institute of Technology with Alvy Ray Smith. Now in the Museum of Modern Art&#x27;s video collection, &quot;Sunstone&quot; was exhibited at SIGGRAPH 79, the 1981 Mill Valley Film Festival and other festivals. In 1979, it was shown on WNET&#x27;s &quot;Video/Film Review&quot;, and a &quot;Sunstone&quot; frame was used on the front cover of &quot;Fundamentals of Interactive Computer Graphics&quot;, published in 1982 by Addison-Wesley.

== CalArts ==
After a period as artist-in-residence at the Television Laboratory WNET/13 (New York), where he worked on the effects for &quot;The Lathe of Heaven&quot; among other projects, he moved to California, where he was the founder of the CalArts Computer Animation Lab and served as provost and dean of the School of Film/Video at the California Institute of Arts from 1979 to 1990. He also served as provost from 1981 through 1986. In 1987, he created his electronic video opera &quot;Hunger&quot; for the 1987 Los Angeles Arts Festival, in partnership with composer Morton Subotnick. It was his last completed work, also presented in October 1989 at the Ars Electronica Festival in Linz, Austria.

== Influences ==
Among Enshwiller&#x27;s neighbors in Levittown was Bill Griffith, later acclaimed for his &quot;Zippy&quot; syndicated comic strip. Griffith&#x27;s parents sometimes posed as models for Emshwiller&#x27;s illustrations. Griffith, who credited Emshwiller as an influence on his becoming an artist, was painted by Emshwiller into the front cover of &quot;Original Science Fiction&quot; (September 1957). Griffith commented, &quot;He didn&#x27;t point me to cartooning, but he pointed me into art in general and showed me a way of understanding how within one artist, there could exist this pop culture impulse and a fine art impulse.&quot;

== Archives and awards ==
Emshwiller won one of the inaugural Hugo Awards in 1953, as the previous year&#x27;s best &quot;Cover Artist&quot; (a tie with Hannes Bok). Cover artists and interior illustrators were not thereafter distinguished by the Hugo Award for Best Artist under various names; he won four more during the 1960s under the current &quot;Professional Artist&quot; distinction. On June 16, 2007, he became the third artist inducted by the Science Fiction Hall of Fame. His paintings of aliens were displayed in the &quot;Alien Encounters&quot; exhibition of the Science Fiction Museum, which houses the hall of fame, at that time (September 10, 2006, to October 30, 2007).

His papers are archived at the California Institute of Arts.

== Personal life ==
Carol and Ed Emshwiller had three children—Eve Emshwiller, screenwriter Susan Emshwiller (&quot;Pollock&quot;) and actor-novelist Stoney Peter Emshwiller (&quot;The Host&quot;, &quot;Short Blade&quot;). Family members, including his brother Maclellan Emshwiller, often served as models in his illustrations. Carol and Eve Emshwiller can be seen on a &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot; cover (January 1957).

Emshwiller died of cancer on July 27, 1990, in Santa Clarita, California, where he was cremated.

== Books ==
* Ortiz, Luis, Ed Emshwiller, Carol Emshwiller, and Alex Eisenstein. &quot;Emshwiller: Infinity x Two: The Art &amp; Life of Ed &amp; Carol Emshwiller&quot;. New York: Nonstop Press, 2007. .

==See also==

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
== External links ==

* Emsh and Coye
* Biography at &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot;
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3047169" start="0" end="27" title="Ed Emshwiller" label="Edmund Alexander Emshwiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="71" end="79" title="American people" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="80" end="93" title="visual artist" label="visual artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="110" end="125" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047169" start="218" end="222" title="Ed Emshwiller" label="Emsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047169" start="242" end="249" title="Ed Emshwiller" label="Ed Emsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047169" start="251" end="260" title="Ed Emshwiller" label="Ed Emsler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047169" start="262" end="268" title="Ed Emshwiller" label="Willer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="343" end="360" title="Lansing, Michigan" label="Lansing, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="384" end="406" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056289" start="436" end="456" title="École des Beaux Arts" label="École des Beaux Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="472" end="477" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939834" start="502" end="518" title="Carol Emshwiller" label="Carol Emshwiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="591" end="622" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452134" start="690" end="709" title="Levittown, New York" label="Levittown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="834" end="856" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="873" end="918" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="944" end="958" title="pulp magazines" label="pulp magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627887" start="1100" end="1110" title="H. L. Gold" label="H. L. Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077400" start="1206" end="1214" title="Odd John" label="Odd John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112878" start="1448" end="1468" title="Leo and Diane Dillon" label="Leo and Diane Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q454840" start="1584" end="1605" title="William Cullen Bryant" label="William Cullen Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="1667" end="1682" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337229" start="2006" end="2022" title="Emile de Antonio" label="Emile de Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889029" start="2036" end="2053" title="Painters Painting" label="Painters Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q364959" start="2138" end="2151" title="Adolfas Mekas" label="Adolfas Mekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="2228" end="2237" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036627" start="2252" end="2277" title="Only a Pawn in Their Game" label="Only a Pawn in Their Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q986376" start="2341" end="2363" title="Greenwood, Mississippi" label="Greenwood, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115810" start="2419" end="2443" title="Jack Willis" label="The Streets of Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q225852" start="2465" end="2481" title="D. A. Pennebaker" label="D. A. Pennebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242182" start="2514" end="2528" title="Dont Look Back" label="Dont Look Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754777" start="2551" end="2572" title="United States Information Agency" label="US Information Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709596" start="3283" end="3315" title="New York Institute of Technology" label="New York Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761378" start="3321" end="3335" title="Alvy Ray Smith" label="Alvy Ray Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746339" start="3872" end="3891" title="The Lathe of Heaven (film)" label="The Lathe of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026827" start="4073" end="4101" title="California Institute of Arts" label="California Institute of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q962366" start="4306" end="4322" title="Morton Subotnick" label="Morton Subotnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q678361" start="4394" end="4409" title="Ars Electronica" label="Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q862146" start="4506" end="4519" title="Bill Griffith" label="Bill Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429728" start="4551" end="4556" title="Zippy the Pinhead" label="Zippy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="5155" end="5166" title="Hugo Awards" label="Hugo Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649104" start="5246" end="5256" title="Hannes Bok" label="Hannes Bok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933763" start="5340" end="5366" title="Hugo Award for Best Artist" label="Hugo Award for Best Artist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5546" end="5574" title="EMP Museum#Science Fiction Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466736" start="5959" end="5966" title="Pollock (film)" label="Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173858" start="6000" end="6016" title="Peter Emshwiller" label="Peter Emshwiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q491132" start="6318" end="6343" title="Santa Clarita, California" label="Santa Clarita, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="6685" end="6720" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="150239" wikidata="Q6645093" url="?curid=150239" title="List of watermills">
<text>The List of watermills is a link page for any watermill.
==Historical mills==
*List of ancient watermills
*List of early medieval watermills
*Barbegal aqueduct and mill
*Hierapolis sawmill

==Africa==

* Drostdy Museum, Swellendam, South Africa
* Josephine Mill, Cape Town, South Africa
* Genadendal Watermill, Genadendal, South Africa
* Elim Watermill, Caledon, South Africa

==Asia==
* Panchakki, India
* Pundri mill, India

==Australasia==

===Australia===

* Anderson&#x27;s Mill, Smeaton, Victoria
* Barrabool Flour Mill, Buckley&#x27;s Falls, Highton, Geelong, Victoria
* Ben Eadie Mill, Sunbury, Victoria
* Carome Mill, South Morang, Victoria
* Dight&#x27;s Ceres Mill, Abbotsford, Victoria
* Dunn&#x27;s Mill, Bridgewater, South Australia
* Fyansford Paper Mill, Fyansford, Victoria
* Glendining and McKenzie Mill, Riddells Creek, Victoria
* Hepburn&#x27;s Werona Mill, Kingston, Victoria
* Janefield Mill, Bundoora, Victoria
* Jetty Mills, Warrnambool, Victoria
* Lucas Watermills Archaeological Sites, Sydney, New South Wales
* Polworth Mill, Rosebrook, Victoria
* Thomas Mill, Mernda, Victoria
* Waterwheel Flourmill, Bridgewater on Loddon, Victoria

==Europe==

=== Austria ===

* Haslachmühle, Gnigl, Salzburg

===Belgium===
*Faber Mill, Wallonia
*Moulin Lindekemale, Brussels
*Watermill Sint-Gertrudis-Pede, Flanders

=== France ===

* Ischermühle, Hirschland, Grand Est

===Ireland===
*Ballincollig Royal Gunpowder Mills
*Clonmoyle Mill
*Cregg Mill, County Galway
*Milford Mills, County Carlow
*Newmills Corn and Flax Mills

===Isle of Man===
*Laxey Wheel
*Little Isabella
*Snaefell Wheel

===Kosovo===
*Ali Bel Bicaj Tower House and Mill
*Hajrizi Mill

===Luxemburg===
*Lameschmillen

===Netherlands===
*Bulkemsmolen
*Gennep Watermill
*Kruitmolen
*Oliemolen, Heerlen
*Opwetten Watermill
*Oude Molen, Simpelveld
*Watermill at Kollen
*Weltermolen, Welten

===Switzerland===
*Hofenmühle

===United Kingdom===
See List of watermills in the United Kingdom.

==North America==

===Canada===
*Arva Flour Mill, Arva, Ontario
*Balmoral Grist Mill Museum, Nova Scotia
*Caledonia Mill, Caledonia, Ontario
*Kings Landing Historical Settlement, New Brunswick
*Morningstar Mill, St. Catharines, Ontario
*Tyrone Mill, Tyrone, Ontario
*Moulin du Petit-Pré, Château-Richer, Quebec 
*Watson&#x27;s Mill, Manotick, Ontario
*Wile Carding Mill, Bridgewater, Nova Scotia

===United States===
See List of watermills in United States

==See also==
*List of windmills
*Tide mill
*Gristmill

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6645093" start="4" end="22" title="List of watermills" label="List of watermills"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="46" end="55" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003878" start="79" end="105" title="List of ancient watermills" label="List of ancient watermills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617598" start="107" end="140" title="List of early medieval watermills" label="List of early medieval watermills"/>
<link wikidata="Q89272148" start="142" end="168" title="Barbegal aqueduct and mill" label="Barbegal aqueduct and mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567442" start="170" end="188" title="Hierapolis sawmill" label="Hierapolis sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15961639" start="204" end="218" title="Drostdy Museum" label="Drostdy Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023257" start="220" end="230" title="Swellendam" label="Swellendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="232" end="244" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="247" end="261" title="Josephine Mill" label="Josephine Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="263" end="272" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="274" end="286" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501295" start="311" end="321" title="Genadendal" label="Genadendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="323" end="335" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q777884" start="354" end="361" title="Caledon, South Africa" label="Caledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="363" end="375" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130250" start="388" end="397" title="Panchakki" label="Panchakki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737500" start="407" end="413" title="Pundri" label="Pundri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220612" start="463" end="483" title="Anderson&amp;#x27;s Mill, Smeaton" label="Anderson&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740519" start="485" end="502" title="Smeaton, Victoria" label="Smeaton, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q809667" start="527" end="547" title="Buckley&amp;#x27;s Falls" label="Buckley&amp;#x27;s Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q231765" start="558" end="565" title="Geelong" label="Geelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007711" start="594" end="611" title="Sunbury, Victoria" label="Sunbury, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567979" start="627" end="639" title="South Morang" label="South Morang"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="641" end="649" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275695" start="652" end="675" title="Dights Falls" label="Dight&amp;#x27;s Ceres Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q306710" start="677" end="697" title="Abbotsford, Victoria" label="Abbotsford, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="700" end="716" title="John Dunn (miller)#Bridgewater" label="Dunn&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966824" start="718" end="746" title="Bridgewater, South Australia" label="Bridgewater, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511175" start="771" end="780" title="Fyansford" label="Fyansford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431699" start="823" end="837" title="Riddells Creek" label="Riddells Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="839" end="847" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197128" start="878" end="896" title="Kingston, Victoria" label="Kingston, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997558" start="915" end="923" title="Bundoora" label="Bundoora"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="925" end="933" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q705867" start="949" end="960" title="Warrnambool" label="Warrnambool"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="962" end="970" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202130" start="973" end="1010" title="Lucas Watermills Archaeological Sites" label="Lucas Watermills Archaeological Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1012" end="1018" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1020" end="1035" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q31445768" start="1053" end="1072" title="Rosebrook, Victoria" label="Rosebrook, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819892" start="1088" end="1094" title="Mernda" label="Mernda"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="1096" end="1104" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966856" start="1129" end="1150" title="Bridgewater on Loddon" label="Bridgewater on Loddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17681170" start="1193" end="1205" title="Haslachmuhle" label="Haslachmühle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1214" end="1222" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217175" start="1239" end="1249" title="Faber Mill" label="Faber Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179449" start="1261" end="1279" title="Moulin Lindekemale" label="Moulin Lindekemale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351081" start="1291" end="1320" title="Watermill Sint-Gertrudis-Pede" label="Watermill Sint-Gertrudis-Pede"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126072" start="1350" end="1361" title="Ischermühle" label="Ischermühle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21522" start="1363" end="1373" title="Hirschland" label="Hirschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677983" start="1375" end="1384" title="Grand Est" label="Grand Est"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851721" start="1401" end="1435" title="Ballincollig Royal Gunpowder Mills" label="Ballincollig Royal Gunpowder Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890454" start="1437" end="1451" title="Clonmoyle Mill" label="Clonmoyle Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183974" start="1453" end="1478" title="Cregg Mill, County Galway" label="Cregg Mill, County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20540998" start="1480" end="1508" title="Milford Mills, County Carlow" label="Milford Mills, County Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876136" start="1510" end="1538" title="Newmills Corn and Flax Mills" label="Newmills Corn and Flax Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046863" start="1559" end="1570" title="Laxey Wheel" label="Laxey Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650443" start="1572" end="1587" title="Little Isabella" label="Little Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546896" start="1589" end="1603" title="Snaefell Wheel" label="Snaefell Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26709802" start="1619" end="1653" title="Ali Bel Bicaj Tower House and Mill" label="Ali Bel Bicaj Tower House and Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q27869065" start="1655" end="1667" title="Hajrizi Mill" label="Hajrizi Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481794" start="1686" end="1699" title="Lameschmillen" label="Lameschmillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482418" start="1720" end="1732" title="Bulkemsmolen" label="Bulkemsmolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969755" start="1734" end="1750" title="Watermill at Gennep" label="Gennep Watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427177" start="1752" end="1762" title="Kruitmolen" label="Kruitmolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843870" start="1764" end="1782" title="Oliemolen, Heerlen" label="Oliemolen, Heerlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817379" start="1784" end="1802" title="Watermill at Opwetten" label="Opwetten Watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296808" start="1804" end="1826" title="Oude Molen, Simpelveld" label="Oude Molen, Simpelveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117023" start="1828" end="1847" title="Watermill at Kollen" label="Watermill at Kollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972121" start="1849" end="1868" title="Weltermolen, Welten" label="Weltermolen, Welten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876536" start="1889" end="1899" title="Hofenmühle" label="Hofenmühle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645095" start="1926" end="1966" title="List of watermills in the United Kingdom" label="List of watermills in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2002" end="2017" title="Arva Flour Mill" label="Arva Flour Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116626" start="2019" end="2032" title="Arva, Ontario" label="Arva, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852386" start="2034" end="2060" title="Balmoral Grist Mill Museum" label="Balmoral Grist Mill Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="2062" end="2073" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019389" start="2075" end="2089" title="Caledonia Mill" label="Caledonia Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019355" start="2091" end="2109" title="Caledonia, Ontario" label="Caledonia, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197090" start="2111" end="2124" title="Kings Landing" label="Kings Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="2148" end="2161" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q99978138" start="2163" end="2179" title="Morningstar Mill" label="Morningstar Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q126805" start="2181" end="2195" title="St. Catharines" label="St. Catharines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2197" end="2204" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2206" end="2217" title="Tyrone Mill" label="Tyrone Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861567" start="2219" end="2234" title="Tyrone, Ontario" label="Tyrone, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325808" start="2236" end="2255" title="Moulin du Petit-Pré" label="Moulin du Petit-Pré"/>
<link wikidata="Q142001" start="2257" end="2271" title="Château-Richer" label="Château-Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2273" end="2279" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974783" start="2282" end="2300" title="Watson&amp;#x27;s Mill" label="Watson&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286496" start="2302" end="2310" title="Manotick" label="Manotick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="2312" end="2319" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001592" start="2321" end="2338" title="Wile Carding Mill" label="Wile Carding Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q474178" start="2340" end="2364" title="Bridgewater, Nova Scotia" label="Bridgewater, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645097" start="2390" end="2425" title="List of watermills in United States" label="List of watermills in United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645273" start="2441" end="2458" title="List of windmills" label="List of windmills"/>
<link wikidata="Q493694" start="2460" end="2469" title="Tide mill" label="Tide mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="2471" end="2480" title="Gristmill" label="Gristmill"/>
</links>
</doc>
