<doc id="149223" wikidata="Q208166" url="?curid=149223" title="Borderline personality disorder">
<text>Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a personality disorder characterized by a pervasive, long-term pattern of significant interpersonal relationship instability, a distorted sense of self, and intense emotional responses. People diagnosed with BPD frequently exhibit self-harming behaviours and engage in risky activities, primarily due to challenges regulating emotional states to a healthy, stable baseline. Symptoms such as dissociation (a feeling of detachment from reality), a pervasive sense of emptiness, and an acute fear of abandonment are prevalent among those affected.

The onset of BPD symptoms can be triggered by events that others might perceive as normal, with the disorder typically manifesting in early adulthood and persisting across diverse contexts. BPD is often comorbid with substance use disorders, depressive disorders, and eating disorders. BPD is associated with a substantial risk of suicide; studies estimated that up to 10 percent of people with BPD die by suicide. Despite its severity, BPD faces significant stigmatization in both media portrayals and the psychiatric field, potentially leading to underdiagnosis and insufficient treatment.

The causes of BPD are unclear and complex, implicating genetic, neurological, and psychosocial conditions in its development. A genetic predisposition is evident, with the disorder significantly more common in people with a family history of BPD, particularly immediate relatives. Psychosocial factors, particularly adverse childhood experiences, have been proposed. The American &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; (DSM) classifies BPD in the dramatic cluster of personality disorders. There is a risk of misdiagnosis, with BPD most commonly confused with a mood disorder, substance use disorder, or other mental health disorders.

Therapeutic interventions for BPD predominantly involve psychotherapy, with dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) and schema therapy the most effective modalities. Although pharmacotherapy cannot cure BPD, it may be employed to mitigate associated symptoms, with atypical antipsychotics (e.g., Quetiapine) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants commonly being prescribed, though their efficacy is unclear. A 2020 meta-analysis found the use of medications was still unsupported by evidence.

BPD has a point prevalence of 1.6% and a lifetime prevalence of 5.9% of the global population, with a higher incidence rate among women compared to men in the clinical setting of up to three times. Despite the high utilization of healthcare resources by people with BPD, up to half may show significant improvement over a ten-year period with appropriate treatment. The name of the disorder, particularly the suitability of the term &quot;borderline&quot;, is a subject of ongoing debate. Initially, the term reflected historical ideas of &quot;borderline insanity&quot; and later described patients on the border between neurosis and psychosis. These interpretations are now regarded as outdated and clinically imprecise.
== Signs and symptoms ==
Borderline personality disorder, as outlined in the DSM-5, manifests through nine distinct symptoms, with a diagnosis requiring at least five of the following criteria to be met:

# Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined emotional abandonment.
# Unstable and chaotic interpersonal relationships, often characterized by a pattern of alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation, also known as &#x27;splitting&#x27;.
# A markedly disturbed sense of identity and distorted self-image.
# Impulsive or reckless behaviors, including uncontrollable spending, unsafe sexual practices, substance use disorder, reckless driving, and binge eating.
# Recurrent suicidal ideation or behaviors involving self-harm.
# Rapidly shifting intense emotional dysregulation.
# Chronic feelings of emptiness.
# Inappropriate, intense anger that can be difficult to control.
# Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms.

The distinguishing characteristics of BPD include a pervasive pattern of instability in one&#x27;s interpersonal relationships and in one&#x27;s self-image, with frequent oscillation between extremes of idealization and devaluation of others, alongside fluctuating moods and difficulty regulating intense emotional reactions. Dangerous or impulsive behaviors are commonly associated with BPD.

Additional symptoms may encompass uncertainty about one&#x27;s identity, values, morals, and beliefs; experiencing paranoid thoughts under stress; episodes of depersonalization; and, in moderate to severe cases, stress-induced breaks with reality or episodes of psychosis. It is also common for individuals with BPD to have comorbid conditions such as depressive or bipolar disorders, substance use disorders, eating disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

===Mood and affect===

Individuals with BPD exhibit emotional dysregulation. Emotional dysregulation is characterized by an inability in flexibly responding to and managing emotional states, resulting in intense and prolonged emotional reactions that deviate from social norms, given the nature of the environmental stimuli encountered. Such reactions not only deviate from accepted social norms but also surpass what is informally deemed appropriate or proportional to the encountered stimuli.

A core characteristic of BPD is &quot;affective instability&quot;, which manifests as rapid and frequent shifts in mood of high affect intensity and rapid onset of emotions, triggered by environmental stimuli. The return to a stable emotional state is notably delayed, exacerbating the challenge of achieving emotional equilibrium. This instability is further intensified by an acute sensitivity to psychosocial cues, leading to significant challenges in managing emotions effectively.

As the first component of emotional dysregulation, individuals with BPD are shown to have increased emotional sensitivity, especially towards negative mood states such as fear, anger, sadness, rejection, criticism, isolation, and perceived failure. This increased sensitivity results in an intensified response to environmental cues, including the emotions of others. Studies have identified a negativity bias in those with BPD, showing a predisposition towards recognizing and reacting more strongly to negative emotions in others, along with an attentional bias towards processing negatively-valenced stimuli. Without effective coping mechanisms, individuals might resort to self-harm, or suicidal behaviors to manage or escape from these intense negative emotions. While conscious of the exaggerated nature of their emotional responses, individuals with BPD face challenges in regulating these emotions. To mitigate further distress, there may be an unconscious suppression of emotional awareness, which paradoxically hinders the recognition of situations requiring intervention.

A second component of emotional dysregulation in BPD is high levels of negative affectivity, stemming directly from the individual&#x27;s emotional sensitivity to negative emotions. This negative affectivity causes emotional reactions that diverge from socially accepted norms, in ways that are disproportionate to the environmental stimuli presented. Those with BPD are relatively unable to tolerate the distress that is encountered in daily life, and they are prone to engage in maladaptive strategies to try to reduce the distress experienced. Maladaptive coping strategies include rumination, thought suppression, experiential avoidance, emotional isolation, as well as impulsive and self-injurious behaviours.

American psychologist Marsha Linehan highlights that while the sensitivity, intensity, and duration of emotional experiences in individuals with BPD can have positive outcomes, such as exceptional enthusiasm, idealism, and capacity for joy and love, it also predisposes them to be overwhelmed by negative emotions. This includes experiencing profound grief instead of mere sadness, intense shame instead of mild embarrassment, rage rather than annoyance, and panic over nervousness. Research indicates that individuals with BPD endure chronic and substantial emotional suffering.

Emotional dysregulation is a significant feature of BPD, yet Fitzpatrick et al. (2022) suggest that such dysregulation may also be observed in other disorders, like generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Nonetheless, their findings imply that individuals with BPD particularly struggle with disengaging from negative emotions and achieving emotional equilibrium.

Euphoria, or transient intense joy, can occur in those with BPD, but they are more commonly afflicted by dysphoria (a profound state of unease or dissatisfaction), depression, and pervasive distress. Zanarini et al. identified four types of dysphoria characteristic of BPD: intense emotional states, destructiveness or self-destructiveness, feelings of fragmentation or identity loss, and perceptions of victimization. A diagnosis of BPD is closely linked with experiencing feelings of betrayal, lack of control, and self-harm.

Moreover, emotional lability, indicating variability or fluctuations in emotional states, is frequent among those with BPD. Although emotional lability may imply rapid alternations between depression and elation, mood swings in BPD are more commonly between anger and anxiety or depression and anxiety.

===Interpersonal relationships===
Interpersonal relationships are significantly impacted in individuals with BPD, characterized by a heightened sensitivity to the behavior and actions of others. Individuals with BPD can be very conscious of and susceptible to their perceived or real treatment by others. Individuals may experience profound happiness and gratitude for perceived kindness, yet feel intense sadness or anger towards perceived criticism or harm. A notable feature of BPD is the tendency to engage in idealization and devaluation of others – that is to idealize and subsequently devalue others – oscillating between extreme admiration and profound mistrust or dislike. This pattern, referred to as &quot;splitting,&quot; can significantly influence the dynamics of interpersonal relationships. In addition to this external &quot;splitting,&quot; patients with BPD typically have internal splitting, i.e. vacillation between considering oneself a good person who has been mistreated (in which case anger predominates) and a bad person whose life has no value (in which case self-destructive or even suicidal behavior may occur). This splitting is also evident in black-and-white or all-or-nothing dichotomous thinking.

Despite a strong desire for intimacy, individuals with BPD may exhibit insecure, avoidant, ambivalent, or fearfully preoccupied attachment styles in relationships, complicating their interactions and connections with others. Family members, including parents of adults with BPD, may find themselves in a cycle of being overly involved in the individual&#x27;s life at times and, at other times, significantly detached, contributing to a sense of alienation within the family unit.

Personality disorders, including BPD, are associated with an increased incidence of chronic stress and conflict, reduced satisfaction in romantic partnerships, domestic abuse, and unintended pregnancies. Research indicates variability in relationship patterns among individuals with BPD. A portion of these individuals may transition rapidly between relationships, a pattern metaphorically described as &quot;butterfly-like,&quot; characterized by fleeting and transient interactions and &quot;fluttering&quot; in and out of relationships. Conversely, a subgroup, referred to as &quot;attached,&quot; tends to establish fewer but more intense and dependent relationships. These connections often form rapidly, evolving into deeply intertwined and tumultuous bonds, indicating a more pronounced dependence on these interpersonal ties compared to those without BPD.

Individuals with BPD express higher levels of jealousy towards their partners in romantic relations.

===Behavior===
Behavioral patterns associated with BPD frequently involve impulsive actions, which may manifest as substance use disorders, binge eating, unprotected sexual encounters, and self-injury among other self-harming practices. These behaviors are a response to the intense emotional distress experienced by individuals with BPD, serving as an immediate but temporary alleviation of their emotional pain. However, such actions typically result in feelings of shame and guilt, contributing to a recurrent cycle. This cycle typically begins with emotional discomfort, followed by impulsive behavior aimed at mitigating this discomfort, only to lead to shame and guilt, which in turn exacerbates the emotional pain. This escalation of emotional pain then intensifies the compulsion towards impulsive behavior as a form of relief, creating a vicious cycle. Over time, these impulsive responses can become an automatic mechanism for coping with emotional pain.

===Self-harm and suicide===

Self-harm and suicidal behaviors are core diagnostic criteria for BPD as outlined in the DSM-5. Between 50% and 80% of individuals diagnosed with BPD engage in self-harm, with cutting being the most common method. Other methods, such as bruising, burning, head banging, or biting, are also prevalent. It is hypothesized that individuals with BPD might experience a sense of emotional relief following acts of self-harm.

Estimates of the lifetime risk of death by suicide among individuals with BPD range between 3% and 10%, varying with the method of investigation. There is evidence that a significant proportion of males who die by suicide may have undiagnosed BPD.

The motivations behind self-harm and suicide attempts among individuals with BPD are reported to differ. Nearly 70% of individuals with BPD engage in self-harm without the intention of ending their lives. Motivations for self-harm include expressing anger, self-punishment, inducing normal feelings or feelings of normality in response to dissociative episodes, and distraction from emotional distress or challenging situations. Conversely, true suicide attempts by individuals with BPD frequently are motivated by the notion that others will be better off in their absence.

===Sense of self and self-concept===
Individuals diagnosed with BPD frequently experience significant difficulties in maintaining a stable self-concept. This instability manifests as uncertainty in personal values, beliefs, preferences, and interests. They may also express confusion regarding their aspirations and objectives in terms of relationships and career paths. Such indeterminacy leads to feelings of emptiness and a profound sense of disorientation regarding their own identity. Moreover, their self-perception can fluctuate dramatically over short periods, oscillating between positive and negative evaluations. Consequently, individuals with BPD might adopt their sense of self-based on their surroundings or the people they interact with, resulting in a chameleon-like adaptation of identity.

===Dissociation and cognitive challenges===
The heightened emotional states experienced by individuals with BPD can impede their ability to concentrate and cognitively function. Additionally, individuals with BPD may frequently dissociate, which can be regarded as a mild to severe disconnection from physical and emotional experiences. Observers may notice signs of dissociation in individuals with BPD through diminished expressiveness in their face or voice, or an apparent disconnection and insensitivity to emotional cues or stimuli.

Dissociation typically arises in response to distressing occurrences or reminders of past trauma, acting as a psychological defense mechanism by diverting attention from the current stressor or by blocking it out entirely. This process is believed to shield the individual from the anticipated overwhelming negative emotions and undesired impulses that the current emotional situation might provoke, and is rooted in the avoidance of intense emotional pain based on past experiences. While this mechanism may offer temporary emotional respite, it can foster unhealthy coping strategies and inadvertently dull positive emotions, thereby obstructing the individual&#x27;s access to crucial emotional insights. These insights are essential for informed, healthy decision-making in everyday life.

=== Psychotic symptoms ===
BPD is predominantly characterized as a disorder involving emotional dysregulation, yet psychotic symptoms frequently occur in individuals with BPD, with about 20-50% of patients reporting psychotic symptoms. These manifestations have historically been labeled as &quot;pseudo-psychotic&quot; or &quot;psychotic-like&quot;, implying a differentiation from symptoms observed in primary psychotic disorders. Studies conducted in the 2010s suggest a closer similarity between psychotic symptoms in BPD and those in recognized psychotic disorders than previously understood. The distinction of pseudo-psychosis has faced criticism for its weak construct validity and the potential to diminish the perceived severity of these symptoms, potentially hindering accurate diagnosis and effective treatment. Consequently, there are suggestions from some in the research community to categorize these symptoms as genuine psychosis, advocating for the abolishment of the distinction between pseudo-psychosis and true psychosis.

The DSM-5 identifies transient paranoia, exacerbated by stress, as a symptom of BPD. Research has identified the presence of both hallucinations and delusions in individuals with BPD who do not possess an alternate diagnosis that would better explain these symptoms. Further, phenomenological analysis indicates that auditory verbal hallucinations in BPD patients are indistinguishable from those observed in schizophrenia. This has led to suggestions of a potential shared etiological basis for hallucinations across BPD and other disorders, including psychotic and affective disorders.

===Disability and employment===
Individuals diagnosed with BPD often possess the capability to engage in employment, provided they secure positions that align with their skill sets and the severity of their condition remains manageable. In certain cases, BPD may be recognized as a disability within the workplace, particularly if the condition&#x27;s severity results in behaviors that undermine relationships, involve engagement in risky activities, or manifest as intense anger, thereby inhibiting the individual&#x27;s ability to perform their job role effectively. The United States Social Security Administration officially recognizes BPD as a form of disability, enabling those significantly affected to apply for disability benefits.

==Causes==

The etiology, or causes, of BPD is multifaceted, with no consensus on a singular cause. BPD may share a connection with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). While childhood trauma is a recognized contributing factor, the roles of congenital brain abnormalities, genetics, neurobiology, and non-traumatic environmental factors remain subjects of ongoing investigation.

===Genetics and heritability===
Compared to other major psychiatric conditions, the exploration of genetic underpinnings in BPD remains novel. Estimates suggest the heritability of BPD ranges from 37% to 69%, indicating that human genetic variations account for a substantial portion of the risk for BPD within the population. Twin studies, which often form the basis of these estimates, may overestimate the perceived influence of genetics due to the shared environment of twins, potentially skewing results.

Despite these methodological considerations, certain studies propose that personality disorders are significantly shaped by genetics, more so than many Axis I disorders, such as depression and eating disorders, and even surpassing the genetic impact on broad personality traits. Notably, BPD ranks as the third most heritable among ten surveyed personality disorders.

Research involving twin and sibling studies has shown a genetic component to traits associated with BPD, such as impulsive aggression; with the genetic contribution to behavior from serotonin-related genes appearing to be modest.

A study conducted by Trull et al. in the Netherlands, which included 711 sibling pairs and 561 parents, aimed to identify genetic markers associated with BPD. This research identified a linkage to genetic markers on chromosome 9 as relevant to BPD characteristics, underscoring a significant genetic contribution to the variability observed in BPD features. Prior findings from this group indicated that 42% of BPD feature variability could be attributed to genetics, with the remaining 58% owing to environmental factors.

Among specific genetic variants under scrutiny , the DRD4 7-repeat polymorphism (of the dopamine receptor D4) located on chromosome 11 has been linked to disorganized attachment, and in conjunction with the 10/10-repeat genotype of the dopamine transporter (DAT), it has been associated with issues with inhibitory control, both of which are characteristic of BPD. Additionally, potential links to chromosome 5 are being explored, further emphasizing the complex genetic landscape influencing BPD development and manifestation.

===Psychosocial factors===

====Adverse childhood experiences====
Empirical studies have established a strong correlation between adverse childhood experiences such as child abuse, particularly child sexual abuse, and the onset of BPD later in life. Reports from individuals diagnosed with BPD frequently include narratives of extensive abuse and neglect during early childhood, though causality remains a subject of ongoing investigation. These individuals are significantly more prone to recount experiences of verbal, emotional, physical, or sexual abuse by caregivers, alongside a notable frequency of incest and loss of caregivers in early childhood.

Moreover, there have been consistent accounts of caregivers invalidating the individuals&#x27; emotions and thoughts, neglecting physical care, failing to provide the necessary protection, and exhibiting emotional withdrawal and inconsistency. Specifically, female individuals with BPD reporting past neglect or abuse by caregivers have a heightened likelihood of encountering sexual abuse from individuals outside their immediate family circle.

The enduring impact of chronic maltreatment and difficulties in forming secure attachments during childhood has been hypothesized to potentially contribute to the development of BPD.

==== Invalidating environment ====
Marsha Linehan&#x27;s biosocial developmental theory posits that BPD arises from the interaction between a child&#x27;s inherent emotional vulnerability and an invalidating environment. Emotional vulnerability is thought to be influenced by biological and genetic factors that shape the child&#x27;s temperament. Traditional biomedical constructions of BPD often focus solely on biological factors. Though these factors certainly play a role in the development of borderline personality disorder, they do not provide a complete picture. A biosocial approach considers the interplay between genetic predispositions and environmental stressors, such as childhood trauma, invalidating environments, and social relationships, in shaping the course of the disorder.

Invalidating environments are characterized by the neglect, ridicule, dismissal, or discouragement of a child&#x27;s emotions and needs, and may also encompass experiences of trauma and abuse.
Invalidation from caregivers, peers, or authority figures can lead individuals with borderline personality disorder to doubt the legitimacy of their feelings and experiences. This can exacerbate their emotional dysregulation and contribute to a cycle of invalidation, distress, and maladaptive coping strategies. When emotions are consistently dismissed or criticized, individuals with BPD may resort to destructive behaviors such as self-harm, substance abuse, or impulsive actions to cope with their distress, further perpetuating the negative stigma attached to those who suffer from borderline personality disorder.

==== Clinical and cultural perspectives ====
Anthropologist Rebecca Lester raises two perspectives that BPD can be viewed: a clinical perspective where BPD is a &quot;dysfunction of personality&quot;, and an academic perspective that views BPD as a &quot;mechanism of social regulation&quot;. Lester provides the perspective that BPD as a disorder of relationships and communication; that a person with BPD lacks the communication skills and knowledge to interact effectively with others within their society and culture given their life experience. Lester provides the metaphor of the particle-wave duality in quantum physics when dealing with the distinction between cultural and clinical perspectives of BPD. Like the particle-wave-duality, when asking particle-like questions you will get particle-like answers; and if you ask wave-like questions you will get wave-like answers. Lester argues the same applies to BPD; if you ask culturally based questions about the presence of BPD you will get culturally based answers, if you ask clinical personality-based questions it will reinforce personality-based perspectives. Lester advised both perspectives are valid and should work in tandem to provide a greater understanding of BPD culturally and for the individual.

In this light, Lester argues the higher diagnosis of women than men with BPD goes towards arguing feminist claims. A higher diagnosis BPD in women would be expected in cultures where females are victimised. In this view, BPD is seen as a cultural phenomenon. This is understandable when BPD behaviours are viewed as learned behaviours as a consequence of their experience of surviving environments that reinforce worthlessness and their rejection. To Lester these survival techniques evidence humans&#x27; &quot;resilience, adaptation, creativity&quot;. Behaviours associated with BPD are therefore an inherently human response.

===Brain and neurobiologic factors===

Research employing structural neuroimaging techniques, such as voxel-based morphometry, has reported variations in individuals diagnosed with BPD in specific brain regions that have been associated with the psychopathology of BPD. Notably, reductions in volume enclosed have been observed in the hippocampus, orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and amygdala, among others, which are crucial for emotional self-regulation and stress management.

In addition to structural imaging, a subset of studies utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopy has investigated the neurometabolic profile within these affected regions. These investigations have focused on the concentrations of various neurometabolites, including &quot;N&quot;-acetylaspartate, creatine, compounds related to glutamate, and compounds containing choline. These studies aim to show the biochemical alterations that may underlie the symptomatology observed in BPD, offering insights into BPD&#x27;s neurobiological basis.

==== Neurological patterns ====
Research into BPD has identified that the propensity for experiencing intense negative emotions, a trait known as negative affectivity, serves as a more potent predictor of BPD symptoms than the history of childhood sexual abuse alone. This correlation, alongside observed variations in brain structure and the presence of BPD in individuals without traumatic histories, delineates BPD from disorders such as PTSD that are frequently co-morbid. Consequently, investigations into BPD encompass both developmental and traumatic origins.

Research has shown changes in two brain circuits implicated in the emotional dysregulation characteristic of BPD: firstly, an escalation in activity within brain circuits associated with experiencing severe emotional pain, and secondly, a decreased activation within circuits tasked with the regulation or suppression of these intense emotions. These dysfunctional activations predominantly occur within the limbic system, though individual variances necessitate further neuroimaging research to explore these patterns in detail.

Contrary to earlier findings, individuals with BPD exhibit decreased amygdala activation in response to heightened negative emotional stimuli compared to control groups. John Krystal, the editor of &quot;Biological Psychiatry&quot;, commented on these findings, suggesting they contribute to understanding the innate neurological predisposition of individuals with BPD to lead emotionally turbulent lives, which are not inherently negative or unproductive. This emotional volatility is consistently linked to disparities in several brain regions, emphasizing the neurobiological underpinnings of BPD.

===Mediating and moderating factors===

====Executive function and social rejection sensitivity====
High sensitivity to social rejection is linked to more severe symptoms of BPD, with executive function playing a mediating role. Executive function—encompassing planning, working memory, attentional control, and problem-solving—moderates how rejection sensitivity influences BPD symptoms. Studies demonstrate that individuals with lower executive function exhibit a stronger correlation between rejection sensitivity and BPD symptoms. Conversely, higher executive function may mitigate the impact of rejection sensitivity, potentially offering protection against BPD symptoms. Additionally, deficiencies in working memory are associated with increased impulsivity in individuals with BPD.

==Diagnosis==
The clinical diagnosis of BPD can be made through a psychiatric assessment conducted by a mental health professional, ideally a psychiatrist or psychologist. This comprehensive assessment integrates various sources of information to confirm the diagnosis, encompassing the patient&#x27;s self-reported clinical history, observations made by the clinician during interviews, and corroborative details obtained from family members, friends, and medical records. It is crucial to thoroughly assess patients for co-morbid mental health conditions, substance use disorders, suicidal ideation, and any self-harming behaviors.

An effective approach involves presenting the criteria of the disorder to the individual and inquiring if they perceive these criteria as reflective of their experiences. Involving individuals in the diagnostic process may enhance their acceptance of the diagnosis. Despite the stigma associated with BPD and previous notions of its untreatability, disclosing the diagnosis to individuals is generally beneficial. It provides them with validation and directs them to appropriate treatment options.

The psychological evaluation for BPD typically explores the onset and intensity of symptoms and their impact on the individual&#x27;s quality of life. Critical areas of focus include suicidal thoughts, self-harm behaviors, and any thoughts of harming others. The diagnosis relies on both the individual&#x27;s self-reported symptoms and the clinician&#x27;s observations. To exclude other potential causes of the symptoms, additional assessments may include a physical examination and blood tests, to exclude thyroid disorders or substance use disorders. The International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) categorizes the condition as &quot;emotionally unstable personality disorder&quot;, with diagnostic criteria similar to those in the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition&quot; (DSM-5), where the disorder&#x27;s name remains unchanged from previous editions.

=== &quot;DSM-5&quot; diagnostic criteria ===

The &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition&quot; (DSM-5) has eliminated the multiaxial diagnostic system, integrating all disorders, including personality disorders, into Section II of the manual. For a diagnosis of BPD, an individual must meet five out of nine specified diagnostic criteria. The DSM-5 characterizes BPD as a pervasive pattern of instability in interpersonal relationships, self-image, affect, and a significant propensity towards impulsive behavior. Moreover, the DSM-5 introduces alternative diagnostic criteria for BPD in Section III, titled &quot;Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders&quot;. These criteria are rooted in trait research and necessitate the identification of at least four out of seven maladaptive traits. Marsha Linehan highlights the diagnostic challenges faced by mental health professionals in using the DSM criteria due to the broad range of behaviors they encompass. To mitigate these challenges, Linehan categorizes BPD symptoms into five principal areas of dysregulation: emotions, behavior, interpersonal relationships, sense of self, and cognition.

===International Classification of Disease (ICD) diagnostic criteria===

==== ICD-11 diagnostic criteria ====

The World Health Organization&#x27;s ICD-11 completely restructured its personality disorder section. It classifies BPD as &quot;Personality disorder&quot;, () &quot;Borderline pattern&quot;, (). The borderline pattern specifier is defined as a personality disturbance marked by instability in interpersonal relationships, self-image, and emotions, as well as impulsivity.

==== ICD-10 diagnostic criteria ====
The ICD-10 (version 2019) identified a condition akin to BPD, termed &quot;Emotionally unstable personality disorder&quot; (EUPD) (). This classification described EUPD as a personality disorder with a marked propensity for impulsive behavior without considering potential consequences. Individuals with EUPD have noticeably erratic and fluctuating moods and are prone to sudden emotional outbursts, struggling to regulate these rapid shifts in emotion. Conflict and confrontational behavior are common, especially in situations where impulsive actions are criticized or hindered.

The ICD-10 recognizes two subtypes of this disorder: the &quot;impulsive type&quot;, characterized mainly by emotional dysregulation and impulsivity, and the &quot;borderline type&quot;, which additionally includes disturbances in self-perception, goals, and personal preferences. Those with the &quot;borderline subtype&quot; also experience a persistent feeling of emptiness, unstable and chaotic interpersonal relationships, and a predisposition towards self-harming behaviors, encompassing both suicidal ideations and suicide attempts.

===Millon&#x27;s subtypes===
Psychologist Theodore Millon proposed four subtypes of BPD, where individuals with BPD would exhibit none, one, or multiple subtypes.
===Misdiagnosis===

Individuals with BPD are subject to misdiagnosis due to various factors, notably the overlap (comorbidity) of BPD symptoms with those of other disorders such as depression, PTSD, and bipolar disorder. Misdiagnosis of BPD can lead to a range of adverse consequences. Diagnosis plays a crucial role in informing healthcare professionals about the patient&#x27;s mental health status, guiding treatment strategies, and facilitating accurate reporting of successful interventions. Consequently, misdiagnosis may deprive individuals of access to suitable psychiatric medications or evidence-based psychological interventions tailored to their specific disorders.

Critics of the BPD diagnosis contend that it is indistinguishable from negative affectivity upon undergoing regression and factor analyses. They maintain that the diagnosis of BPD does not provide additional insight beyond what is captured by other diagnoses, positing that it may be redundant or potentially misleading.

===Adolescence and prodrome===
The onset of BPD symptoms typically occurs during adolescence or early adulthood, with possible early signs in childhood. Predictive symptoms in adolescents include body image issues, extreme sensitivity to rejection, behavioral challenges, non-suicidal self-injury, seeking exclusive relationships, and profound shame. Although many adolescents exhibit these symptoms without developing BPD, those who do are significantly more likely to develop the disorder and potentially face long-term social challenges.

BPD is recognized as a stable and valid diagnosis during adolescence, supported by the DSM-5 and ICD-11. Early detection and treatment of BPD in young individuals are emphasized in national guidelines across various countries, including the US, Australia, the UK, Spain, and Switzerland, highlighting the importance of early intervention.

Historically, diagnosing BPD during adolescence was met with caution, due to concerns about the accuracy of diagnosing young individuals, the potential misinterpretation of normal adolescent behaviors, stigma, and the stability of personality during this developmental stage. Despite these challenges, research has confirmed the validity and clinical utility of the BPD diagnosis in adolescents, though misconceptions persist among mental health care professionals, contributing to clinical reluctance in diagnosing and a key barrier to the provision of effective treatment BPD in this population.

A diagnosis of BPD in adolescence can indicate the persistence of the disorder into adulthood, with outcomes varying among individuals. Some maintain a stable diagnosis over time, while others may not consistently meet the diagnostic criteria. Early diagnosis facilitates the development of effective treatment plans, including family therapy, to support adolescents with BPD.

===Differential diagnosis and comorbidity===
Lifetime co-occurring (comorbid) conditions are prevalent among individuals diagnosed with BPD. Individuals with BPD exhibit higher rates of comorbidity compared to those diagnosed with other personality disorders. These comorbidities include mood disorders (such as major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder), anxiety disorders (including panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)), other personality disorders (notably schizotypal, antisocial, and dependent personality disorder), substance use disorder, eating disorders (anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), somatic symptom disorder, and the dissociative disorders. It is advised that a personality disorder diagnosis should be made cautiously during untreated mood episodes or disorders unless a comprehensive lifetime history supports the existence of a personality disorder.

====Comorbid Axis I disorders====

A 2008 study stated that 75% of individuals with BPD at some point meet criteria for mood disorders, notably major depression and bipolar I, with a similar percentage for anxiety disorders. The same study stated that 73% of individuals with BPD meet criteria for substance use disorders, and about 40% for PTSD. This challenges the notion that BPD and PTSD are identical, as less than half of those with BPD exhibit PTSD symptoms in their lifetime. The study also noted significant gender differences in comorbidity among individuals with BPD: a higher proportion of males meet criteria for substance use disorders, whereas females are more likely to have PTSD and eating disorders. Additionally, 38% of individuals with BPD were found to meet criteria for ADHD, and 15% for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in separate studies, highlighting the risk of misdiagnosis due to &quot;lower expressions&quot; of BPD or a complex pattern of comorbidity that might obscure the underlying personality disorder.

====Mood disorders====
Seventy-five percent (75%) of individuals with BPD concurrently experience mood disorders, notably major depressive disorder (MDD) or bipolar disorder (BD), complicating diagnostic clarity due to overlapping symptoms. Distinguishing BPD from BD is particularly challenging, as behaviors part of diagnostic criteria for both BPD and BD may emerge during depressive or manic episodes in BD. However, these behaviours are likely to subside as mood normalises in BD to euthymia, but typically are pervasive in BPD. Thus, diagnosis should ideally be deferred until after the mood has stabilised.

Differences between BPD and BD mood swings include their duration, with BD episodes typically lasting for at least two weeks at a time, in contrast to the rapid and transient mood shifts seen in BPD. Additionally, BD mood changes are generally unresponsive to environmental stimuli, whereas BPD moods are. For example, a positive event might alleviate a depressive mood in BPD, responsiveness not observed in BD. Furthermore, the euphoria in BPD lacks the racing thoughts and reduced need for sleep characteristic of BD, though sleep disturbances have been noted in BPD.

An exception would be individuals with rapid-cycling BD, who can be a challenge to differentiate from the affective lability of individuals with BPD.

Historically, BPD was considered a milder form of BD, or part of the bipolar spectrum. However, distinctions in phenomenology, family history, disease progression, and treatment responses refute a singular underlying mechanism for both conditions. Research indicates only a modest association between BPD and BD, challenging the notion of a close spectrum relationship.

====Premenstrual dysphoric disorder====
BPD is a psychiatric condition distinguishable from premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), despite some symptom overlap. BPD affects individuals persistently across all stages of the menstrual cycle, unlike PMDD, which is confined to the luteal phase and ends with menstruation. While PMDD, affecting 3–8% of women, includes mood swings, irritability, and anxiety tied to the menstrual cycle, BPD presents a broader, constant emotional and behavioral challenge irrespective of hormonal changes.

====Comorbid Axis II disorders====

Approximately 74% of individuals with BPD also fulfill criteria for another Axis II personality disorder during their lifetime, according to research conducted in 2008. The most prevalent co-occurring disorders are from Cluster A (paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal personality disorders), affecting about half of those with BPD, with schizotypal personality disorder alone impacting one-third of individuals. Being part of Cluster B, BPD patients also commonly share characteristics with other Cluster B disorders (antisocial, histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders), with nearly half of individuals with BPD showing signs of these conditions, and narcissistic personality disorder affecting roughly one-third. Cluster C disorders (avoidant, dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders) have the least comorbidity with BPD, with just under a third of individuals with BPD meeting the criteria for a Cluster C disorder.

==Management==

The main approach to managing BPD is through psychotherapy, tailored to the individual&#x27;s specific needs rather than applying a one-size-fits-all model based on the diagnosis alone. While medications do not directly treat BPD, they are beneficial in managing comorbid conditions like depression and anxiety. Evidence states short-term hospitalization does not offer advantages over community care in terms of enhancing outcomes or in the long-term prevention of suicidal behavior among individuals with BPD.

===Psychotherapy===
Long-term, consistent psychotherapy stands as the preferred method for treating BPD and engagement in any therapeutic approach tends to surpass the absence of treatment, particularly in diminishing self-harm impulses. Among the effective psychotherapeutic approaches, dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), schema therapy, and psychodynamic therapies have shown efficacy, although improvements may require extensive time, often years of dedicated effort.

Available treatments for BPD include dynamic deconstructive psychotherapy (DDP), mentalization-based treatment (MBT), schema therapy, transference-focused psychotherapy, dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), and general psychiatric management. The effectiveness of these therapies does not significantly vary between more intensive and less intensive approaches.

Transference-focused psychotherapy is designed to mitigate absolutist thinking by encouraging individuals to express their interpretations of social interactions and their emotions, thereby fostering more nuanced and flexible categorizations. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), on the other hand, focuses on developing skills in four main areas: interpersonal communication, distress tolerance, emotional regulation, and mindfulness, aiming to equip individuals with BPD with tools to manage intense emotions and improve interpersonal relationships.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) targets the modification of behaviors and beliefs through problem identification related to BPD, showing efficacy in reducing anxiety, mood symptoms, suicidal ideation, and self-harming actions.

Mentalization-based therapy and transference-focused psychotherapy draw from psychodynamic principles, while DBT is rooted in cognitive-behavioral principles and mindfulness. General psychiatric management integrates key aspects from these treatments and is seen as more accessible and less resource-intensive. Studies suggest DBT and MBT may be particularly effective, with ongoing research into developing abbreviated forms of these therapies to enhance accessibility and reduce both financial and resource burdens on patients and providers.

Schema therapy considers early maladaptive schemas, conceptualized as organized patterns that recur throughout life in response to memories, emotions, bodily sensations, and cognitions associated with unmet childhood needs. When activated by events in the patient&#x27;s life, they manifest as schema modes associated with responses such as feelings of abandonment, anger, impulsivity, self-punitiveness, or avoidance and emptiness. Schema therapy attempts to modify early maladaptive schemas and their modes with a variety of cognitive, experiential, and behavioral techniques such as cognitive restructuring, mental imagery, and behavioral experiments. It also seeks to remove some of the stigma associated with BPD by explaining to clients that most people have maladaptive schemas and modes, but that in BPD, the schemas tend to be more extreme, while the modes shift more frequently. In schema therapy, the therapeutic alliance is based on the concept of limited reparenting: it does not only facilitate treatment, but is an integral part of it as the therapist seeks to model a healthy relationship that counteracts some of the instability, rejection, and deprivation often experienced early in life by BPD patients while helping them develop similarly healthy relationships in their broader personal lives.

Additionally, mindfulness meditation has been associated with positive structural changes in the brain and improvements in BPD symptoms, with some participants in mindfulness-based interventions no longer meeting the diagnostic criteria for BPD after treatment.

===Medications===
A 2010 Cochrane review found that no medications were effective for the core symptoms of BPD, such as chronic feelings of emptiness, identity disturbances, and fears of abandonment. Some medications might impact isolated symptoms of BPD or those of comorbid conditions. A 2017 systematic review and a 2020 Cochrane review confirmed these findings. This 2020 Cochrane review found that while some medications, like mood stabilizers and second-generation antipsychotics, showed some benefits, SSRIs and SNRIs lacked high-level evidence of effectiveness. The review concluded that stabilizers and second-generation antipsychotics may effectively treat some symptoms and associated psychopathology of BPD, but these drugs are not effective for the overall severity of BPD; as such, pharmacotherapy should target specific symptoms.

Specific medications have shown varied effectiveness on BPD symptoms: haloperidol and flupenthixol for anger and suicidal behavior reduction; aripiprazole for decreased impulsivity and interpersonal problems; and olanzapine and quetiapine for reducing affective instability, anger, and anxiety, though olanzapine showed less benefit for suicidal ideation than a placebo. Mood stabilizers like valproate and topiramate showed some improvements in depression, impulsivity, and anger, but the effect of carbamazepine was not significant. Of the antidepressants, amitriptyline may reduce depression, but mianserin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and phenelzine sulfate showed no effect. Omega-3 fatty acid may ameliorate suicidality and improve depression. , trials with these medications had not been replicated and the effect of long-term use had not been assessed. Lamotrigine and other medications like IV ketamine for unresponsive depression require further research for their effects on BPD.

Quetiapine showed some benefits for BPD severity, psychosocial impairment, aggression, and manic symptoms at doses of 150 mg/day to 300 mg/day, but the evidence is mixed.

Despite the lack of solid evidence, SSRIs and SNRIs are prescribed off-label for BPD and are typically considered adjunctive to psychotherapy.

Given the weak evidence and potential for serious side effects, the UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommends against using drugs specifically for BPD or its associated behaviors and symptoms. Medications may be considered for treating comorbid conditions within a broader treatment plan. Reviews suggest minimizing the use of medications for BPD to very low doses and short durations, emphasizing the need for careful evaluation and management of drug treatment in BPD.

===Health care services===
The disparity between those benefiting from treatment and those receiving it, known as the &quot;treatment gap,&quot; arises from several factors. These include reluctance to seek treatment, healthcare providers&#x27; underdiagnosis, and limited availability and accessibility to advanced treatments. Furthermore, establishing clear pathways to services and medical care remains a challenge, complicating access to treatment for individuals with BPD. Despite efforts, many healthcare providers lack the training or resources to address severe BPD effectively, an issue acknowledged by both affected individuals and medical professionals.

In the context of psychiatric hospitalizations, individuals with BPD constitute approximately 20% of admissions. While many engage in outpatient treatment consistently over several years, reliance on more restrictive and expensive treatment options, such as inpatient admission, tends to decrease over time.

Service experiences vary among individuals with BPD. Assessing suicide risk poses a challenge for clinicians, with patients underestimating the lethality of self-harm behaviors. The suicide risk among people with BPD is significantly higher than that of the general population, characterized by a history of multiple suicide attempts during crises. Notably, about half of all individuals who commit suicide are diagnosed with a personality disorder, with BPD being the most common association.

In 2014, following the death by suicide of a patient with BPD, the National Health Service (NHS) in England faced criticism from a coroner for the lack of commissioned services to support individuals with BPD. It was stated that 45% of female patients were diagnosed with BPD, yet there was no provision or prioritization for therapeutic psychological services. At that time, England had only 60 specialized inpatient beds for BPD patients, all located in London or the northeast region.

==Prognosis==
With treatment, the majority of people with BPD can find relief from distressing symptoms and achieve remission, defined as a consistent relief from symptoms for at least two years. A longitudinal study tracking the symptoms of people with BPD found that 34.5% achieved remission within two years from the beginning of the study. Within four years, 49.4% had achieved remission, and within six years, 68.6% had achieved remission. By the end of the study, 73.5% of participants were found to be in remission. Moreover, of those who achieved recovery from symptoms, only 5.9% experienced recurrences. A later study found that ten years from baseline (during a hospitalization), 86% of patients had sustained a stable recovery from symptoms. Other estimates have indicated an overall remission rate of 50% at 10 years, with 93% of people being able to achieve a 2-year remission and 86% achieving at least a 4-year remission. And a 30% risk of relapse over 10 years (relapse indicating a recurrence of BPD symptoms meeting diagnostic criteria). A meta-analysis which followed people over 5 years reported remission rates of 50-70%.

Patient personality can play an important role during the therapeutic process, leading to better clinical outcomes. Recent research has shown that BPD patients undergoing dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) exhibit better clinical outcomes correlated with higher levels of the trait of agreeableness in the patient, compared to patients either low in agreeableness or not being treated with DBT. This association was mediated through the strength of a working alliance between patient and therapist; that is, more agreeable patients developed stronger working alliances with their therapists, which in turn, led to better clinical outcomes.

In addition to recovering from distressing symptoms, people with BPD can also achieve high levels of psychosocial functioning. A longitudinal study tracking the social and work abilities of participants with BPD found that six years after diagnosis, 56% of participants had good function in work and social environments, compared to 26% of participants when they were first diagnosed. Vocational achievement was generally more limited, even compared to those with other personality disorders. However, those whose symptoms had remitted were significantly more likely to have good relationships with a romantic partner and at least one parent, good performance at work and school, a sustained work and school history, and good psychosocial functioning overall.

==Epidemiology==
BPD has a point prevalence of 1.6% and a lifetime prevalence of 5.9% of the global population. Within clinical settings, the occurrence of BPD is 6.4% among urban primary care patients, 9.3% among psychiatric outpatients, and approximately 20% among psychiatric inpatients. Despite the high utilization of healthcare resources by individuals with BPD, up to half may show significant improvement over a ten-year period with appropriate treatment.

Regarding gender distribution, women are diagnosed with BPD three times more frequently than men in clinical environments. Nonetheless, epidemiological research in the United States indicates no significant gender difference in the lifetime prevalence of BPD within the general population. This finding implies that women with BPD may be more inclined to seek treatment compared to men. Studies examining BPD patients have found no significant differences in the rates of childhood trauma and levels of current psychosocial functioning between genders. The relationship between BPD and ethnicity continues to be ambiguous, with divergent findings reported in the United States. The overall prevalence of BPD in the U.S. prison population is thought to be 17%. These high numbers may be related to the high frequency of substance use and substance use disorders among people with BPD, which is estimated at 38%.

==History==

The coexistence of intense, divergent moods within an individual was recognized by Homer, Hippocrates, and Aretaeus, the latter describing the vacillating presence of impulsive anger, melancholia, and mania within a single person. The concept was revived by Swiss physician Théophile Bonet in 1684 who, using the term &quot;folie maniaco-mélancolique&quot;, described the phenomenon of unstable moods that followed an unpredictable course. Other writers noted the same pattern, including the American psychiatrist Charles H. Hughes in 1884 and J. C. Rosse in 1890, who called the disorder &quot;borderline insanity&quot;. In 1921, Emil Kraepelin identified an &quot;excitable personality&quot; that closely parallels the borderline features outlined in the current concept of BPD.

The idea that there were forms of disorder that were neither psychotic nor simply neurotic began to be discussed in psychoanalytic circles in the 1930s. The first formal definition of borderline disorder is widely acknowledged to have been written by Adolph Stern in 1938. He described a group of patients who he felt to be on the &quot;borderline&quot; between neurosis and psychosis, who very often came from family backgrounds marked by trauma. He argued that such patients would often need more active support than that provided by classical psychoanalytic techniques.

The 1960s and 1970s saw a shift from thinking of the condition as borderline schizophrenia to thinking of it as a borderline affective disorder (mood disorder), on the fringes of bipolar disorder, cyclothymia, and dysthymia. In the DSM-II, stressing the intensity and variability of moods, it was called cyclothymic personality (affective personality). While the term &quot;borderline&quot; was evolving to refer to a distinct category of disorder, psychoanalysts such as Otto Kernberg were using it to refer to a broad spectrum of issues, describing an intermediate level of personality organization between neurosis and psychosis.

After standardized criteria were developed to distinguish it from mood disorders and other Axis I disorders, BPD became a personality disorder diagnosis in 1980 with the publication of the DSM-III. The diagnosis was distinguished from sub-syndromal schizophrenia, which was termed &quot;schizotypal personality disorder&quot;. The DSM-IV Axis II Work Group of the American Psychiatric Association finally decided on the name &quot;borderline personality disorder&quot;, which is still in use by the DSM-5. However, the term &quot;borderline&quot; has been described as uniquely inadequate for describing the symptoms characteristic of this disorder.

===Etymology===
Earlier versions of the DSM—before the multiaxial diagnosis system—classified most people with mental health problems into two categories: the psychotics and the neurotics. Clinicians noted a certain class of neurotics who, when in crisis, appeared to straddle the borderline into psychosis. The term &quot;borderline personality disorder&quot; was coined in American psychiatry in the 1960s. It became the preferred term over a number of competing names, such as &quot;emotionally unstable character disorder&quot; and &quot;borderline schizophrenia&quot; during the 1970s. Borderline personality disorder was included in DSM-III (1980) despite not being universally recognized as a valid diagnosis.

==Controversies==

===Credibility and validity of testimony===
The credibility of individuals with personality disorders has been questioned at least since the 1960s. Two concerns are the incidence of dissociation episodes among people with BPD and the belief that lying is not uncommon in those diagnosed with the condition.

====Dissociation====
Researchers disagree about whether dissociation or a sense of emotional detachment and physical experiences, impact the ability of people with BPD to recall the specifics of past events. A 1999 study reported that the specificity of autobiographical memory was decreased in BPD patients. The researchers found that decreased ability to recall specifics was correlated with patients&#x27; levels of dissociation, which &#x27;may help them to avoid episodic information that would evoke acutely negative affect&#x27;.

===Gender===
In a clinic, up to 80% of patients are women, but this might not necessarily reflect the gender distribution in the entire population. According to Joel Paris, the primary reason for gender disparities in clinical settings is that women are more likely to develop symptoms that prompt them to seek help. Statistics indicate that twice as many women as men in the community experience depression. Conversely, men more frequently meet criteria for substance use disorder and psychopathy, but tend not to seek treatment as often. Additionally, men and women with similar symptoms may manifest them differently. Men often exhibit behaviors such as increased alcohol consumption and criminal activity, while women may internalize anger, leading to conditions like depression and self-harm, such as cutting or overdosing. Hence, the gender gap observed in antisocial personality disorder and borderline personality disorder, which may share similar underlying pathologies but present different symptoms influenced by gender. In a study examining completed suicides among individuals aged 18 to 35, 30% of the suicides were attributed to people with BPD, with a majority being men and almost none receiving treatment. Similar findings were reported in another study.

In short, men are less likely to seek or accept appropriate treatment, more likely to be treated for symptoms of BPD such as substance use rather than BPD itself (the symptoms of BPD and ASPD possibly deriving from a similar underlying etiology); more likely to wind up in the correctional system due to criminal behavior; and, more likely to commit suicide prior to diagnosis.

Among men diagnosed with BPD there is also evidence of a higher suicide rate: &quot;men are more than twice as likely as women—18 percent versus 8 percent&quot;—to die by suicide.

There are also sex differences in personality traits and Axis I and II comorbidity. Men with BPD are more likely to recreationally use substances, have explosive temper, high levels of novelty seeking and have (especially) antisocial, narcissistic, passive-aggressive or sadistic personality traits (male BPD being characterised by antisocial overtones). Women with BPD are more likely to have eating, mood, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorders.

===Manipulative behavior===
Manipulative behavior to obtain nurturance is considered by the DSM-IV-TR and many mental health professionals to be a defining characteristic of borderline personality disorder. In one research study, 88% of therapists reported that they have experienced manipulation attempts from patient(s). Marsha Linehan has argued that doing so relies upon the assumption that people with BPD who communicate intense pain, or who engage in self-harm and suicidal behavior, do so with the intention of influencing the behavior of others. The impact of such behavior on others—often an intense emotional reaction in concerned friends, family members, and therapists—is thus assumed to have been the person&#x27;s intention.

According to Linehan, their frequent expressions of intense pain, self-harming, or suicidal behavior may instead represent a method of mood regulation or an escape mechanism from situations that feel unbearable, however, making their assumed manipulative behavior an involuntary and unintentional response.

One paper identified possible reasons for manipulation in BPD: identifying others&#x27; feelings and reactions, a regulatory function due to insecurity, communicating one&#x27;s emotions and connecting to others, or to feel as if one is in control, or allowing them to be &quot;liberated&quot; from relationships or commitments.

===Stigma===

The features of BPD include emotional instability, intense and unstable interpersonal relationships, a need for intimacy, and a fear of rejection. As a result, people with BPD often evoke intense emotions in those around them. Pejorative terms to describe people with BPD, such as &quot;difficult&quot;, &quot;treatment resistant&quot;, &quot;manipulative&quot;, &quot;demanding&quot;, and &quot;attention seeking&quot;, are often used and may become a self-fulfilling prophecy, as the negative treatment of these individuals may trigger further self-destructive behavior.

Since BPD can be a stigmatizing diagnosis even within the mental health community, some survivors of childhood abuse who are diagnosed with BPD are re-traumatized by the negative responses they receive from healthcare providers. One camp argues that it would be better to diagnose these people with post-traumatic stress disorder, as this would acknowledge the impact of abuse on their behavior. Critics of the PTSD diagnosis argue that it medicalizes abuse rather than addressing the root causes in society. Regardless, a diagnosis of PTSD does not encompass all aspects of the disorder (see brain abnormalities and terminology).

====Physical violence====
The stigma surrounding borderline personality disorder includes the belief that people with BPD are prone to violence toward others. While movies and visual media often sensationalize people with BPD by portraying them as violent, the majority of researchers agree that people with BPD are unlikely to physically harm others. Although people with BPD often struggle with experiences of intense anger, a defining characteristic of BPD is that they direct it inward toward themselves.

One 2020 study found that BPD is individually associated with psychological, physical, and sexual forms of intimate partner violence (IPV), especially amongst men. In terms of the AMPD trait facets, hostility (negative affectivity), suspiciousness (negative affectivity) and risk-taking (disinhibition) were most strongly associated with IPV perpetration for the total sample.

In addition, adults with BPD have often experienced abuse in childhood, so many people with BPD adopt a &quot;no-tolerance&quot; policy toward expressions of anger of any kind. Their extreme aversion to violence can cause many people with BPD to overcompensate and experience difficulties being assertive and expressing their needs. This is one reason why people with BPD often choose to harm themselves over potentially causing harm to others.

====Mental health care providers====

People with BPD are considered to be among the most challenging groups of patients to work with in therapy, requiring a high level of skill and training for the psychiatrists, therapists, and nurses involved in their treatment. A majority of psychiatric staff report finding individuals with BPD moderately to extremely difficult to work with and more difficult than other client groups. This largely negative view of BPD can result in people with BPD being terminated from treatment early, being provided harmful treatment, not being informed of their diagnosis of BPD, or being misdiagnosed. With healthcare providers contributing to the stigma of a BPD diagnosis, seeking treatment can often result in the perpetuation of BPD features. Efforts are ongoing to improve public and staff attitudes toward people with BPD.

In psychoanalytic theory, the stigmatization among mental health care providers may be thought to reflect countertransference (when a therapist projects his or her feelings onto a client). This inadvertent countertransference can give rise to inappropriate clinical responses, including excessive use of medication, inappropriate mothering, and punitive use of limit setting and interpretation.

Some clients feel the diagnosis is helpful, allowing them to understand that they are not alone and to connect with others with BPD who have developed helpful coping mechanisms. However, others experience the term &quot;borderline personality disorder&quot; as a pejorative label rather than an informative diagnosis. They report concerns that their self-destructive behavior is incorrectly perceived as manipulative and that the stigma surrounding this disorder limits their access to health care. Indeed, mental health professionals frequently refuse to provide services to those who have received a BPD diagnosis.

===Terminology===
Because of concerns around stigma, and because of a move away from the original theoretical basis for the term (see history), there is ongoing debate about renaming borderline personality disorder. While some clinicians agree with the current name, others argue that it should be changed, since many who are labelled with borderline personality disorder find the name unhelpful, stigmatizing, or inaccurate. Valerie Porr, president of Treatment and Research Advancement Association for Personality Disorders states that &quot;the name BPD is confusing, imparts no relevant or descriptive information, and reinforces existing stigma&quot;.

Alternative suggestions for names include &quot;emotional regulation disorder&quot; or &quot;emotional dysregulation disorder&quot;. &quot;Impulse disorder&quot; and &quot;interpersonal regulatory disorder&quot; are other valid alternatives, according to John G. Gunderson of McLean Hospital in the United States. Another term suggested by psychiatrist Carolyn Quadrio is &quot;post-traumatic personality disorganization&quot; (PTPD), reflecting the condition&#x27;s status as (often) both a form of chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as well as a personality disorder.&lt;ref name=&quot;AxisOne/AxisTwo&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; However, although many with BPD do have traumatic histories, some do not report any kind of traumatic event, which suggests that BPD is not necessarily a trauma spectrum disorder.

The Treatment and Research Advancements National Association for Personality Disorders (TARA-APD) campaigned unsuccessfully to change the name and designation of BPD in DSM-5, published in May 2013, in which the name &quot;borderline personality disorder&quot; remains unchanged and it is not considered a trauma- and stressor-related disorder.

==Society and culture==

=== Literature ===
In literature, characters believed to exhibit signs of BPD include Catherine in &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot; (1847), Smerdyakov in &quot;The Brothers Karamazov&quot; (1880), and Harry Haller in &quot;Steppenwolf&quot; (1927).

=== Film ===
Films have also attempted to portray BPD, with characters in &quot;Margot at the Wedding&quot; (2007), &quot;Mr. Nobody&quot; (2009), &quot;Cracks&quot; (2009), &quot;Truth&quot; (2013), &quot;Wounded (2013)&quot;, &quot;Welcome to Me&quot; (2014), and &quot;Tamasha&quot; (2015) all suggested to show traits of the disorder. The behavior of Theresa Dunn in &quot;Looking for Mr. Goodbar&quot; (1975) is consistent with BPD, as suggested by Robert O. Friedel. Films like &quot;Play Misty for Me&quot; (1971) and &quot;Girl, Interrupted&quot; (1999, based on the memoir of the same name) suggest emotional instability characteristic of BPD, while &quot;Single White Female&quot; (1992) highlights aspects such as identity disturbance and fear of abandonment. Clementine in &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; (2004) is noted to show classic BPD behavior, and Carey Mulligan&#x27;s portrayal in &quot;Shame&quot; (2011) is praised for its accuracy regarding BPD characteristics by psychiatrists.

Psychiatrists have even analyzed characters such as Kylo Ren and Anakin Skywalker/Darth Vader from the &quot;Star Wars&quot; films, noting that they meet several diagnostic criteria for BPD.

=== Television ===
Television series like &quot;Crazy Ex-Girlfriend&quot; (2015) and the miniseries &quot;Maniac&quot; (2018) depict characters with BPD. Traits of BPD and narcissistic personality disorders are observed in characters like Cersei and Jaime Lannister from &quot;A Song of Ice and Fire&quot; (1996) and its TV adaptation &quot;Game of Thrones&quot; (2011). In &quot;The Sopranos&quot; (1999), Livia Soprano is diagnosed with BPD, and even the portrayal of Bruce Wayne/Batman in the show &quot;Titans&quot; (2018) is said to include aspects of the disorder. The animated series &quot;Bojack Horseman&quot; (2014) also features a main character with symptoms of BPD.

=== Awareness ===
Awareness of BPD has been growing, with the U.S. House of Representatives declaring May as Borderline Personality Disorder Awareness Month in 2008. People with BPD will share their personal experiences of living with the disorder on social media to raise awareness of the condition.

Public figures like South Korean singer-songwriter Lee Sun-mi have opened up about their personal experiences with the disorder, bringing further attention to its impact on individuals&#x27; lives.

== See also ==

* Affective empathy
* Hysteria
* Pseudohallucination
* Obsessive love disorder

== Citations ==
== General bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* APA DSM 5 Definition of Borderline personality disorder
* APA Division 12 treatment page for Borderline personality disorder
* ICD-10 definition of EUPD by the World Health Organization
* NHS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="0" end="31" title="Borderline personality disorder" label="Borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="33" end="36" title="Borderline personality disorder" label="BPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="43" end="63" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="127" end="153" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860557" start="179" end="192" title="sense of self" label="sense of self"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="206" end="224" title="emotional response" label="emotional response"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="272" end="281" title="self-harm" label="self-harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316140" start="345" end="383" title="Emotional dysregulation" label="challenges regulating emotional states"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="432" end="444" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229382" start="459" end="469" title="Emotional detachment" label="detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001341" start="538" end="549" title="Abandonment (emotional)" label="abandonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="790" end="798" title="Comorbidity" label="comorbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="804" end="827" title="substance use disorders" label="substance use disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="829" end="849" title="depressive disorders" label="depressive disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="855" end="870" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="918" end="925" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q784237" start="1308" end="1330" title="genetic predisposition" label="genetic predisposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q105821669" start="1496" end="1525" title="adverse childhood experiences" label="adverse childhood experiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="1566" end="1619" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1654" end="1670" title="Personality disorder#Cluster B (emotional or erratic disorders)" label="dramatic cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="1674" end="1695" title="personality disorders" label="personality disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q460433" start="1716" end="1728" title="misdiagnosis" label="misdiagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="1769" end="1782" title="mood disorder" label="mood disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="1784" end="1806" title="substance use disorders" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="1899" end="1912" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="1919" end="1947" title="dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172195" start="1958" end="1972" title="schema therapy" label="schema therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q701216" start="2013" end="2028" title="pharmacotherapy" label="pharmacotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q758295" start="2103" end="2126" title="Atypical antipsychotic" label="atypical antipsychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q408535" start="2134" end="2144" title="Quetiapine" label="Quetiapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="2150" end="2188" title="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="2369" end="2385" title="point prevalence" label="point prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="2400" end="2419" title="lifetime prevalence" label="lifetime prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="2468" end="2482" title="incidence rate" label="incidence rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="2981" end="2989" title="neurosis" label="neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="2994" end="3003" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="3159" end="3164" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="3198" end="3206" title="symptoms" label="symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="3215" end="3224" title="diagnosis" label="diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001341" start="3331" end="3352" title="Abandonment (emotional)" label="emotional abandonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656431" start="3474" end="3502" title="idealization and devaluation" label="idealization and devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325774" start="3524" end="3533" title="Splitting (psychology)" label="splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100073" start="3554" end="3581" title="Identity disturbance" label="disturbed sense of identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q473596" start="3596" end="3606" title="self-image" label="self-image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549918" start="3610" end="3619" title="Impulsive (behavior)" label="Impulsive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303219" start="3749" end="3761" title="binge eating" label="binge eating"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="3775" end="3792" title="suicidal ideation" label="suicidal ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316140" start="3854" end="3877" title="emotional dysregulation" label="emotional dysregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096367" start="3901" end="3910" title="emptiness" label="emptiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="4005" end="4022" title="paranoid ideation" label="paranoid ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="4033" end="4045" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociative"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="4514" end="4522" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="4524" end="4530" title="values" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="4532" end="4538" title="morals" label="morals"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="4544" end="4550" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q83177" start="4610" end="4627" title="depersonalization" label="depersonalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="4713" end="4722" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="4775" end="4794" title="Comorbidity" label="comorbid conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="4803" end="4813" title="Depressive disorder" label="depressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="4817" end="4834" title="bipolar disorders" label="bipolar disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="4836" end="4859" title="substance use disorders" label="substance use disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="4861" end="4877" title="eating disorders" label="eating disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="4879" end="4909" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="4922" end="4962" title="attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="5145" end="5160" title="emotional state" label="emotional state"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="5236" end="5248" title="social norms" label="social norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q331769" start="5583" end="5587" title="Mood (psychology)" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="5596" end="5602" title="Affect (psychology)" label="affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="5632" end="5639" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551030" start="5867" end="5884" title="Social cue" label="psychosocial cues"/>
<link wikidata="Q241849" start="6055" end="6076" title="emotional sensitivity" label="emotional sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254302" start="6349" end="6364" title="negativity bias" label="negativity bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q10392227" start="6502" end="6518" title="attentional bias" label="attentional bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113318" start="6549" end="6557" title="Valence (psychology)" label="valenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759895" start="6585" end="6602" title="coping mechanisms" label="coping mechanisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="7110" end="7130" title="negative affectivity" label="negative affectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="7292" end="7315" title="Social norm" label="socially accepted norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411912" start="7624" end="7634" title="Rumination (psychology)" label="rumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495864" start="7636" end="7655" title="thought suppression" label="thought suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q774453" start="7657" end="7679" title="experiential avoidance" label="experiential avoidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155534" start="7681" end="7700" title="emotional isolation" label="emotional isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q274156" start="7777" end="7791" title="Marsha Linehan" label="Marsha Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026040" start="8106" end="8111" title="grief" label="grief"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="8501" end="8529" title="generalized anxiety disorder" label="generalized anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="8697" end="8705" title="Euphoria" label="Euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q290620" start="8802" end="8811" title="dysphoria" label="dysphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q373752" start="9101" end="9114" title="victimization" label="victimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455110" start="9236" end="9254" title="emotional lability" label="emotional lability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933601" start="9439" end="9449" title="mood swing" label="mood swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656431" start="10044" end="10072" title="idealization and devaluation" label="idealization and devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325774" start="10247" end="10256" title="Splitting (psychology)" label="splitting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10890" end="10907" title="Attachment theory#Attachment patterns" label="attachment styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="11244" end="11265" title="Personality disorders" label="Personality disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305232" start="11328" end="11342" title="chronic stress" label="chronic stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="11404" end="11418" title="domestic abuse" label="domestic abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817591" start="11424" end="11446" title="unintended pregnancies" label="unintended pregnancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491521" start="12609" end="12623" title="emotional pain" label="emotional pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q266332" start="12988" end="12998" title="Compulsive behavior" label="compulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q196751" start="13382" end="13389" title="cutting" label="cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518184" start="13913" end="13929" title="suicide attempts" label="suicide attempts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860557" start="14591" end="14603" title="self-concept" label="self-concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="14659" end="14665" title="values" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="14667" end="14673" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q908656" start="14676" end="14686" title="preference" label="preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="14932" end="14940" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380588" start="14958" end="14973" title="Self-perception theory" label="self-perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="15488" end="15498" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866472" start="15924" end="15941" title="defense mechanism" label="defense mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="17006" end="17025" title="psychotic disorders" label="psychotic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592163" start="17261" end="17279" title="construct validity" label="construct validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="17767" end="17780" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q189643" start="17786" end="17795" title="delusions" label="delusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056506" start="17913" end="17938" title="Interpretative phenomenological analysis" label="phenomenological analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054088" start="17954" end="17984" title="auditory verbal hallucinations" label="auditory verbal hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="18046" end="18059" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="18111" end="18122" title="etiological" label="etiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="18204" end="18222" title="affective disorder" label="affective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="18508" end="18518" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="18800" end="18844" title="United States Social Security Administration" label="United States Social Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281188" start="18947" end="18966" title="disability benefits" label="disability benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="18985" end="18993" title="etiology" label="etiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="19101" end="19131" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="19255" end="19267" title="neurobiology" label="neurobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="19517" end="19529" title="heritability" label="heritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502105" start="19577" end="19600" title="human genetic variation" label="human genetic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244775" start="19679" end="19691" title="Twin study" label="Twin studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="20015" end="20031" title="Axis I disorders" label="Axis I disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="20122" end="20140" title="personality traits" label="personality traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="20414" end="20423" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q767511" start="20585" end="20599" title="genetic marker" label="genetic marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q840604" start="20679" end="20691" title="chromosome 9" label="chromosome 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="20783" end="20794" title="Variability (statistics)" label="variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q14866071" start="21040" end="21066" title="DRD4 7-repeat polymorphism" label="DRD4 7-repeat polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14866071" start="21075" end="21095" title="Dopamine receptor D4" label="dopamine receptor D4"/>
<link wikidata="Q847096" start="21108" end="21121" title="chromosome 11" label="chromosome 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271947" start="21223" end="21243" title="dopamine transporter" label="dopamine transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033829" start="21291" end="21309" title="inhibitory control" label="inhibitory control"/>
<link wikidata="Q840741" start="21385" end="21397" title="chromosome 5" label="chromosome 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155640" start="21582" end="21599" title="Empirical research" label="Empirical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="21626" end="21637" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105821669" start="21646" end="21675" title="adverse childhood experiences" label="adverse childhood experiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="21684" end="21695" title="child abuse" label="child abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="21710" end="21728" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="21902" end="21911" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="22122" end="22128" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q116789092" start="22233" end="22245" title="Emotional validation" label="invalidating"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356567" start="22692" end="22709" title="secure attachment" label="secure attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q274156" start="22839" end="22853" title="Marsha Linehan" label="Marsha Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="26373" end="26396" title="structural neuroimaging" label="structural neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q845664" start="26417" end="26440" title="voxel-based morphometry" label="voxel-based morphometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245053" start="26512" end="26525" title="brain regions" label="brain regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q624758" start="26561" end="26576" title="psychopathology" label="psychopathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="26650" end="26661" title="hippocampus" label="hippocampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18717" start="26663" end="26683" title="orbitofrontal cortex" label="orbitofrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121931" start="26685" end="26710" title="anterior cingulate cortex" label="anterior cingulate cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="26716" end="26724" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267800" start="26762" end="26787" title="emotional self-regulation" label="emotional self-regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404268" start="26792" end="26809" title="stress management" label="stress management"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="26877" end="26908" title="magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="magnetic resonance spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629377" start="27079" end="27108" title="N-acetylaspartate" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-acetylaspartate"/>
<link wikidata="Q223600" start="27110" end="27118" title="creatine" label="creatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="27141" end="27150" title="glutamate" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="27177" end="27184" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="27498" end="27518" title="negative affectivity" label="negative affectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43283" start="27954" end="27968" title="brain circuits" label="brain circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q192560" start="28328" end="28341" title="limbic system" label="limbic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914961" start="28655" end="28676" title="Biological Psychiatry (journal)" label="Biological Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="29173" end="29189" title="social rejection" label="social rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="29237" end="29255" title="executive function" label="executive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q309100" start="29314" end="29322" title="planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="29324" end="29338" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818236" start="29340" end="29359" title="attentional control" label="attentional control"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="29365" end="29380" title="problem-solving" label="problem-solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510807" start="29909" end="29931" title="psychiatric assessment" label="psychiatric assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817473" start="29947" end="29973" title="mental health professional" label="mental health professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="29985" end="29997" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="30001" end="30013" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="30159" end="30175" title="clinical history" label="clinical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633203" start="30981" end="31005" title="psychological evaluation" label="psychological evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="31111" end="31126" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="31437" end="31457" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="31462" end="31472" title="blood test" label="blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="31536" end="31576" title="International Classification of Diseases" label="International Classification of Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="31725" end="31793" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="33189" end="33214" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q55695727" start="33222" end="33228" title="ICD-11" label="ICD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q45127" start="33600" end="33606" title="ICD-10" label="ICD-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495911" start="34761" end="34776" title="Theodore Millon" label="Theodore Millon"/>
<link wikidata="Q460433" start="34938" end="34950" title="misdiagnosis" label="misdiagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733239" start="36079" end="36089" title="body image" label="body image"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="36155" end="36179" title="non-suicidal self-injury" label="non-suicidal self-injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="37796" end="37808" title="Comorbidity" label="co-occurring"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="38030" end="38044" title="mood disorders" label="mood disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="38054" end="38079" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="38084" end="38100" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="38103" end="38119" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q741713" start="38132" end="38146" title="panic disorder" label="panic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q281928" start="38148" end="38171" title="social anxiety disorder" label="social anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="38177" end="38207" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q861560" start="38254" end="38265" title="Schizotypal personality disorder" label="schizotypal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="38267" end="38277" title="Antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q320719" start="38283" end="38313" title="dependent personality disorder" label="dependent personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="38340" end="38356" title="eating disorders" label="eating disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="38358" end="38374" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="38379" end="38394" title="bulimia nervosa" label="bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="38397" end="38437" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q936549" start="38446" end="38470" title="somatic symptom disorder" label="somatic symptom disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627467" start="38480" end="38502" title="dissociative disorders" label="dissociative disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="39527" end="39551" title="autism spectrum disorder" label="autism spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="40144" end="40158" title="manic episodes" label="manic episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q427900" start="40242" end="40250" title="Euthymia (medicine)" label="euthymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="40799" end="40807" title="euphoria" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279717" start="40825" end="40840" title="racing thoughts" label="racing thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728811" start="41555" end="41586" title="premenstrual dysphoric disorder" label="premenstrual dysphoric disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363481" start="41742" end="41754" title="luteal phase" label="luteal phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="41769" end="41781" title="menstruation" label="menstruation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="41880" end="41895" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="42112" end="42119" title="Axis II (psychiatry)" label="Axis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="43045" end="43058" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172195" start="43837" end="43851" title="schema therapy" label="schema therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q940923" start="43857" end="43870" title="psychodynamic" label="psychodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907995" start="44023" end="44059" title="dynamic deconstructive psychotherapy" label="dynamic deconstructive psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817506" start="44067" end="44096" title="mentalization-based treatment" label="mentalization-based treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172195" start="44104" end="44118" title="schema therapy" label="schema therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531493" start="44348" end="44382" title="Transference focused psychotherapy" label="Transference-focused psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="44591" end="44619" title="Dialectical behavior therapy" label="Dialectical behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="44900" end="44928" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy" label="Cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817506" start="45131" end="45158" title="Mentalization-based treatment" label="Mentalization-based therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q940923" start="45208" end="45221" title="psychodynamic" label="psychodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="45293" end="45304" title="mindfulness" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q172195" start="45676" end="45690" title="Schema therapy" label="Schema therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619399" start="45701" end="45726" title="List of maladaptive schemas" label="early maladaptive schemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696690" start="46588" end="46608" title="therapeutic alliance" label="therapeutic alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="47005" end="47027" title="mindfulness meditation" label="mindfulness meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="47279" end="47287" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="47763" end="47767" title="SSRI" label="SSRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="47773" end="47777" title="SNRI" label="SNRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q251347" start="48170" end="48181" title="haloperidol" label="haloperidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27164953" start="48186" end="48198" title="flupenthixol" label="flupenthixol"/>
<link wikidata="Q411188" start="48242" end="48254" title="aripiprazole" label="aripiprazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q201872" start="48313" end="48323" title="olanzapine" label="olanzapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q240642" start="48493" end="48502" title="valproate" label="valproate"/>
<link wikidata="Q221174" start="48507" end="48517" title="topiramate" label="topiramate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410412" start="48600" end="48613" title="carbamazepine" label="carbamazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="48642" end="48656" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58397" start="48659" end="48672" title="amitriptyline" label="amitriptyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q416701" start="48700" end="48709" title="mianserin" label="mianserin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="48711" end="48721" title="fluoxetine" label="fluoxetine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409236" start="48723" end="48734" title="fluvoxamine" label="fluvoxamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747559" start="48740" end="48750" title="phenelzine" label="phenelzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="48777" end="48795" title="Omega-3 fatty acid" label="Omega-3 fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410346" start="48958" end="48969" title="Lamotrigine" label="Lamotrigine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408535" start="49089" end="49099" title="Quetiapine" label="Quetiapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="49297" end="49301" title="SSRI" label="SSRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273909" start="49307" end="49311" title="SNRI" label="SNRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="49476" end="49529" title="National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="51447" end="51470" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="51985" end="51994" title="Remission (medicine)" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758614" start="52067" end="52085" title="longitudinal study" label="longitudinal study"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="53756" end="53768" title="psychosocial" label="psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="54443" end="54459" title="point prevalence" label="point prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="54474" end="54493" title="lifetime prevalence" label="lifetime prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="54642" end="54653" title="outpatients" label="outpatients"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="54695" end="54705" title="inpatients" label="inpatients"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="55017" end="55041" title="epidemiological research" label="epidemiological research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="55718" end="55741" title="substance use disorders" label="substance use disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="55889" end="55894" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="55896" end="55907" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q505931" start="55913" end="55921" title="Aretaeus of Cappadocia" label="Aretaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="55990" end="56001" title="melancholia" label="melancholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="56007" end="56012" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q76828" start="56437" end="56451" title="Emil Kraepelin" label="Emil Kraepelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658201" start="56839" end="56851" title="Adolph Stern" label="Adolph Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="56950" end="56958" title="neurosis" label="neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="56963" end="56972" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255172" start="57228" end="57252" title="Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia" label="borderline schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="57359" end="57370" title="cyclothymia" label="cyclothymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="57376" end="57385" title="dysthymia" label="dysthymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="57394" end="57400" title="DSM-II" label="DSM-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="57466" end="57489" title="cyclothymic personality" label="cyclothymic personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q78731" start="57634" end="57647" title="Otto Kernberg" label="Otto Kernberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575316" start="57682" end="57690" title="Spectrum disorder" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="57985" end="57992" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="DSM-III"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="58606" end="58616" title="Psychosis" label="psychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="58625" end="58634" title="Neurosis" label="neurotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="59366" end="59387" title="dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociation episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229382" start="59575" end="59595" title="emotional detachment" label="emotional detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q682304" start="59746" end="59769" title="autobiographical memory" label="autobiographical memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18646" start="59960" end="59968" title="episodic memory" label="episodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="60015" end="60021" title="affect (psychology)" label="affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="60489" end="60511" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="60516" end="60527" title="psychopathy" label="psychopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="60893" end="60924" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368945" start="62049" end="62064" title="novelty seeking" label="novelty seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="62099" end="62111" title="Narcissism" label="narcissistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q905726" start="62347" end="62368" title="Manipulation (psychology)" label="Manipulative behavior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62411" end="62420" title="diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders#DSM-IV-TR (2000)" label="DSM-IV-TR"/>
<link wikidata="Q274156" start="62642" end="62656" title="Marsha Linehan" label="Marsha Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899872" start="64108" end="64125" title="attention seeking" label="attention seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q528458" start="64165" end="64189" title="self-fulfilling prophecy" label="self-fulfilling prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64879" end="64898" title="#Brain abnormalities" label="brain abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64903" end="64914" title="#Terminology" label="terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="67142" end="67156" title="Stigma (sociological theory)" label="stigmatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498375" start="67218" end="67237" title="countertransference" label="countertransference"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="67771" end="67781" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q40613" start="67782" end="67787" title="labeling theory" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68260" end="68267" title="#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q29001852" start="69039" end="69056" title="John G. Gunderson" label="John G. Gunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354672" start="69060" end="69075" title="McLean Hospital" label="McLean Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q126894721" start="69137" end="69152" title="Carolyn Quadrio" label="Carolyn Quadrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202975" start="70078" end="70095" title="Wuthering Heights" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183157" start="70130" end="70152" title="The Brothers Karamazov" label="The Brothers Karamazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q217073" start="70193" end="70204" title="Steppenwolf (novel)" label="Steppenwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895406" start="70300" end="70321" title="Margot at the Wedding" label="Margot at the Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q732022" start="70342" end="70352" title="Mr. Nobody (film)" label="Mr. Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708250" start="70373" end="70379" title="Cracks (film)" label="Cracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616461" start="70400" end="70405" title="Truth (2013 film)" label="Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18517239" start="70426" end="70433" title="Wounded (2013 film)" label="Wounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089641" start="70454" end="70467" title="Welcome to Me" label="Welcome to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387836" start="70492" end="70499" title="Tamasha (2015 film)" label="Tamasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675387" start="70597" end="70620" title="Looking for Mr. Goodbar (novel)" label="Looking for Mr. Goodbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q544434" start="70710" end="70727" title="Play Misty for Me" label="Play Misty for Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q463101" start="70751" end="70768" title="Girl, Interrupted (film)" label="Girl, Interrupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284057" start="70795" end="70818" title="Girl, Interrupted" label="memoir of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542371" start="70885" end="70904" title="Single White Female" label="Single White Female"/>
<link wikidata="Q208269" start="71011" end="71048" title="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" label="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q219655" start="71105" end="71119" title="Carey Mulligan" label="Carey Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q909445" start="71146" end="71151" title="Shame (2011 film)" label="Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="71324" end="71335" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="71351" end="71360" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863017" start="71482" end="71501" title="Crazy Ex-Girlfriend (TV series)" label="Crazy Ex-Girlfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q24144688" start="71540" end="71546" title="Maniac (miniseries)" label="Maniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3665163" start="71673" end="71679" title="Cersei Lannister" label="Cersei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806180" start="71684" end="71699" title="Jaime Lannister" label="Jaime Lannister"/>
<link wikidata="Q45875" start="71711" end="71733" title="A Song of Ice and Fire" label="A Song of Ice and Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="71775" end="71790" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="71814" end="71826" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567137" start="71841" end="71854" title="Livia Soprano" label="Livia Soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="71904" end="71915" title="Bruce Wayne" label="Bruce Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q38542856" start="71941" end="71947" title="Titans (2018 TV series)" label="Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17733404" start="72031" end="72046" title="BoJack Horseman" label="Bojack Horseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="72176" end="72205" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q624995" start="72467" end="72477" title="Lee Sun-mi" label="Lee Sun-mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="72633" end="72650" title="Affective empathy" label="Affective empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="72653" end="72661" title="Hysteria" label="Hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361468" start="72664" end="72683" title="Pseudohallucination" label="Pseudohallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q13779009" start="72686" end="72709" title="Obsessive love disorder" label="Obsessive love disorder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149224" wikidata="Q1203200" url="?curid=149224" title="Generation gap">
<text>A generation gap or generational gap is a difference of opinions and outlooks between one generation and another. These differences may relate to beliefs, politics, language, work, demographics and values. The differences between generations can cause misunderstandings, but it is possible for generations to overcome their differences and maintain functional relationships.

==History==
While the term &quot;generation gap&quot; might have been crystallized in the 1960s, its essence extends far beyond this label. Throughout history, each generation has carved its identity, distilling the essence of its time into distinctive expressions of culture, art, and innovation. John Poppy&#x27;s introduction of the term, in Look magazine in 1967, merely affixed a name to a phenomenon that had long been an undercurrent of societal evolution, marking a turning point where the clash of old and new became undeniable. Indeed, Protzko and Schooler report that since 624 BC people have complained about the decline of the present generation of youth compared to earlier generations. They call this the &quot;kids these days effect&quot;.

Also early sociologists such as Karl Mannheim noted differences across generations in how the youth transits into adulthood, and studied the ways in which generations separate themselves from one another, in the home and in social situations and areas (such as churches, clubs, senior centers, and youth centers).

The sociological theory of a generation gap first came to light in the 1960s, when the younger generation (later known as baby boomers) seemed to go against everything their parents had previously believed in terms of music, values, government and political views as well as cultural tastes. Sociologists now refer to the &quot;generation gap&quot; as &quot;institutional age segregation&quot;. Usually, when any of these age groups are engaged in its primary activity, the individual members are physically isolated from people of other generations, with little interaction across age barriers except at the nuclear family level.

==Distinguishing generation gaps==
There are several ways to make distinctions between generations. For example, names are given to major groups (Silent Generation, Baby boomers, Generation X, Millennials, Generation Z, Generation Alpha, and Generation Beta) and each generation sets its own trends and has its own cultural impact.

===Language use===
It can be distinguished by the differences in their language use. The generation gap has created a parallel gap in language that can be difficult to communicate across. This issue is one visible throughout society, creating complications within day-to-day communication at home, in the workplace, and in schools. As new generations seek to define themselves as something apart from the old, they adopt new lingo and slang, allowing a generation to create a sense of division from the previous one. This is a visible gap between generations we see every day. &quot;Man&#x27;s most important symbol is his language and through this language, he defines his reality.&quot;

====Slang====
Slang is an ever-changing set of colloquial words and phrases that speakers use to establish or reinforce social identity or cohesiveness within a group or with a trend in society at large. As each successive generation of society struggles to establish its own unique identity among its predecessors it can be determined that generational gaps provide a large influence over the continual change and adaptation of slang. As slang is often regarded as an ephemeral dialect, a constant supply of new words is required to meet the demands of the rapid change in characteristics. And while most slang terms maintain a fairly brief duration of popularity, slang provides a quick and readily available vernacular screen to establish and maintain generational gaps in a societal context.

====Technological influences====
Every generation develops new slang, but with the development of technology, understanding gaps have widened between the older and younger generations. &quot;The term &#x27;communication skills,&#x27; for example, might mean formal writing and speaking abilities to an older worker. But it might mean e-mail and instant-messenger savvy to a twenty-something.&quot; People often have private conversations in secret in a crowded room in today&#x27;s age due to the advances of mobile phones and text messaging. Among &quot;texters&quot; a form of slang or texting lingo has developed, often keeping those not as tech-savvy out of the loop. &quot;Children increasingly rely on personal technological devices like cell phones to define themselves and create social circles apart from their families, changing the way they communicate with their parents. Cell phones, instant messaging, e-mail, and the like have encouraged younger users to create their own inventive, quirky, and very private written language. That has given them the opportunity to essentially hide in plain sight. They are more connected than ever, but also far more independent. Text messaging, in particular, has perhaps become this generation&#x27;s version of Pig Latin.&quot;

Technological innovations that have occurred between generations have made some skills obsolete: for example, shorthand (e.g. Gregg shorthand), a system of stenography often used in the 20th century to take notes and write faster using abbreviated symbols, rather than having to write each word. However, with new technology and the keyboard, newer generations no longer favour these older communication skills. Over 20 years ago, shorthand was taught in many high schools, but now students have rarely seen or even heard of it.

The transitions from each level of lifespan development have remained the same throughout history. They have all shared the same basic milestones in their travel from childhood, through midlife and into retirement. However, while the pathways remain the same—i.e. attending school, marriage, raising families, retiring—the actual journey varies not only with each individual but with each new generation.

In 2011, the National Sleep Foundation conducted a poll that focused on sleep and the use of technology; 95% of those polled admitted to using some form of technology within the last hour before going to bed at night. The study compared the difference in sleep patterns in those who watched TV or listened to music before bedtime, compared to those who used cell phones, video games and the Internet. The study looked at Baby Boomers, Generation Xers, Generation Yers, and Generation Zers. The research, as expected, showed generational gaps between the different forms of technology used. The largest gap was shown between texting and talking on the phone; 56% of Gen Zers and 42% of Gen Yers admitted to sending, receiving, and reading text messages every night within one hour before bedtime, compared to only 15% of Gen Xers, and 5% of Baby Boomers. Baby Boomers were more likely to watch TV within the last hour before bedtime, 67%, compared to Millennials, who came in at 49%. When asked about computer/internet use within the last hour before bedtime, 70% of those polled admitted to using a computer &quot;a few times a week&quot;, and of those, 55% of the Gen Zers said they &quot;surf the web&quot; every night before bed.

====Language brokering====

Another aspect of language use which works to define a generation gap occurs within families in which different generations speak different primary languages. To help communicate within a family, &quot;language brokerage&quot; may be used: that is, the &quot;interpretation and translation performed in everyday situations by bilinguals who have had no special training&quot;. In some immigrant families, the first generation speaks mainly their native tongue; the second generation speaks mainly the host language (i.e. that of the country in which they now live) while still retaining fluency in their parent&#x27;s dominant language; and the third generation mainly uses the host language, and retain little or no conversational skills in their grandparents&#x27; native tongue. In such families, the second generation family members serve as interpreters not only to outside persons, but within the household, further propelling generational differences and divisions by means of linguistic communication.

In some immigrant families and communities, language brokering is also used to integrate children into family endeavors and into civil society. Child integration has become very important to form linkages between new immigrant communities and the predominant culture and new forms of bureaucratic systems. It also helps child development by learning, and pitching in.

====Workplace attitudes====

&quot;USA Today&quot; reported that younger generations are &quot;entering the workplace in the face of demographic change and an increasingly multi-generational workplace&quot;. Multiple engagement studies show that the interests shared across the generation gap by members of this increasingly multi-generational workplace can differ substantially.

Researchers, who found evidence of millennials are relatively more confident in their abilities, speculate that they were &#x27;buoyed by an educational system with inflated grades and standardized tests&#x27; and that this may complicate relations with colleagues of other generations.

Most of these inflated expectations are direct results of the generation&#x27;s upbringing. During the Great Recession, millennials watched first-hand as their parents worked long hours, only to fall victim to downsizing and layoffs. Many families could not withstand these challenges, leading to high divorce rates and broken families. In fact, 59% of Millennials say the Great Recession negatively impacted their career plans, while only 35% of mature workers feel the same way. For these reasons, millennials are more likely to negotiate the terms of their work. Though some boomers view this as lazy behavior, others have actually been able to learn from millennials, reflecting on whether the sacrifices that they had made in their lives provided them with the happiness that they had hoped for.

Growing up, millennials looked to parents, teachers, and coaches as a source of praise and support. They were part of an educational system with inflated grades and standardized tests, in which they were skilled at performing well. Millennials developed a strong need for frequent, positive feedback from supervisors. Today, managers find themselves assessing their subordinates’ productivity quite frequently, despite the fact that they often find it burdensome. Additionally, millennials’ salaries and employee benefits give this generation an idea of how well they are performing. Millennials crave success, and good-paying jobs have been proven to make them feel more successful.

Because group projects and presentations were commonplace during the schooling of millennials, this generation enjoys collaborating and even developing close friendships with colleagues. While working as part of a team enhances innovation, enhances productivity, and lowers personnel costs, supervisors find that millennials avoid risk and independent responsibility by relying on team members when making decisions, which prevents them from showcasing their own abilities.

A commonly cited generational gap concerns generational relationships to technology. Some research suggests that an overreliance has rendered millennials less adept at face-to-face interaction and verbal cues. Though it was also suggested that millennials are relatively more effective in multitasking, responding to visual stimulation, and filtering information.

However, according to the engagement studies, mature workers and the new generations of workers share similar thoughts on a number of topics across the generation gap. Their opinions overlap on flexible working hours/arrangements, promotions/bonuses, the importance of computer proficiency, and leadership. Additionally, the majority of Millennials and mature workers enjoy going to work every day and feel inspired to do their best.

In 2020 the NAS completed a literature review on workplace generational differences, looking at a variety of measures including job satisfaction, manager&#x27;s perceptions, and personality. For a great deal of research, it reported that it was difficult to surmise whether an effect was a result of one&#x27;s generation, or rather a result of a person&#x27;s age or historical events/trends. Among research which accounted for this by following attitudes over time, the review found mild effects, writing &quot;“individuals from the same “generation” are just as likely to be different from one another as from individuals of different generations.”&quot; Other researchers have drawn similar conclusions.

===Generational consciousness===
Generational consciousness is another way of distinguishing among generations that were worked on by social scientist Karl Mannheim. Generational consciousness is when a group of people become mindful of their place in a distinct group identifiable by their shared interests and values. Social, economic, or political changes can bring awareness to these shared interests and values for similarly-aged people who experience these events together and thereby form a generational consciousness. These types of experiences can impact individuals&#x27; development at a young age and enable them to begin making their own interpretations of the world based on personal encounters that set them apart from other generations.

===Intergenerational living===
&quot;Both social isolation and loneliness in older men and women are associated with increased mortality, according to a 2012 Report by the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America&quot;. Intergenerational living is one method being used worldwide as a means of combating such feelings. A nursing home in Deventer, The Netherlands, developed a program wherein students from a local university are provided small, rent-free apartments within the nursing home facility. In exchange, the students volunteer a minimum of 30 hours per month to spend time with the seniors. The students will watch sports with the seniors, celebrate birthdays, and simply keep them company during illnesses and times of distress. Programs similar to the Netherlands’ program were developed as far back as the mid-1990s in Barcelona, Spain. In Spain&#x27;s program, students were placed in seniors’ homes, with a similar goal of free or cheap housing in exchange for companionship for the elderly. That program quickly spread to 27 other cities throughout Spain, and similar programs can be found in Lyon, France, and Cleveland, Ohio.

===Demographics===
To help sociologists understand the transition into adulthood of children of different generations, they compare the current generation to both older and earlier generations at the same time. Not only does each generation mature mentally and physically in their own ways, but they also create new aspects of attending school, forming new households, starting families and even creating new demographics. The difference in demographics regarding values, attitudes, and behaviors between the two generations are used to create a profile for the emerging generation of young adults.

After the economic boom after the Second World War, America&#x27;s population rose between the years 1940–1959, and the new American generation was called the Baby Boomers. As of 2017, many of these Baby Boomers had celebrated their 60th birthdays, and so, over the late 2010s and early 2020s, America&#x27;s senior citizen population increased. The generation gap, however, between the Baby Boomers and earlier generations is growing due to the Boomers population post-war.

There is a large demographic difference between the Baby Boomer generation and earlier generations, which are less racially and ethnically diverse than the Baby Boomers. This also results in a growing cultural gap: baby boomers have generally higher education, with a higher percentage of women in the labor force and more often occupying professional and managerial positions. These differences create issues of community preferences as well as spending.

==See also==

* Achievement gap
* Ageism
* Digital divide
* Income gap
* Inter-generational contract
* Intergenerational equity
* List of generations
* Marriage gap
* Moral panic
* Student activism
* Student voice
* Transgenerational design
* Youth activism
* Youth voice
* Slang
* Technology
* Culture shock
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bennis, W. and Thomas, R. (2002) &quot;Geeks and Geezers: how era, values and defining moments shape leaders&quot;, Harvard Business School Publishing
* Employee Evolution: the Voice of Millennials at Work
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1203200" start="2" end="16" title="Generation gap" label="generation gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203200" start="20" end="36" title="Generation gap" label="generational gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="90" end="100" title="generation" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740768" start="721" end="734" title="Look (American magazine)" label="Look magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76823" start="1165" end="1178" title="Karl Mannheim" label="Karl Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="1570" end="1582" title="baby boomers" label="baby boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="2057" end="2071" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044693" start="2226" end="2243" title="Silent Generation" label="Silent Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="2245" end="2257" title="Baby boomers" label="Baby boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="2259" end="2271" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="2273" end="2284" title="Millennials" label="Millennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="2286" end="2298" title="Generation Z" label="Generation Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960388" start="2300" end="2316" title="Generation Alpha" label="Generation Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q111917558" start="2322" end="2337" title="Generation Beta" label="Generation Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="4409" end="4421" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="4427" end="4441" title="text messaging" label="text messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q751065" start="5163" end="5172" title="Pig Latin" label="Pig Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="5291" end="5300" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844848" start="5307" end="5322" title="Gregg shorthand" label="Gregg shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="5337" end="5348" title="stenography" label="stenography"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205962" start="8534" end="8551" title="Child Integration" label="Child integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="8731" end="8756" title="Observational learning" label="learning, and pitching in"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="8794" end="8803" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="9531" end="9546" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244907" start="10395" end="10412" title="standardized test" label="standardized test"/>
<link wikidata="Q678774" start="10734" end="10751" title="employee benefits" label="employee benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="12202" end="12205" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="NAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10001" start="14010" end="14018" title="Deventer" label="Deventer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="14504" end="14520" title="Barcelona, Spain" label="Barcelona, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="14781" end="14793" title="Lyon, France" label="Lyon, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="14799" end="14814" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="15576" end="15588" title="Baby Boomers" label="Baby Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q861360" start="16366" end="16381" title="Achievement gap" label="Achievement gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q438946" start="16384" end="16390" title="Ageism" label="Ageism"/>
<link wikidata="Q244752" start="16393" end="16407" title="Digital divide" label="Digital divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="16410" end="16420" title="Income gap" label="Income gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q50807067" start="16423" end="16450" title="Inter-generational contract" label="Inter-generational contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502025" start="16453" end="16477" title="Intergenerational equity" label="Intergenerational equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="16480" end="16499" title="List of generations" label="List of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13604258" start="16502" end="16514" title="Marriage gap" label="Marriage gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="16517" end="16528" title="Moral panic" label="Moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191303" start="16531" end="16547" title="Student activism" label="Student activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627905" start="16550" end="16563" title="Student voice" label="Student voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834235" start="16566" end="16590" title="Transgenerational design" label="Transgenerational design"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059283" start="16593" end="16607" title="Youth activism" label="Youth activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059355" start="16610" end="16621" title="Youth voice" label="Youth voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="16624" end="16629" title="Slang" label="Slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="16632" end="16642" title="Technology" label="Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q268586" start="16645" end="16658" title="Culture shock" label="Culture shock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149225" wikidata="Q27593" url="?curid=149225" title="AC/DC">
<text>AC/DC are an Australian rock band formed in Sydney in 1973. Their music has been variously described as hard rock, blues rock and heavy metal, although the band calls it simply &quot;rock and roll&quot;. They are cited as a formative influence on the new wave of British heavy metal bands. The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2003 and have sold over 200 million records worldwide, making them one of the best-selling artists of all time.

AC/DC were founded by brothers Angus (lead guitar) and Malcolm Young (rhythm guitar), with Colin Burgess (drums), Larry Van Kriedt (bass guitar) and Dave Evans (lead vocals). They underwent several line-up changes before releasing their debut Australasian-only album, &quot;High Voltage&quot; (1975). Membership stabilised after the release of &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot; (1977), with the Young brothers, Phil Rudd on drums, Cliff Williams on bass guitar and Bon Scott on lead vocals. Seven months after the release of &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; (1979), Scott died of alcohol poisoning and English singer Brian Johnson was then recruited as their new frontman. Their first album with Johnson, &quot;Back in Black&quot; (1980), dedicated to Scott&#x27;s memory, became the second best-selling album of all time. Their eighth studio album, &quot;For Those About to Rock&quot; (1981), was their first album to reach number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Rudd was fired partway through the &quot;Flick of the Switch&quot; sessions in 1983 and was replaced by Simon Wright, who was replaced by Chris Slade six years later.

AC/DC experienced a commercial resurgence in the early 1990s with the release of album &quot;The Razors Edge&quot; (1990); it was their only record to feature Slade, as Rudd returned in 1994. Rudd has since recorded five more albums with the band, starting with &quot;Ballbreaker&quot; (1995). Their fifteenth studio album, &quot;Black Ice&quot;, was the second highest-selling record of 2008 and their highest chart peak since &quot;For Those About to Rock&quot;, eventually reaching number one worldwide. The band&#x27;s line-up remained the same for 20 years until 2014, when Malcolm retired due to early-onset dementia, from which he died three years later; additionally, Rudd was charged with threatening to kill and possession of methamphetamine and cannabis. Angus and Malcolm&#x27;s nephew, Stevie Young, replaced Malcolm and debuted on the album &quot;Rock or Bust&quot; (2014). On the accompanying tour, Slade filled in for Rudd. In 2016, Guns N&#x27; Roses singer Axl Rose replaced Johnson for the rest of the tour dates due to a risk of hearing loss. Williams retired at the end of the tour and the band entered a two-year hiatus. A reunion of the &quot;Rock or Bust&quot; line-up was announced in September 2020; the band&#x27;s seventeenth studio album, &quot;Power Up&quot;, was released two months later. Its supporting tour was announced in February 2024, with drummer Matt Laug replacing Rudd, and bassist Chris Chaney replacing Williams.

==History==
===1973–1974: Formation and name===
AC/DC were formed in the Australian pop music scene of the early to mid-1970s, which is described as the third wave of rock music. Many local 1960s artists – e.g., the Easybeats and the Masters Apprentices, had attempted to gain international recognition but achieved limited commercial success overseas and disbanded after returning to Australia. Newer artists and veterans of the 1960s beat boom developed a variety of genres, which included a harder blues rock style dubbed pub rock. Popular Australian bands – e.g., Sherbet and Skyhooks, played mainstream pop or adopted a glam rock approach.
In November 1973, brothers Malcolm and Angus Young formed AC/DC in Sydney with drummer Colin Burgess from the Masters Apprentices, bass guitarist Larry Van Kriedt and vocalist Dave Evans. Earlier, Malcolm and Evans had been members of a band called Velvet Underground – not the American group of the same name – based in Newcastle for two years, and Angus started his own band called Tantrum – he would only jam with his friends. The Young brothers had joined Marcus Hook Roll Band, a studio-only band, in 1973, which provided their first recordings for their debut album, &quot;Tales of Old Grand-Daddy&quot; (1974), although the pair left before it was issued. Before formation, Malcolm teamed with ex-Velvet Underground bass guitarist Mick Sheffzick and Burgess for his proposed group. Van Kriedt took over from Sheffzick for bass guitar, then Evans responded to an ad in &quot;the Sydney Morning Herald&quot; and then Angus joined after passing an audition.
Upon formation, Malcolm and Angus developed the band&#x27;s name after their sister Margaret pointed out the symbol &quot;AC/DC&quot; on the AC adapter of her sewing machine. A.C./D.C. is an abbreviation for alternating current/direct current electricity. The brothers felt that this name symbolised the band&#x27;s raw energy and the power-driven performances of their music. It is pronounced one letter at a time, though the band are colloquially known as Acca Dacca in Australia. The AC/DC band name is stylised with a lightning bolt separating the AC from DC and has been used on all studio albums, except the international version of &quot;Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap&quot;. Their logo was designed by American typographer Gerard Huerta in 1977 and first appeared on &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot;. Adam Behr of &quot;The Bulletin&quot; explained, &quot;[its] type font conveyed the sense of electricity implicit in their name.&quot;

AC/DC&#x27;s first official gig was at Chequers nightclub in Sydney on 31 December 1973. For about 18 months, most members of the band dressed in some form of glam or satin outfit. Angus tried various costumes: Zorro, a gorilla, and Superman. Their performances involved cover versions of the Rolling Stones, Chuck Berry, the Beatles and &quot;smattering of old blues standards&quot; while trialling some original songs. Angus first wore his characteristic school-uniform stage outfit in April 1974 at Victoria Park, Sydney; the idea was Margaret&#x27;s. He portrayed a boy &quot;straight from school to play his guitar.&quot; On stage, Evans was occasionally replaced on lead vocals by their first manager, Denis Loughlin from Sherbet. In Paul Stenning&#x27;s book &quot;AC/DC: Two Sides to Every Glory&quot;, he states that Evans and Loughlin were clashing and as a consequence, other members developed bitter feelings towards Evans.

The group recorded a session in January 1974 at EMI Studios in Sydney, with Vanda &amp; Young – George Young and Harry Vanda – as the producers; both were former members of the Easybeats and Marcus Hook Roll Band. George is Angus and Malcolm&#x27;s older brother. Several songs were recorded, including &quot;Can I Sit Next to You, Girl&quot;, &quot;Rockin&#x27; in the Parlour&quot; and an early version of &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Singer&quot;. A week after the session, Burgess was fired due to intoxication; he was unconscious during a performance. Subsequently, Van Kriedt was replaced; his recorded bass lines for the January session were re-recorded by George. Their replacements, Neil Smith on bass guitar and Noel Taylor on drums, lasted six weeks, replaced in turn by Rob Bailey and Peter Clack, respectively. The band signed with Albert Productions in June 1974. &quot;Can I Sit Next to You, Girl&quot;, backed with &quot;Rockin&#x27; in the Parlour&quot;, taken from the January session, was released on 22 July 1974 as the band&#x27;s first single. The song reached the top 50 on Australia&#x27;s Kent Music Report singles chart.

The group had developed a strong live reputation by mid-1974, which resulted in a supporting slot on Lou Reed&#x27;s national tour in August. During that tour, Malcolm switched to rhythm guitar, leaving Angus on lead guitar – the roles the two guitarists played from then on. During 1974, on the recommendation of Michael Chugg, veteran Melbourne promoter Michael Browning booked them to play at his club, the Hard Rock Cafe. He was not pleased with their glam rock image and felt that Evans was the wrong singer, but he was impressed by the Young brothers&#x27; guitar playing. Browning then received a call weeks after the Hard Rock gig from Malcolm: Loughlin had quit and they were stuck in Adelaide with no money. They hired Browning as their manager in November 1974, with the cooperation of George and Harry Vanda. The Young brothers decided to abandon their glam rock image; instead, they pursued a pub rock sound. To this end, they agreed that Evans was no longer a suitable frontman.

===1974–1976: Bon Scott joins===

In September 1974, Bon Scott, a vocalist previously with the Valentines (1966–1970) and Fraternity (1971–1973), joined AC/DC after his former bandmate Vince Lovegrove introduced him to George during their stopover in Adelaide in August. Scott worked as a chauffeur for the group until an audition promoted him to lead singer. Like the Young brothers, Scott was born in Scotland, emigrated to Australia in his childhood and had a passion for blues music. Scott also had experience as a songwriter and drummer. Their debut single&#x27;s tracks were re-written and the vocals were re-recorded by Scott. With Scott&#x27;s inclusion, &quot;[their] working-class style, boogie-rock sound and earthy humour fell into place&quot;, according to music journalist Ian McFarlane. Scott&#x27;s first concert for AC/DC was on 5 October 1974 at the Masonic Hall in Brighton-Le-Sands, New South Wales.

AC/DC recorded their first studio album, &quot;High Voltage&quot;, in November 1974 with Vanda &amp; Young producing at Albert Studios in Sydney. Bailey and Clack were still in the band during its recording, but Clack played on only one track, and the rest were provided by session drummer Tony Currenti. George handled some bass parts and later redid others. Recording sessions took ten days and were based on instrumentals written by the Young brothers with lyrics added by Scott. They relocated to Melbourne that month. Both Bailey and Clack were fired in January 1975. Paul Matters took over bass duties briefly before being fired in turn and replaced temporarily by George or Malcolm for live duties. Matters had disagreements with the Young brothers&#x27; decisions. Meanwhile, on drums, Ron Carpenter and Russell Coleman had brief tenures before Phil Rudd, from Buster Brown, joined in that month. Bass guitarist Mark Evans was enlisted in March 1975, setting the line-up which lasted two years.
The band were scheduled to play at the 1975 Sunbury Pop music festival in January; however, they went home without performing following a physical altercation with the management and crew of headlining act Deep Purple. &quot;High Voltage&quot; was released exclusively in Australasia on 17 February 1975 via Albert Productions/EMI Music Australia, and reached the top 20 in Australia. It provided a single, their cover version of Big Joe Williams&#x27; &quot;Baby, Please Don&#x27;t Go&quot;.

McFarlane observed, &quot;[their] initial achievement was to take the raw energy of Aussie pub rock, extend its basic guidelines, serve it up to a teenybop &quot;Countdown&quot; audience and still reap the benefits of the live circuit by packing out the pubs.&quot; They released their second studio album &quot;T.N.T.&quot; (1975), in Australasia only, its tracks were recorded with Evans and Rudd except for two tracks, which used Currenti and George. It peaked at number two in Australia and the top 40 in New Zealand. Its second single, &quot;It&#x27;s a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll)&quot; (December 1975), had a well-known promotional video made for the ABC-TV pop music programme &quot;Countdown&quot;, featuring the band miming the song on the back of a flatbed truck. The single reached the top ten in Australia. The title track was issued as a single in March 1976 and includes the lyric &quot;so lock up your daughter&quot;, which was modified into their first United Kingdom tour&#x27;s name.

===1976–1977: Initial success and record deal===

Browning sent promo material to contacts in London, which came to the attention of Phil Carson of Atlantic Records. AC/DC signed an international deal with Atlantic in 1976. On their arrival in London in April, their scheduled tour with Back Street Crawler was cancelled due to the death of that group&#x27;s guitarist, Paul Kossoff. As a result, AC/DC returned to playing smaller venues to build a local following until their label organised the Lock Up Your Daughters tour sponsored by &quot;Sounds&quot; magazine, starting in June 1976. At the time, punk rock was breaking and came to dominate the pages of major British music weeklies, including &quot;NME&quot; and &quot;Melody Maker&quot;. AC/DC were sometimes identified with the punk rock movement by the British press, but they hated punk rock, believing it to be a passing fad. Browning wrote that &quot;it wasn&#x27;t possible to even hold a conversation with AC/DC about punk without them getting totally pissed off&quot;.

The first AC/DC album to have worldwide distribution was a 1976 combination of tracks taken from the &quot;High Voltage&quot; and &quot;T.N.T.&quot; LPs. Also titled &quot;High Voltage&quot;, it was released through Atlantic in May 1976, eventually going on to sell over three million copies in the US by 2005. The track selection was heavily weighted towards the more recent &quot;T.N.T.&quot;, including only two songs from their first LP. Their third studio album, &quot;Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap&quot;, was released in September–November 1976, in both Australian and European versions. Track listings varied worldwide; the international version of the album included the &quot;T.N.T.&quot; track &quot;Rocker&quot;, which had previously not been released internationally. The original Australian version included &quot;Jailbreak&quot;. This was later more readily available on the 1984 compilation extended play &quot;&#x27;74 Jailbreak&quot;, or as a live version on 1992&#x27;s &quot;Live&quot;. &quot;Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap&quot; was not released in North America until 2 April 1981, by which time the band were at the peak of their popularity.

After a brief tour of Sweden, they returned to London, where they set new attendance records during their residency at the Marquee. They continued to tour throughout Europe and then Australia. In January 1977, they started recording their fourth studio album, &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot;. Early the same year, they returned to Britain and began a European tour with Black Sabbath. While Scott and Ozzy Osbourne quickly became friends, other members of each group were less cordial. In one incident, Geezer Butler allegedly pulled a switchblade at Malcolm during their show in Sweden in April. Accounts of the incident differ, but AC/DC were taken off the rest of the tour.

===1977–1980: Cliff Williams joins and death of Bon Scott===

In May 1977, Mark Evans was fired. This was due to &quot;musical differences&quot; and personality clashes with Angus. He was replaced on bass guitar by Cliff Williams, a former member of the UK bands Home (1970–1974) and Bandit (1976). Scott explained that Williams was more experienced, while Malcolm wanted a bass guitarist and backing vocalist. Evans&#x27; autobiography, &quot;Dirty Deeds: My Life Inside/Outside of AC/DC&quot;, released in 2011, predominantly dealt with his time in AC/DC.

AC/DC&#x27;s first American radio exposure was through Bill Bartlett at Jacksonville station WPDQ-FM/WAIV-FM in 1975. Two years later, they played their first concert there, as a support act for Canadian group Moxy in Austin, Texas, on 27 July 1977. From booking agent Doug Thaler of American Talent International and the management of Leber-Krebs, they experienced the country&#x27;s stadium circuit, supporting rock acts Ted Nugent, Aerosmith, Kiss, Styx, UFO and Blue Öyster Cult; they co-headlined with Cheap Trick. AC/DC released their fifth studio album, &quot;Powerage&quot;, on 5 May 1978. The sole single from &quot;Powerage&quot; was &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Damnation&quot; (June 1978). An appearance at The Apollo, Glasgow, during the Powerage Tour was recorded and released as &quot;If You Want Blood You&#x27;ve Got It&quot; (1978).
In 1979, the group recorded their sixth studio album, &quot;Highway to Hell&quot;, with producer Robert John &quot;Mutt&quot; Lange, which was issued on 27 July 1979. It became their first album to reach the top 20 the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, eventually peaking at number 17, and it propelled AC/DC into the top ranks of hard rock acts. &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; had lyrics that shifted away from flippant and comical towards more central rock themes, putting increased emphasis on backing vocals but still featuring AC/DC&#x27;s signature sound: loud, simple, pounding riffs and grooving back-beats.

In February 1980, the members began to work on their seventh studio album, &quot;Back in Black&quot;, with Scott on drums instead of vocals. On 18 February, Scott passed out in a car driven by his friend Alistair Kinnear after a night of drinking at The Music Machine in Camden Town, London. According to police, Kinnear left Scott in the car overnight to sleep off the alcohol effects. Unable to wake Scott early on the evening of 19 February, Kinnear rushed him to King&#x27;s College Hospital, Camberwell, where Scott was pronounced dead on arrival. The official cause of death was &quot;acute alcohol poisoning&quot;. Scott&#x27;s family buried him in Fremantle, Western Australia, the area they emigrated to when he was a boy.

===1980–1983: Brian Johnson joins and rebirth===

Following Scott&#x27;s death, the members briefly considered quitting. Scott&#x27;s parents advised the members that he would have wanted them to carry on, so they decided to continue and sought a new vocalist. Fat Lip vocalist Allan Fryer, ex-Rick Wakeman vocalist Gary Pickford-Hopkins, and the Easybeats&#x27; singer Stevie Wright were touted by the press as possible replacements. Various other candidates were considered by the group: ex-Moxy member Buzz Shearman, who was unable to join due to voice issues, Slade vocalist Noddy Holder, and ex-Back Street Crawler vocalist Terry Slesser. During their auditions, the group brought in ex-Geordie singer Brian Johnson, who impressed the group. Johnson sang Ike &amp; Tina Turner&#x27;s &quot;Nutbush City Limits&quot; and then &quot;Whole Lotta Rosie&quot; from &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot;. After they worked through the rest of the applicants in the following days, Johnson returned for a second audition. Angus later recalled that Scott himself had praised Johnson&#x27;s singing.

On 29 March 1980, Malcolm offered Johnson a place in the band, much to the singer&#x27;s surprise. Out of respect for Scott, the band wanted a vocalist who would not be an imitator. In addition to his distinctive voice, demeanour and love of classic soul and blues music, the group were impressed by Johnson&#x27;s engaging personality. Johnson was officially announced as the lead singer of AC/DC on 1 April. With Johnson, the group completed the songwriting previously began with Scott for &quot;Back in Black&quot;. Recording took place at Compass Point Studios in The Bahamas a few months after Scott&#x27;s death. Produced by Lange and recorded by Tony Platt, it became the second best-selling album of all time and a hard rock landmark. Its singles are &quot;Hells Bells&quot;, &quot;You Shook Me All Night Long&quot;, &quot;Rock and Roll Ain&#x27;t Noise Pollution&quot; and the title track. The album peaked at number one in the UK, and number four in the US, where it spent 612 weeks on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart. It also reached the top spot in Australia, Canada, and France.

AC/DC released their first theatrical concert film, &quot;AC/DC: Let There Be Rock&quot;, which was recorded on 9 December 1979 in Paris during their Highway to Hell Tour on 1 September 1980. It was produced and directed by Eric Dionysius and Eric Mistler and distributed by Warner Bros. The band&#x27;s eighth studio album, &quot;For Those About to Rock We Salute You&quot;, was released on 23 November 1981. It was their first number-one album on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and it also reached the top three in Australia and Germany. It received mixed reviews from critics. Two singles were issued: &quot;Let&#x27;s Get It Up&quot; and the title track, which peaked at number 13 and number 15 in the UK, respectively.

===1983–1990: Line-up changes and commercial decline===

Instead of Lange, their ninth studio album, &quot;Flick of the Switch&quot; (1983), was produced by the group&#x27;s members themselves. It was a return to the rawness and simplicity of their early albums, but received mixed reviews and was considered underdeveloped and unmemorable; one critic stated that they &quot;had made the same album nine times&quot;. &quot;Flick of the Switch&quot; eventually reached number four on the UK charts, and the top five in Australia, and Finland. AC/DC had minor success with the single &quot;Guns for Hire&quot;, reaching number 84 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. Rudd has had long-term drug and alcohol addictions. His friendship with Malcolm had deteriorated and eventually escalated into a physical confrontation, after which Rudd was fired partway through the &quot;Flick of the Switch&quot; sessions in mid-1983. Rudd was replaced by ex-A II Z drummer Simon Wright in July 1983, after they held over 700 auditions in the US and UK. Simon Kirke and Paul Thompson were two drummers who auditioned.

The band&#x27;s tenth studio album, &quot;Fly on the Wall&quot;, produced by the Young brothers in 1985, was also regarded as uninspired and directionless. A concept music video of the same name featured the band at a bar, playing five of the album&#x27;s ten songs. In 1986, the group returned to the top 20 on singles charts with the made-for-radio &quot;Who Made Who&quot;, reaching number nine in Australia and number 16 in the UK. The associated album &quot;Who Made Who&quot; is the soundtrack to Stephen King&#x27;s film &quot;Maximum Overdrive&quot;; it brought together older hits, such as &quot;You Shook Me All Night Long&quot;, with a few new songs – the title track and two instrumentals, &quot;D.T.&quot; and &quot;Chase the Ace&quot;.
In February 1988, both AC/DC and Vanda &amp; Young were inducted into the Australian Recording Industry Association&#x27;s inaugural Hall of Fame. The group&#x27;s eleventh studio album, &quot;Blow Up Your Video&quot;, released in 1988, was recorded at Studio Miraval in Le Val, France, with Vanda &amp; Young as producers. The group recorded nineteen songs, choosing ten for the final release; though the album was later criticised for containing excessive &quot;filler&quot;, it was a commercial success: &quot;Blow Up Your Video&quot; reached number two on the UK charts and Australia, AC/DC&#x27;s highest position since &quot;Back in Black&quot; in 1980. It provided an Australian top-five and UK top-twenty single, &quot;Heatseeker&quot;, and &quot;That&#x27;s the Way I Wanna Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll&quot;.
The Blow Up Your Video World Tour began in February 1988 in Perth, Australia. In April, following live appearances across Europe, Malcolm announced that he was taking time off from the North American legs of the tour, principally to deal with his alcoholism. Angus and Malcolm&#x27;s nephew, Stevie Young, temporarily replaced Malcolm on guitar. In 1989, Wright left the group to work on British heavy metal band Dio&#x27;s fifth studio album, &quot;Lock Up the Wolves&quot; (1990); he was replaced by drummer Chris Slade, who has played with ex-Thin Lizzy guitarist Gary Moore, before joining. Johnson was unavailable for several months while finalising his divorce, so the Young brothers wrote all the songs for the next album, a practice they continued for all subsequent releases through &quot;Power Up&quot; in 2020.

===1990–1999: Popularity regained===
The band&#x27;s twelfth studio album, &quot;The Razors Edge&quot;, was recorded in Vancouver, Canada and was mixed and engineered by Mike Fraser and produced by Bruce Fairbairn, who had previously worked with Aerosmith and Bon Jovi. Released on 24 September 1990, it was a major success for the band, reaching the top three in Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany, Switzerland, and the US. Its lead single, &quot;Thunderstruck&quot; (September 1990), peaked at number 5 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Mainstream Rock chart, number 4 on the ARIA Singles chart, and number 13 on the OCC&#x27;s UK Singles Chart. Its second single, &quot;Moneytalks&quot; (12 November 1990), peaked at number 23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. By 2006, the album had achieved 5× Platinum status in the US.

Several shows on the 1991 Razors Edge World Tour were recorded for the 1992 live album, &quot;AC/DC Live&quot;. It was produced by Fairbairn and was called one of the best live albums of the 1990s by Barry Weber of AllMusic. AC/DC headlined the Monsters of Rock show during this tour, which was released as a video album, &quot;Live at Donington&quot;, in 1992. During the tour, three fans were killed at a concert at the Salt Palace in Salt Lake City on 18 January 1991, when they were crushed and fell to the floor at the beginning of the show. It took 26 minutes before venue security and group members understood the severity of the situation and halted the concert. AC/DC settled out of court with the victims&#x27; families. In September 1991, AC/DC performed in Moscow for the Monsters of Rock festival in front of 1.6 million people. It was the first open-air rock concert to be held in the former Soviet Union.

AC/DC recorded &quot;Big Gun&quot; in 1993 for the soundtrack of Arnold Schwarzenegger&#x27;s film &quot;Last Action Hero&quot;. Released as a single, it reached number one on the US Mainstream Rock chart, the band&#x27;s first number-one single on that chart. Pacific Gameworks proposed a beat &#x27;em up video game for the Atari Jaguar CD in 1994, &quot;AC/DC: Defenders of Metal&quot;, which would have featured the group&#x27;s crew; however, production never started. Angus and Malcolm invited Rudd to several jam sessions during 1994; he was eventually rehired due to Slade resigning. Recording began in October 1994 at Record Plant Studios in New York City. After 10 weeks of recording, they moved to Ocean Way Studios in Los Angeles, in February 1995, and finished recording in May. On 22 September, their thirteenth studio album, &quot;Ballbreaker&quot;, was released, which reached number one in Australia, Sweden, and Switzerland.

In November 1997, a box set, &quot;Bonfire&quot;, was released. It contained four albums: a remastered version of &quot;Back in Black&quot;, &quot;Volts&quot; – a disc with alternative takes, outtakes and stray live cuts recorded with Scott – and two live albums, &quot;Live from the Atlantic Studios&quot; and &quot;Let There Be Rock: The Movie&quot;. &quot;Live from the Atlantic Studios&quot; was recorded on 7 December 1977 at the Atlantic Studios in New York. &quot;Let There Be Rock: The Movie&quot; was a double album recorded in December 1979 at the Pavillon de Paris and was the soundtrack of &quot;AC/DC: Let There Be Rock&quot; (1980).

===1999–2014: Popularity confirmed and &quot;Black Ice&quot;===

AC/DC recorded their fourteenth studio album, &quot;Stiff Upper Lip&quot;, in 1999, which was produced by George at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver. Released in February 2000, it was better received by critics than &quot;Ballbreaker&quot; but was considered lacking in new ideas. The title track was issued as a single in January 2000, which remained at number one on the US Mainstream Rock charts for four weeks. The other singles, &quot;Satellite Blues&quot; and &quot;Safe in New York City&quot;, reached number one and number seven, respectively, on the same chart. The band signed a long-term, multi-album deal with Sony Music in December 2002, which issued their remasters series. In 2003, the entire back catalogue – except &quot;Ballbreaker&quot; and &quot;Stiff Upper Lip&quot; – was remastered and reissued. &quot;Ballbreaker&quot; and &quot;Stiff Upper Lip&quot; were reissued in the UK in 2004. Later in 2003, AC/DC were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. The band&#x27;s 2003 lineup (Johnson, Williams, Rudd, Angus Young, and Malcolm Young), in addition to Scott, were the inductees. Notably, former bassist Mark Evans (who appeared on four albums in the 1970s) was initially announced as an inductee, but six weeks after the announcement, his inclusion was quietly omitted.

The group performed at Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto, supporting the Rolling Stones, with Rush and other artists, on 30 July 2003. The benefit concert assisted the city&#x27;s tourism industry, which was negatively impacted by the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak. The audience of 450,000 set a record for the largest paid music event in Canadian history. The band came second in a list of Australia&#x27;s highest-earning entertainers for 2005, and sixth in the following year. Verizon made all the albums, including the &quot;Live at Donington&quot; video, available for digital download in 2007. AC/DC released video compilations &quot;Family Jewels&quot; on 28 March 2005, and &quot;Plug Me In&quot; on 16 October 2007. &quot;No Bull: The Directors Cut&quot;, a newly edited, comprehensive Blu-ray and DVD of the band&#x27;s July 1996 Plaza De Toros de las Ventas concert in Madrid, Spain, was released on 9 September 2008.
&quot;Black Ice&quot;, their fifteenth studio album, was released in Australia on 18 October 2008, and issued worldwide two days later. Produced by Brendan O&#x27;Brien and mixed and engineered by Mike Fraser, its 15 tracks were their first studio recordings in eight years. Like &quot;Stiff Upper Lip&quot;, it was recorded at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver. It was sold in the US exclusively at Wal-Mart, Sam&#x27;s Club and the band&#x27;s official website. &quot;Black Ice&quot; reached number one in 29 countries, including Australia, the UK, and the US. &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Train&quot;, the album&#x27;s first single, was released to radio on 28 August.

The Black Ice World Tour was announced on 11 September 2008 and began on 28 October in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. It then concluded with its final show in Bilbao, Spain, on 28 June 2010, after 20 months in which the band went to 108 cities in over 28 countries, with an estimated total audience of over 4.9 million. On 15 September 2008, AC/DC Radio debuted on Sirius Channel 19 and XM Channel 53, which plays their music along with band member interviews.

On 29 September 2009, the band announced a collection of studio and live rarities, &quot;Backtracks&quot;, which was released on 10 November as a 2×CD and DVD standard edition, or 3×CD, 2×DVD and LP deluxe edition box set. On 4 November, AC/DC were announced as the &quot;Business Review Weekly&quot; top Australian earner in entertainment for 2009, with earnings of $105 million. This displaced the Wiggles from the number-one spot for the first time in four years. On 19 April 2010, AC/DC released &quot;Iron Man 2&quot;, the soundtrack for the eponymous film, which compiled earlier tracks from the band&#x27;s studio albums.
The band headlined the Download Festival at Donington Park in June 2010. Three concerts in December 2009 at the River Plate Stadium in Argentina were released on a video album, &quot;Live at River Plate&quot; via DVD on 10 May 2011. An exclusive single from the DVD, featuring the songs &quot;Shoot to Thrill&quot; and &quot;War Machine&quot;, was issued on Record Store Day, April 2011. AC/DC released their first live audio album in 20 years, &quot;Live at River Plate&quot;, on 19 November 2012.

In June 2011, AC/DC reissued their concert film, &quot;AC/DC: Let There Be Rock&quot;, on DVD and Blu-ray. The entire catalogue – excluding &quot;T.N.T.&quot; (1975) and the Australian versions of &quot;High Voltage&quot; (1975), &quot;Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap&quot; (1976) and &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot; (1977), became available on the iTunes Store the same day. At the conclusion of the Black Ice World Tour in 2010, Malcolm had been diagnosed with lung cancer. It was treated at an early stage and surgery was successful with cancerous tissue removed. He also had an unspecified heart problem and had a pacemaker fitted.

===2014–2018: Malcolm Young retires and hiatus===

Malcolm became seriously ill in April 2014 and was unable to continue performing; fans speculated that the group could disband. However, Johnson stated that despite Malcolm&#x27;s absence, they would return to Vancouver to record their sixteenth studio album, &quot;Rock or Bust&quot;. In July, AC/DC announced that they had finished recording it and that Stevie had replaced Malcolm in the studio. On 23 September, AC/DC members confirmed that Malcolm had officially retired from performing. Malcolm&#x27;s last show with the group had been on 28 June 2010 in Bilbao, Spain; he died on 18 November 2017 at the age of 64 due to his dementia. Rudd confirmed that there would be another AC/DC tour and that they had no intention of retiring.

On 23 September 2014, The band revealed that &quot;Rock or Bust&quot;, featuring eleven tracks, would be released on 28 November as the first AC/DC album in the band&#x27;s history without Malcolm on the recordings, nevertheless all its compositions were credited to Angus and Malcolm. The album reached number one in Australia, Canada, Germany, and the UK. The band also announced their supporting world tour, with Stevie as Malcolm&#x27;s replacement.

Rudd was charged with threatening to kill, possession of methamphetamine and possession of cannabis following a police raid on his home on 6 November 2014. AC/DC&#x27;s members issued a statement clarifying that the tour promoting &quot;Rock or Bust&quot; would continue but did not indicate whether or not Rudd would participate or whether he was still a member. At a charity signing before the Grammy Awards, the band were photographed together with Slade. It was later confirmed that he had rejoined for the Grammys and tour. In April 2015, Rudd pleaded guilty to drug and threatening to kill charges. Shortly thereafter, the band&#x27;s website showed that Rudd was replaced by Slade on drums. On 9 July 2015, Rudd was sentenced to eight months of home detention.
On 7 March 2016, the band announced that the final ten dates of the Rock or Bust World Tour would be rescheduled as Johnson&#x27;s doctors had ordered him to stop touring immediately; he risked complete deafness if he persisted. The ten cancelled dates were to be rescheduled, &quot;likely with a guest vocalist&quot; later in the year, leaving Johnson&#x27;s future in touring with the group uncertain. On 16 April 2016, Guns N&#x27; Roses frontman Axl Rose was announced as the lead vocalist for the remainder of their 2016 tour dates.

Williams indicated he was leaving AC/DC during an interview with &quot;Gulfshore Life&quot;″s Jonathan Foerste on 8 July 2016. &quot;It&#x27;s been what I&#x27;ve known for the past 40 years, but after this tour I&#x27;m backing off of touring and recording. Losing Malcolm, the thing with [Rudd] and now with [Johnson], it&#x27;s a changed animal. I feel in my gut it&#x27;s the right thing.&quot; At the end of the Rock or Bust World Tour, he released a video statement confirming his departure. His last show with AC/DC before the hiatus was in Philadelphia on 20 September 2016. After completing the tour in 2016, AC/DC went on hiatus. George Young died on 22 October 2017, aged 70.

===2018–present: Reunion and &quot;Power Up&quot;===
In August 2018, speculation grew that former members Johnson and Rudd were back working with the band. A fan living near The Warehouse Studio, Vancouver claimed to have observed them in the outdoor area of the studio from an apartment window. Shortly afterwards, a photograph of Johnson with Williams at the gymnasium of the Living Shangri-La hotel in Vancouver in December 2018 surfaced, indicating that Williams had also rejoined. AC/DC then confirmed on 30 September 2020 the return of Johnson, Rudd and Williams to the line-up alongside Angus and Stevie, reuniting the &quot;Rock or Bust&quot; line-up.

On 28 September 2020, the band updated their social media accounts posting a teaser video, which led to speculation of their &quot;comeback, possibly as early as this week or next week.&quot; On 1 October, AC/DC released a snippet of their new song &quot;Shot in the Dark&quot;. On 7 October, the band confirmed the upcoming release on 13 November of their next studio album, &quot;Power Up&quot; and issued &quot;Shot in the Dark&quot; as its lead single from the album. The album&#x27;s track listing was revealed on their website the same day. They had recorded it in August–September 2018 with O&#x27;Brien producing at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver, with some tweaking in Los Angeles in 2019.
AC/DC launched a dive bar on 2 October 2023, located at Club 5 Bar in Indio, called the High Voltage Dive Bar. AC/DC performed a co-headlining act for the Power Trip music festival at the Empire Polo Club in Indio, California, on 7 October, which was their first show in seven years, with Williams being part of the line-up after coming out of retirement, and American drummer Matt Laug, who had previously played for Slash&#x27;s Snakepit and Alice Cooper, replacing Rudd. The band hinted at another tour to occur in 2024; the mayor of Munich, Dieter Reiter, confirmed that they had booked a show in the Olympic Stadium for 12 June 2024. Founding drummer Colin Burgess died on 16 December 2023, aged 77.

On 6 February 2024, the band published a teaser on their social media accounts, showing the band&#x27;s lightning bolt symbol flickering before the words &quot;Are You Ready&quot; appear and their song of the same name plays. This led to fans speculating that they would come back to touring after eight years. On 12 February, the Power Up Tour was announced, with former Jane&#x27;s Addiction bass guitarist Chris Chaney replacing Williams. The European leg of the tour began on 17 May and concluded on 17 August, with American band the Pretty Reckless as their support act for all twenty-four performances. AC/DC reissued their entire catalogue on gold vinyl for their 50th anniversary on 15 March 21 June and 27 September 2024, as part of the &quot;AC/DC 50&quot; series. They have also reissued two Australasia-only albums – &quot;High Voltage&quot; and &quot;T.N.T.&quot; (both 1975), only available at the High Voltage Dive Bar. On 2 December 2024, the band announced a second leg of the Power Up Tour in North America for thirteen shows, with The Pretty Reckless as their support act.

In January 2025, news broke that the band&#x27;s Burwood home on Burleigh Street had been demolished in December 2024 to make way for a large development project. The news sparked outrage from the band&#x27;s followers and rock music fans in Australia and worldwide.

==Musical style==
Aside from an early flirtation with glam rock, the group&#x27;s sound and performance style are based on Australian pub rock. That style was pioneered by Lobby Loyde of Billy Thorpe&#x27;s early 1970s group, the Aztecs. Vanda noted &quot;the pub crowd as an audience demanded blood—&#x27;or else&#x27;.&quot; He described wanting to &quot;recreate the real Australian pub sound—&#x27;not like that American sound, smooth and creamy, nicey, nicey.&#x27;&quot; Glenn A. Baker felt they played &quot;rib-crushing, blood-curdling, brain damaging, no bullshit, thunder rock&quot;.

&quot;The Canberra Times&quot;″ Tony Catterall reviewed &quot;T.N.T.&quot;, in which &quot;[they] wallow in the lumpen proletarianism that&#x27;s the home of punk rock&quot; while comparing them with rivals Buster Brown, which are &quot;more imaginative and musically better&quot;. Music journalist Ed Nimmervoll summarised, &quot;If we tried to isolate what has characterised Australian rock and roll from the rest of the world&#x27;s it would be music that&#x27;s made to be played live, and gets right down to basics with a minimum of distraction. [...] AC/DC captured that essence not long after it crystallised, and they have continued to carry that creed around the world as their own.&quot;

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said AC/DC utilizes &quot;dirty&quot; guitar riffs, &quot;snarling&quot; singing, and &quot;catchy, &quot; hooks. According to &quot;Vulture&quot; music journalist David Marchese, the instrumental foundation of the band&#x27;s simple sound was the drummer—Rudd, Wright, or Slade—striking the kick drum on the first and third beat of every measure and the snare drum on the second and fourth beat; bass guitarist Williams consistently down-picking an eighth note; Angus performing lead parts that possessed &quot;a clear architecture and even sort of swing, in a frenzied, half-demented way&quot;; and Malcolm&#x27;s &quot;propulsive&quot; yet nuanced rhythm guitar featuring &quot;little &quot;chuks&quot;, stutters, and silences that give the monstrous riffs life.&quot;

For the majority of Malcolm&#x27;s tenure in AC/DC, he used a Marshall Super Bass head to amplify his rhythm guitar while recording in the studio. According to Chris Gill of &quot;Guitar World&quot;, this amplifier helped define his signature guitar tone: &quot;clean but as loud as possible to ride on the razor&#x27;s edge of power amp distortion and deliver the ideal combination of grind, twang, clang and crunch, with no distorted preamp &#x27;hair,&#x27; fizz or compression&quot;, as heard on songs such as &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot;, &quot;Dirty Deeds&quot;, &quot;For Those About to Rock&quot; and &quot;Thunderstruck&quot;. During 1978 to 1980, Malcolm used a Marshall 2203 100-watt master volume head, which Gill speculates may have contributed to a &quot;slightly more distorted and dark&quot; guitar tone on the albums from that period, including &quot;Powerage&quot; and &quot;Back in Black&quot;.

In a comparison of AC/DC&#x27;s vocalists, Robert Christgau said Scott exhibited a &quot;blokelike croak&quot; and &quot;charm&quot;, often singing about sexual aggression under the guise of fun: &quot;Like Ian Hunter or Roger Chapman though without their panache, he has fun being a dirty young man&quot;. Johnson, in his opinion, possessed &quot;three times the range and wattage&quot; of a vocalist while projecting the character of a &quot;bloke as fantasy-fiction demigod&quot;. By the time Johnson had fully acclimated himself to 1981&#x27;s &quot;For Those About to Rock We Salute You&quot;, Christgau said he defined &quot;an anthemic grandiosity more suitable to [the band&#x27;s] precious-metal status than [Scott]&#x27;s old-fashioned raunch&quot;, albeit in a less intelligent manner.

===Influences===
AC/DC&#x27;s influences include the Rolling Stones, Chuck Berry, Billy Thorpe, the Easybeats and Vanda &amp; Young. The impact of Australian pub rock on AC/DC was documented on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Long Way to the Top&quot; (2001). Angus reflected on his playing style: &quot;A lot of it was nerves at first. It was George that told me if you get on stage and play guitar you want to let people know you are doing something. When I started in the band I was shy and had to push myself forward. [...] [Patrons] would be throwing beer cans and I thought &#x27;just keep moving&#x27; and that&#x27;s how it all started.&quot; George had taught both Malcolm and Angus &quot;how to play guitar, and playing them classic rock and roll and blues records until that music was like blood in their veins.&quot; According to &quot;Long Way to the Top&quot;″s writers, &quot;[t]he hardships of the Australian road would complete AC/DC&#x27;s training. [Scott] revelled in the lifestyle. Somehow he rose above all the substance abuse to become the ultimate rock and roll front man.&quot;

===Genres===
AC/DC&#x27;s music has been variously described as hard rock, blues rock, and heavy metal, but they have referred to themselves as &quot;a rock and roll band, nothing more, nothing less&quot;. Malcolm recalled honing their craft. &quot;We&#x27;d been playing up to four gigs a day. That really shaped the band... It was a mix of screw you, Jack, and having a good time and all being pretty tough guys... The training ground was Melbourne.&quot; In the opinion of Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic, they are &quot;one of the defining acts of &#x27;70s hard rock&quot; and reactionary to the period&#x27;s art rock and arena rock excesses. &quot;AC/DC&#x27;s rock was minimalist – no matter how huge and bludgeoning their guitar chords were, there was a clear sense of space and restraint.&quot; According to Alexis Petridis, their music is &quot;hard-edged, wilfully basic blues-rock,&quot; featuring humorous sexual innuendo and lyrics about rock and roll. Music academic Robert McParland described the band&#x27;s sound as being defined by the heavy rock guitar of the Young brothers, layered power chords and forceful vocals. &quot;For some, AC/DC are the ultimate heavy metal act,&quot; Tim Jonze wrote in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;but for others, AC/DC aren&#x27;t a heavy metal act at all, they&#x27;re a classic rock band – and calling them heavy metal is an act of treachery.&quot; On the controversy of categorising their music, McParland wrote:

With the recording of &quot;Back in Black&quot; in 1980, rock journalist Joe S. Harrington believed the band had departed further from the blues-oriented rock of their previous albums and toward a more dynamic attack that adopted punk rock&#x27;s &quot;high-energy implications&quot; and transmuted their hard rock/heavy metal songs into &quot;more pop-oriented blasts&quot;. The band would remain faithful to this &quot;impeccably ham-handed&quot; musical style for the remainder of their career: &quot;the guitars were compacted into a singular statement of rhythmic efficiency, the rhythm section provided the thunderhorse overdrive and vocalist Johnson bellowed and brayed like the most unhinged practitioner of bluesy top-man dynamics since vintage Robert Plant.&quot;

==Legacy==

Several musicians have credited AC/DC for reasserting hard rock&#x27;s popularity after it had ceded mainstream attention to other musical genres in the late 1970s. Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave noted of &quot;Back in Black&quot;″s release: &quot;Disco was huge and punk and new wave were ascendant, and along came this AC/DC record which just destroyed everybody. It put hard rock music back on the throne, where it belongs!&quot;

AC/DC&#x27;s music was a formative influence on the new wave of British heavy metal bands that emerged in the late 1970s, such as Saxon and Def Leppard, in part as a reaction to the decline of traditional early 1970s hard rock bands. In 2007, critics noted that AC/DC, along with Thin Lizzy, UFO, Scorpions and Judas Priest, were among &quot;the second generation of rising stars ready to step into the breach as the old guard waned.&quot; Over the years, many prominent rock musicians have cited AC/DC as an influence, including Dave Mustaine of Megadeth, Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age and Kyuss, Dave Grohl of Nirvana and Foo Fighters, Scott Ian of Anthrax, Eric Peterson of Testament, Dexter Holland of the Offspring; Brian Baker of Bad Religion, Minor Threat, Dag Nasty and Junkyard, and bands such as Airbourne, Metallica, Slayer, Exodus, the Cult, and the Living End. Australian acts formed in AC/DC&#x27;s footsteps are Rose Tattoo and the Angels. Chrissy Amphlett of Australian rockers Divinyls acknowledged Angus&#x27; schoolboy outfit as the inspiration for her performing in a schoolgirl&#x27;s uniform.

Gene Simmons of hard rock contemporaries Kiss remarked, &quot;a lot of people look the same and act the same and do the same thing. Every once in a while you see a band like AC/DC. Nobody&#x27;s like them. We&#x27;d like to think we&#x27;re unique in that way too.&quot; Slash of Guns N&#x27; Roses called them &quot;with the exception of the [Rolling] Stones, the greatest rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll band ever.&quot; &quot;I always liked them,&quot; said Australian compatriot and singer-songwriter Nick Cave. &quot;We had this TV show called &quot;Countdown&quot; and they were often on and they were always a riot and absolutely unique. They were a heavy rock band, but Bon Scott would go on &quot;Countdown&quot; dressed as a schoolgirl and stuff like that. They were always very anarchic and never took the thing too seriously.&quot;

AC/DC and other artists (see Filthy Fifteen) ran afoul of the Satanic panic of the 1980s. This general fear of modern hard rock and heavy metal was greatly increased in the band&#x27;s case when serial killer Richard Ramirez was arrested. Ramirez, nicknamed the &quot;Night Stalker&quot; by the press, told police that &quot;Night Prowler&quot; from &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; had driven him to commit murder. Police also claimed that Ramirez was wearing an AC/DC shirt and left an AC/DC hat at one of the crime scenes. Accusations that AC/DC were devil worshippers were made, the lyrics of &quot;Night Prowler&quot; were analysed and some newspapers attempted to link Ramirez&#x27;s Satanism with AC/DC&#x27;s name, concluding that AC/DC stood for Anti-Christ/Devil&#x27;s Child or Devil&#x27;s Children.

===Lyrics assessment===
Throughout the band&#x27;s career, their songs have been criticised as simplistic, monotonous, deliberately lowbrow and sexist. David Marchese from &quot;Vulture&quot; wrote that &quot;regardless of the lyricist, whether it was Scott (who was capable of real wit and colour), Johnson, or the Young brothers, there&#x27;s a deep strain of misogyny in the band&#x27;s output that veers from feeling terribly dated to straight-up reprehensible.&quot; According to Christgau in 1988, &quot;the brutal truth is that sexism has never kept a great rock-and-roller down—from Muddy to Lemmy, lots of dynamite music has objectified women in objectionable ways. But rotely is not among those ways&quot;, in regards to AC/DC.

Fans of the band have defended their music by highlighting its &quot;bawdy humour&quot;, while members of the group have generally been dismissive of claims that their songs are sexist, arguing that they are meant to be in jest. In an interview with Sylvie Simmons for &quot;Mojo&quot;, Angus called the band &quot;pranksters more than anything else,&quot; while Malcolm said, &quot;We&#x27;re not like some macho band. We take the music far more seriously than we take the lyrics, which are just throwaway lines.&quot; Marchese regarded the musical aspect of the Youngs&#x27; songs as &quot;strong enough to render the words a functional afterthought&quot; as well as &quot;deceptively plain, devastatingly effective, and extremely lucrative.&quot;

For the book &quot;Under My Thumb: Songs That Hate Women and the Women Who Love Them&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot; arts critic Fiona Sturges contributed an essay evaluating her love for AC/DC. While acknowledging she is a feminist and that the band&#x27;s music is problematic for her, she believed it would be &quot;daft as opposed to damaging&quot; for female listeners if they could understand the band to be &quot;a bunch of archly sex-obsessed idiots with sharp tunes and some seriously killer riffs&quot;. Despite the &quot;unpleasant sneering quality&quot; of &quot;Carry Me Home&quot;″s claims about a woman who &quot;ain&#x27;t no lady&quot;, the &quot;rape fantasy&quot; of &quot;Let Me Put My Love into You&quot; and the generally one-dimensional portrayals of women, Sturges said songs such as &quot;Whole Lotta Rosie&quot; and &quot;You Shook Me All Night Long&quot; demonstrated that the female characters &quot;are also having a good time and are, more often than not, in the driving seat in sexual terms. [...] [I]t&#x27;s the men who come over as passive and hopeless, awestruck in the presence of sexual partners more experienced and adept than them.&quot;

==Awards and achievements==
The band&#x27;s first ever nomination at an award show was from the American Music Awards of 1982 for Favorite Pop/Rock Band/Duo/Group. In 1988, AC/DC were inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame. The municipality of Leganés, near Madrid, named a street in honour of the band &quot;Calle de AC/DC&quot; (English: &quot;AC/DC Street&quot;) on 22 March 2000. Malcolm and Angus attended the inauguration with many fans. The plaque had since been stolen numerous times, forcing the municipality of Leganés to begin selling replicas of the official street plaque.

On 1 October 2004, a central Melbourne thoroughfare, Corporation Lane, was renamed ACDC Lane in honour of the band. The City of Melbourne forbade the use of the slash character in street names, so the four letters were combined. The lane is near Swanston Street, where, on the back of a truck, the band recorded their video for &quot;It&#x27;s a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll)&quot;.

AC/DC were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 10 March 2003. During the ceremony, the band performed &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; and &quot;You Shook Me All Night Long&quot;, with guest vocals provided by host Steven Tyler of Aerosmith. He described the band&#x27;s power chords as &quot;the thunder from down under that gives you the second most powerful surge that can flow through your body.&quot; During the acceptance speech, Johnson quoted their 1977 song &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot;. In May 2003, the Young brothers accepted a Ted Albert Award for Outstanding Service to Australian Music at the APRA Music Awards of 2003, during which Malcolm paid special tribute to Scott, who was also a recipient of the award.

In 2003, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list included &quot;Back in Black&quot; at number 73, and &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; at number 199. They also ranked number 72 on the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time, as American record producer Rick Rubin wrote an essay calling them the &quot;greatest rock &amp; roll band of all time.&quot; In 2004, on their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; included &quot;Back in Black&quot; at number 187 and &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; at number 254. They ranked number four on &quot;VH1&quot;″s list of the 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock, and number seven on MTV&#x27;s Greatest Heavy Metal Band of All Time. They ranked number 23 on &quot;VH1&quot;″s list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time in 2010. On 20 November 2015, the band were inducted into the Music Victoria Awards 10th Anniversary Hall of Fame. Angus offered a statement, in which he declared it was &quot;an absolute honour&quot; to be recognised in the tenth year of the Hall of Fame.

They sold over 1.3 million CDs in the US during 2007. In 50 years of the band&#x27;s career, they have sold over 200 million albums worldwide, and 84 million in the US, according to the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), which AC/DC the fourth best-selling band in US history and the eighth best-selling artist, selling more albums than Elton John and Mariah Carey. The RIAA also certified &quot;Back in Black&quot; as 27× Platinum, for 27 million in US sales, which made it the fourth best-selling album of all time in the US.

==Band members==
===Current members===
* Angus Young – lead guitar, occasional backing vocals (1973–present)
* Phil Rudd – drums (1975–1983, 1994–2015, 2018–present; )
* Cliff Williams – bass guitar, backing vocals (1977–2016, 2018–present; )
* Brian Johnson – lead vocals (1980–2016, 2018–present)
* Stevie Young – rhythm guitar, backing vocals (2014–present; )

===Touring musicians===
Current touring musicians
* Matt Laug – drums (2023–present)
* Chris Chaney – bass guitar, backing vocals (2024–present)

Former touring musicians
* George Young – bass guitar, rhythm guitar, drums, backing vocals (1974–1975; )
* Denis Loughlin – lead vocals (1974; )
* Bruce Howe – bass guitar (1975)
* Paul Greg – bass guitar (1991)
* Axl Rose – lead vocals (2016)

===Former members===
* Malcolm Young – rhythm guitar, backing vocals (1973–2014; )
* Colin Burgess – drums (1973–1974; )
* Larry Van Kriedt – bass guitar (1973–1974, 1975)
* Dave Evans – lead vocals (1973–1974)
* Neil Smith – bass guitar (1974; )
* Ron Carpenter – drums (1974)
* Russell Coleman – drums (1974)
* Noel Taylor – drums (1974)
* Rob Bailey – bass (1974–1975)
* Peter Clack – drums (1974–1975)
* Bon Scott – lead vocals (1974–1980; )
* Paul Matters – bass guitar (1975; )
* Mark Evans – bass guitar (1975–1977)
* Simon Wright – drums (1983–1989)
* Chris Slade – drums (1989–1994, 2015–2016)

==Discography==

Studio albums
* &quot;High Voltage&quot; (1975) (Australasia only)
* &quot;T.N.T.&quot; (1975) (Australasia only)
* &quot;High Voltage&quot; (1976) (international version)
* &quot;Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Let There Be Rock&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Powerage&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Highway to Hell&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Back in Black&quot; (1980)
* &quot;For Those About to Rock We Salute You&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Flick of the Switch&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Fly on the Wall&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Blow Up Your Video&quot; (1988)
* &quot;The Razors Edge&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Ballbreaker&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Stiff Upper Lip&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Black Ice&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Rock or Bust&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Power Up&quot; (2020)

==Concert tours==
* T.N.T./Lock Up Your Daughters Summer Vacation Tour (1975–1976)
* Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap/Giant Dose of Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Tour (1976–1977)
* Let There Be Rock Tour (1977)
* Powerage Tour (1978)
* If You Want Blood Tour (1978–1979)
* Highway to Hell Tour (1979–1980)
* Back in Black Tour (1980–1981)
* For Those About to Rock Tour (1981–1982)
* Flick of the Switch Tour (1983–1985)
* Fly on the Wall Tour (1985–1986)
* Who Made Who Tour (1986)
* Blow Up Your Video World Tour (1988)
* Razors Edge World Tour (1990–1991)
* Ballbreaker World Tour (1996)
* Stiff Upper Lip World Tour (2000–2001)
* Black Ice World Tour (2008–2010)
* Rock or Bust World Tour (2015–2016)
* Power Up Tour (2024–2025)

==See also==

* List of best-selling music artists
* List of blues rock musicians
* List of hard rock bands (A–M)
* List of heavy metal bands

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* n.b. The Kent Report chart was licensed by Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) from mid-1983 until 19 June 1988.
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="0" end="5" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="44" end="50" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="104" end="113" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193355" start="115" end="125" title="blues rock" label="blues rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="130" end="141" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="183" end="196" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q370515" start="251" end="282" title="new wave of British heavy metal" label="new wave of British heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="321" end="347" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="418" end="461" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="one of the best-selling artists of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43932" start="495" end="500" title="Angus Young" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44653" start="519" end="532" title="Malcolm Young" label="Malcolm Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q555933" start="555" end="568" title="Colin Burgess (musician)" label="Colin Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q555131" start="578" end="594" title="Larry Van Kriedt" label="Larry Van Kriedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q346480" start="613" end="623" title="Dave Evans (singer)" label="Dave Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="707" end="718" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131302848" start="738" end="750" title="High Voltage (1975 album)" label="High Voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q832786" start="814" end="831" title="Let There Be Rock" label="Let There Be Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q345400" start="871" end="880" title="Phil Rudd" label="Phil Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q318694" start="891" end="905" title="Cliff Williams" label="Cliff Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q204162" start="925" end="934" title="Bon Scott" label="Bon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q285929" start="991" end="1006" title="Highway to Hell" label="Highway to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="1035" end="1052" title="alcohol poisoning" label="alcohol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q295948" start="1072" end="1085" title="Brian Johnson" label="Brian Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155715" start="1166" end="1179" title="Back in Black" label="Back in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="1239" end="1276" title="List of best-selling albums" label="second best-selling album of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q304605" start="1311" end="1334" title="For Those About to Rock We Salute You" label="For Those About to Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1398" end="1423" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q285905" start="1466" end="1485" title="Flick of the Switch" label="Flick of the Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q433927" start="1529" end="1541" title="Simon Wright (musician)" label="Simon Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q348704" start="1563" end="1574" title="Chris Slade" label="Chris Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q165617" start="1686" end="1701" title="The Razors Edge (AC/DC album)" label="The Razors Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q591875" start="1861" end="1872" title="Ballbreaker" label="Ballbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q157534" start="1923" end="1932" title="Black Ice (album)" label="Black Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="2207" end="2215" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="2329" end="2344" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="2349" end="2357" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319593" start="2392" end="2404" title="Stevie Young" label="Stevie Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121886" start="2454" end="2466" title="Rock or Bust" label="Rock or Bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878015" start="2488" end="2505" title="Rock or Bust World Tour" label="accompanying tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="2542" end="2560" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885" start="2568" end="2576" title="Axl Rose" label="Axl Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q100127054" start="2867" end="2875" title="Power Up (album)" label="Power Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q124516802" start="2918" end="2933" title="Power Up Tour" label="supporting tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756558" start="2979" end="2988" title="Matt Laug" label="Matt Laug"/>
<link wikidata="Q598026" start="3017" end="3029" title="Chris Chaney" label="Chris Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3204" end="3228" title="Rock music in Australia#1970–1975: &amp;quot;Third wave&amp;quot;" label="third wave of rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545459" start="3263" end="3276" title="the Easybeats" label="the Easybeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750624" start="3281" end="3304" title="the Masters Apprentices" label="the Masters Apprentices"/>
<link wikidata="Q546264" start="3487" end="3496" title="beat music" label="beat boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250593" start="3576" end="3584" title="Pub rock (Australia)" label="pub rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494713" start="3619" end="3626" title="Sherbet (band)" label="Sherbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537759" start="3631" end="3639" title="Skyhooks (band)" label="Skyhooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="3676" end="3685" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44653" start="3723" end="3730" title="Malcolm Young" label="Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43932" start="3735" end="3746" title="Angus Young" label="Angus Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="3763" end="3769" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q555933" start="3783" end="3796" title="Colin Burgess (musician)" label="Colin Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q555131" start="3842" end="3858" title="Larry Van Kriedt" label="Larry Van Kriedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q346480" start="3872" end="3882" title="Dave Evans (singer)" label="Dave Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="3970" end="4005" title="The Velvet Underground" label="the American group of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="4017" end="4026" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758237" start="4156" end="4177" title="Marcus Hook Roll Band" label="Marcus Hook Roll Band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4181" end="4197" title="Session musician#Studio band" label="studio-only band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679338" start="4275" end="4299" title="Tales of Old Grand-Daddy" label="Tales of Old Grand-Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="4577" end="4602" title="the Sydney Morning Herald" label="the Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q887369" start="4799" end="4809" title="AC adapter" label="AC adapter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4833" end="4842" title="Electric current#Alternating and direct current" label="A.C./D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="4866" end="4885" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="4886" end="4900" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q290268" start="5303" end="5330" title="Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap" label="Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278251" start="5386" end="5399" title="Gerard Huerta" label="Gerard Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q832786" start="5436" end="5453" title="Let There Be Rock" label="Let There Be Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q226822" start="5808" end="5813" title="Zorro" label="Zorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="5830" end="5838" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="5868" end="5881" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="5886" end="5904" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="5906" end="5917" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="5919" end="5930" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6054" end="6068" title="School uniforms by country#Australia" label="school-uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926927" start="6099" end="6120" title="Victoria Park, Sydney" label="Victoria Park, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="6296" end="6303" title="Talent manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q51092426" start="6337" end="6350" title="Paul Stenning" label="Paul Stenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628309" start="6582" end="6593" title="Studios 301" label="EMI Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914291" start="6610" end="6627" title="Vanda &amp;amp; Young" label="Vanda &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q503701" start="6630" end="6642" title="George Young (rock musician)" label="George Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349337" start="6647" end="6658" title="Harry Vanda" label="Harry Vanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723127" start="6843" end="6870" title="Can I Sit Next to You, Girl" label="Can I Sit Next to You, Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319828" start="7317" end="7327" title="Rob Bailey (musician)" label="Rob Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369038" start="7332" end="7343" title="Peter Clack" label="Peter Clack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553368" start="7380" end="7398" title="Albert Productions" label="Albert Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669424" start="7649" end="7666" title="Kent Music Report" label="Kent Music Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="7784" end="7792" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16114327" start="7997" end="8010" title="Michael Chugg" label="Michael Chugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="8377" end="8385" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q204162" start="8730" end="8739" title="Bon Scott" label="Bon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648841" start="8768" end="8782" title="the Valentines (rock band)" label="the Valentines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033248" start="8799" end="8809" title="Fraternity (band)" label="Fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931539" start="8862" end="8877" title="Vince Lovegrove" label="Vince Lovegrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266376" start="9375" end="9386" title="Boogie rock" label="boogie-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982288" start="9464" end="9477" title="Ian McFarlane" label="Ian McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967581" start="9561" end="9595" title="Brighton-Le-Sands, New South Wales" label="Brighton-Le-Sands, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131302848" start="9645" end="9657" title="High Voltage (1975 album)" label="High Voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553368" start="9718" end="9732" title="Albert Studios" label="Albert Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058390" start="9888" end="9901" title="Tony Currenti" label="Tony Currenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q55356810" start="10171" end="10183" title="Paul Matters" label="Paul Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q345400" start="10451" end="10460" title="Phil Rudd" label="Phil Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017760" start="10467" end="10479" title="Buster Brown (Australian band)" label="Buster Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q358208" start="10518" end="10528" title="Mark Evans (musician)" label="Mark Evans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10640" end="10671" title="Sunbury Pop Festival#1975" label="1975 Sunbury Pop music festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="10807" end="10818" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="10873" end="10884" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269526" start="10928" end="10947" title="EMI Music Australia" label="EMI Music Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q519289" start="11031" end="11047" title="Big Joe Williams" label="Big Joe Williams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11060" end="11086" title="Baby, Please Don&amp;#x27;t Go#AC/DC version" label="Baby, Please Don&amp;#x27;t Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176829" start="11257" end="11266" title="Countdown (Australian TV series)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q836104" start="11407" end="11413" title="T.N.T. (album)" label="T.N.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q2550514" start="11642" end="11712" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll)" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="11784" end="11790" title="ABC TV (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q736070" start="11950" end="11961" title="T.N.T. (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845275" start="12263" end="12274" title="Phil Carson" label="Phil Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="12278" end="12294" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839176" start="12417" end="12436" title="Back Street Crawler (band)" label="Back Street Crawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q707293" start="12500" end="12512" title="Paul Kossoff" label="Paul Kossoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="12674" end="12680" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="12733" end="12742" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="12836" end="12839" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="12856" end="12868" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="13315" end="13318" title="LP record" label="LPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q836320" start="13338" end="13350" title="High Voltage (1976 album)" label="High Voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299055" start="13991" end="14000" title="Jailbreak (AC/DC song)" label="Jailbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="14070" end="14083" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q425605" start="14090" end="14108" title="&amp;#x27;74 Jailbreak" label="&amp;#x27;74 Jailbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q912978" start="14158" end="14162" title="Live (AC/DC album)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q610919" start="14449" end="14456" title="Marquee Club" label="Marquee"/>
<link wikidata="Q832786" start="14592" end="14609" title="Let There Be Rock" label="Let There Be Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="14694" end="14707" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="14725" end="14738" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q310752" start="14827" end="14840" title="Geezer Butler" label="Geezer Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q972351" start="14860" end="14871" title="switchblade" label="switchblade"/>
<link wikidata="Q318694" start="15217" end="15231" title="Cliff Williams" label="Cliff Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q106609453" start="15265" end="15269" title="Home (UK band)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854622" start="15286" end="15292" title="Bandit (band)" label="Bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951179" start="15654" end="15669" title="WJGL" label="WPDQ-FM/WAIV-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951239" start="15771" end="15775" title="Moxy (band)" label="Moxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334670" start="15984" end="15994" title="Ted Nugent" label="Ted Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="15996" end="16005" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="16007" end="16011" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q590102" start="16013" end="16017" title="Styx (band)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q251657" start="16019" end="16022" title="UFO (band)" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="16027" end="16043" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="16068" end="16079" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q846880" start="16128" end="16136" title="Powerage" label="Powerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437727" start="16211" end="16244" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Damnation" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Damnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713991" start="16281" end="16300" title="The Apollo, Glasgow" label="The Apollo, Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q627853" start="16362" end="16398" title="If You Want Blood You&amp;#x27;ve Got It" label="If You Want Blood You&amp;#x27;ve Got It"/>
<link wikidata="Q285929" start="16473" end="16488" title="Highway to Hell" label="Highway to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q547660" start="16510" end="16544" title="Robert John &amp;quot;Mutt&amp;quot; Lange" label="Robert John &amp;quot;Mutt&amp;quot; Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="16632" end="16657" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q155715" start="17101" end="17114" title="Back in Black" label="Back in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028419" start="17270" end="17287" title="KOKO (music venue)" label="The Music Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q149836" start="17291" end="17302" title="Camden Town" label="Camden Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742181" start="17487" end="17515" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="17611" end="17634" title="Alcohol poisoning" label="acute alcohol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q606212" start="17676" end="17704" title="Fremantle, Western Australia" label="Fremantle, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784014" start="18014" end="18021" title="Heaven (Australian band)" label="Fat Lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q312053" start="18047" end="18059" title="Rick Wakeman" label="Rick Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47458804" start="18069" end="18090" title="Gary Pickford-Hopkins" label="Gary Pickford-Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347814" start="18123" end="18136" title="Stevie Wright (Australian singer)" label="Stevie Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951239" start="18258" end="18271" title="Buzz Shearman" label="Buzz Shearman"/>
<link wikidata="Q156872" start="18317" end="18322" title="Slade" label="Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q387655" start="18332" end="18344" title="Noddy Holder" label="Noddy Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012315" start="18382" end="18395" title="Terry Slesser" label="Terry Slesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q499366" start="18445" end="18452" title="Geordie (band)" label="Geordie"/>
<link wikidata="Q295948" start="18460" end="18473" title="Brian Johnson" label="Brian Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165506" start="18513" end="18534" title="Ike &amp;amp; Tina Turner" label="Ike &amp;amp; Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607460" start="18548" end="18567" title="Nutbush City Limits" label="Nutbush City Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966068" start="18589" end="18606" title="Whole Lotta Rosie" label="Whole Lotta Rosie"/>
<link wikidata="Q600140" start="19385" end="19406" title="Compass Point Studios" label="Compass Point Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823191" start="19495" end="19505" title="Tony Platt" label="Tony Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="19521" end="19558" title="List of best-selling albums" label="second best-selling album of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512224" start="19607" end="19618" title="Hells Bells (song)" label="Hells Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337709" start="19632" end="19659" title="You Shook Me All Night Long" label="You Shook Me All Night Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720996" start="19673" end="19713" title="Rock and Roll Ain&amp;#x27;t Noise Pollution" label="Rock and Roll Ain&amp;#x27;t Noise Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466691" start="19724" end="19739" title="Back in Black (song)" label="the title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q430525" start="19977" end="19989" title="concert film" label="concert film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19997" end="20021" title="AC/DC: Let There Be Rock" label="AC/DC: Let There Be Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q20045415" start="20089" end="20109" title="Highway to Hell Tour" label="Highway to Hell Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="20214" end="20226" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q304605" start="20270" end="20307" title="For Those About to Rock We Salute You" label="For Those About to Rock We Salute You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220605" start="20550" end="20570" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Get It Up" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Get It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393681" start="20581" end="20596" title="For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)" label="the title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q285905" start="20771" end="20790" title="Flick of the Switch" label="Flick of the Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357686" start="21252" end="21265" title="Guns for Hire" label="Guns for Hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="21299" end="21328" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089429" start="21608" end="21614" title="A II Z" label="A II Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q433927" start="21623" end="21635" title="Simon Wright (musician)" label="Simon Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q547947" start="21703" end="21714" title="Simon Kirke" label="Simon Kirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256528" start="21719" end="21732" title="Paul Thompson (musician)" label="Paul Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q901854" start="21810" end="21825" title="Fly on the Wall (AC/DC album)" label="Fly on the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q901854" start="21949" end="21962" title="Fly on the Wall (video)" label="the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301083" start="22125" end="22137" title="Who Made Who (song)" label="Who Made Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q901127" start="22231" end="22243" title="Who Made Who" label="Who Made Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="22271" end="22283" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q46637" start="22302" end="22319" title="Maximum Overdrive" label="Maximum Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="22592" end="22633" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653736" start="22651" end="22663" title="ARIA Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q178039" start="22711" end="22729" title="Blow Up Your Video" label="Blow Up Your Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501001" start="22771" end="22785" title="Studio Miraval" label="Studio Miraval"/>
<link wikidata="Q840082" start="22789" end="22795" title="Le Val, Var" label="Le Val"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358248" start="22982" end="22988" title="filler (media)" label="filler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399459" start="23245" end="23255" title="Heatseeker (song)" label="Heatseeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711106" start="23273" end="23324" title="That&amp;#x27;s the Way I Wanna Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll" label="That&amp;#x27;s the Way I Wanna Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928533" start="23336" end="23365" title="Blow Up Your Video World Tour" label="Blow Up Your Video World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="23392" end="23397" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319593" start="23624" end="23636" title="Stevie Young" label="Stevie Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q478750" start="23745" end="23748" title="Dio (band)" label="Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q590151" start="23782" end="23800" title="Lock Up the Wolves" label="Lock Up the Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q348704" start="23842" end="23853" title="Chris Slade" label="Chris Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="23878" end="23888" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185147" start="23899" end="23909" title="Gary Moore" label="Gary Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q100127054" start="24130" end="24138" title="Power Up (album)" label="Power Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q165617" start="24236" end="24251" title="The Razors Edge (AC/DC album)" label="The Razors Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="24275" end="24284" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313320" start="24325" end="24336" title="Mike Fraser (record producer)" label="Mike Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q285116" start="24353" end="24368" title="Bruce Fairbairn" label="Bruce Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="24415" end="24423" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="24585" end="24596" title="lead single" label="lead single"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430003" start="24604" end="24617" title="Thunderstruck (song)" label="Thunderstruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q868813" start="24688" end="24703" title="Mainstream Rock Tracks" label="Mainstream Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="24727" end="24739" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="24768" end="24771" title="Official Charts Company" label="OCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="24779" end="24795" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396390" start="24822" end="24832" title="Moneytalks" label="Moneytalks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299656" start="25006" end="25028" title="Razors Edge World Tour" label="Razors Edge World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q912978" start="25074" end="25084" title="AC/DC Live" label="AC/DC Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="25195" end="25203" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q749420" start="25225" end="25241" title="Monsters of Rock" label="Monsters of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048806" start="25308" end="25325" title="Live at Donington (AC/DC album)" label="Live at Donington"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030210" start="25402" end="25413" title="Salt Palace (arena)" label="Salt Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="25417" end="25431" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25886" end="25898" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q761900" start="25922" end="25929" title="Big Gun" label="Big Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="25966" end="25987" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q858840" start="26006" end="26022" title="Last Action Hero" label="Last Action Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="26191" end="26207" title="beat &amp;#x27;em up" label="beat &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739670" start="26227" end="26242" title="Atari Jaguar CD" label="Atari Jaguar CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="26417" end="26428" title="jam session" label="jam session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095593" start="26528" end="26548" title="Record Plant Studios" label="Record Plant Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076120" start="26610" end="26627" title="Ocean Way Recording" label="Ocean Way Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q591875" start="26747" end="26758" title="Ballbreaker" label="Ballbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q834467" start="26880" end="26887" title="Bonfire (album)" label="Bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="26937" end="26945" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q593561" start="26992" end="26997" title="Volts (album)" label="Volts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049077" start="27115" end="27145" title="Live from the Atlantic Studios" label="Live from the Atlantic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27162" end="27190" title="Let There Be Rock: The Movie – Live in Paris" label="Let There Be Rock: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501052" start="27280" end="27296" title="Atlantic Studios" label="Atlantic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064737" start="27403" end="27420" title="Pavillon de Paris" label="Pavillon de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q826136" start="27610" end="27625" title="Stiff Upper Lip (album)" label="Stiff Upper Lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773545" start="27674" end="27694" title="The Warehouse Studio" label="The Warehouse Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304365" start="27844" end="27855" title="Stiff Upper Lip (AC/DC song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426027" start="27999" end="28014" title="Satellite Blues" label="Satellite Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345904" start="28031" end="28052" title="Safe in New York City" label="Safe in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="28181" end="28191" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="28511" end="28537" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510009" start="28883" end="28916" title="Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto" label="Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="28954" end="28958" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="29100" end="29133" title="severe acute respiratory syndrome" label="severe acute respiratory syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q919641" start="29365" end="29372" title="Verizon (mobile network)" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q588965" start="29525" end="29538" title="Family Jewels (video compilation)" label="Family Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q930393" start="29573" end="29583" title="Plug Me In" label="Plug Me In"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="29680" end="29687" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q756621" start="29725" end="29753" title="Las Ventas" label="Plaza De Toros de las Ventas"/>
<link wikidata="Q157534" start="29820" end="29829" title="Black Ice (album)" label="Black Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q707504" start="29962" end="29982" title="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Brien (record producer)" label="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972120" start="30224" end="30239" title="Sam&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Sam&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160601" start="30383" end="30412" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Train" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q804204" start="30492" end="30512" title="Black Ice World Tour" label="Black Ice World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q745594" start="30575" end="30601" title="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania" label="Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="30644" end="30650" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="30850" end="30856" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q788201" start="31036" end="31046" title="Backtracks (AC/DC album)" label="Backtracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836459" start="31219" end="31241" title="BRW (magazine)" label="Business Review Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409039" start="31343" end="31354" title="the Wiggles" label="the Wiggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q603353" start="31453" end="31463" title="Iron Man 2 (soundtrack)" label="Iron Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q205028" start="31494" end="31508" title="Iron Man 2" label="eponymous film"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544" start="31599" end="31616" title="Download Festival" label="Download Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q173202" start="31620" end="31634" title="Donington Park" label="Donington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q276354" start="31688" end="31707" title="River Plate Stadium" label="River Plate Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866381" start="31759" end="31778" title="Live at River Plate" label="Live at River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q65972241" start="31869" end="31884" title="Shoot to Thrill" label="Shoot to Thrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="31934" end="31950" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257215" start="32027" end="32046" title="Live at River Plate (album)" label="Live at River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="32419" end="32431" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="32688" end="32697" title="Artificial cardiac pacemaker" label="pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121886" start="33024" end="33036" title="Rock or Bust" label="Rock or Bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="33390" end="33398" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878015" start="33887" end="33908" title="Rock or Bust World Tour" label="supporting world tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="34011" end="34026" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="34045" end="34053" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="34350" end="34362" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="34706" end="34720" title="House arrest" label="home detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="35144" end="35162" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885" start="35172" end="35180" title="Axl Rose" label="Axl Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="35809" end="35821" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785026" start="36327" end="36344" title="Living Shangri-La" label="Living Shangri-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q100141824" start="36865" end="36881" title="Shot in the Dark (AC/DC song)" label="Shot in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q100127054" start="36992" end="37000" title="Power Up (album)" label="Power Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q458517" start="37329" end="37337" title="dive bar" label="dive bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715213" start="37467" end="37477" title="Power Trip (music festival)" label="Power Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q19461590" start="37500" end="37516" title="Empire Polo Club" label="Empire Polo Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q838789" start="37520" end="37537" title="Indio, California" label="Indio, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756558" start="37689" end="37698" title="Matt Laug" label="Matt Laug"/>
<link wikidata="Q849877" start="37730" end="37751" title="Slash&amp;#x27;s Snakepit" label="Slash&amp;#x27;s Snakepit"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="37756" end="37768" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q99736389" start="37840" end="37855" title="List of mayors of Munich" label="mayor of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222671" start="37857" end="37870" title="Dieter Reiter" label="Dieter Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131610" start="37917" end="37932" title="Olympiastadion (Munich)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317717" start="38215" end="38236" title="Are You Ready (AC/DC song)" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q124516802" start="38349" end="38362" title="Power Up Tour" label="Power Up Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q622947" start="38390" end="38411" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q598026" start="38427" end="38439" title="Chris Chaney" label="Chris Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q837300" start="38552" end="38571" title="the Pretty Reckless" label="the Pretty Reckless"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="38673" end="38678" title="Phonograph record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250593" start="39502" end="39521" title="Pub rock (Australia)" label="Australian pub rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663594" start="39551" end="39562" title="Lobby Loyde" label="Lobby Loyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903740" start="39566" end="39578" title="Billy Thorpe" label="Billy Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913389" start="39605" end="39615" title="Billy Thorpe and the Aztecs" label="the Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568653" start="39856" end="39870" title="Glenn A. Baker" label="Glenn A. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q495267" start="39980" end="39998" title="The Canberra Times" label="The Canberra Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335226" start="40273" end="40286" title="Ed Nimmervoll" label="Ed Nimmervoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="40700" end="40708" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="40747" end="40759" title="guitar riffs" label="guitar riffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127124" start="40816" end="40821" title="Hook (music)" label="hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881700" start="40842" end="40849" title="Vulture.com" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q126194160" start="40873" end="40887" title="David Marchese" label="David Marchese"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="41001" end="41010" title="kick drum" label="kick drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="41034" end="41038" title="beat (music)" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="41048" end="41055" title="measure (music)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="41064" end="41074" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303250" start="41143" end="41155" title="downpicking" label="down-picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q339575" start="41159" end="41170" title="eighth note" label="eighth note"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="41544" end="41552" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="41662" end="41674" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="42441" end="42457" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q712678" start="42605" end="42615" title="Ian Hunter (singer)" label="Ian Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q720731" start="42619" end="42632" title="Roger Chapman" label="Roger Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927398" start="42842" end="42847" title="bloke" label="bloke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030908" start="43407" end="43426" title="Long Way to the Top" label="Long Way to the Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="44349" end="44358" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193355" start="44360" end="44370" title="blues rock" label="blues rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="44376" end="44387" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="44437" end="44450" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="44761" end="44784" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="44788" end="44796" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="44904" end="44912" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q379033" start="44917" end="44927" title="arena rock" label="arena rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="45107" end="45122" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="45394" end="45405" title="power chord" label="power chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221216" start="45490" end="45499" title="Tim Jonze" label="Tim Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="45515" end="45527" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="46515" end="46527" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q297552" start="46713" end="46724" title="Tom Morello" label="Tom Morello"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="46728" end="46752" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q486830" start="46757" end="46767" title="Audioslave" label="Audioslave"/>
<link wikidata="Q370515" start="47058" end="47089" title="new wave of British heavy metal" label="new wave of British heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q504090" start="47136" end="47141" title="Saxon (band)" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="47146" end="47157" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="47286" end="47296" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="47303" end="47312" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="47317" end="47329" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="47536" end="47549" title="Dave Mustaine" label="Dave Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708504" start="47563" end="47573" title="Josh Homme" label="Josh Homme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="47612" end="47622" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q360485" start="47652" end="47661" title="Scott Ian" label="Scott Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="47674" end="47687" title="Eric Peterson (musician)" label="Eric Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q317095" start="47702" end="47716" title="Dexter Holland" label="Dexter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q911812" start="47735" end="47746" title="Brian Baker (musician)" label="Brian Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q408139" start="47820" end="47829" title="Airbourne (band)" label="Airbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="47831" end="47840" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="47842" end="47848" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728170" start="47850" end="47856" title="Exodus (band)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q887376" start="47858" end="47866" title="the Cult" label="the Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423098" start="47872" end="47886" title="the Living End" label="the Living End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540822" start="47941" end="47952" title="Rose Tattoo" label="Rose Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q660729" start="47957" end="47967" title="the Angels (Australian band)" label="the Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659332" start="47969" end="47985" title="Chrissy Amphlett" label="Chrissy Amphlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663405" start="48008" end="48016" title="Divinyls" label="Divinyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q207197" start="48130" end="48142" title="Gene Simmons" label="Gene Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34166" start="48401" end="48406" title="Slash (musician)" label="Slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="48627" end="48636" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48996" end="49010" title="Parents Music Resource Center#Filthy Fifteen" label="Filthy Fifteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268748" start="49029" end="49042" title="Satanic panic" label="Satanic panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382035" start="49176" end="49191" title="Richard Ramirez" label="Richard Ramirez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033412" start="49292" end="49305" title="Night Prowler (song)" label="Night Prowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="50137" end="50145" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="50366" end="50371" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="50375" end="50380" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661056" start="50764" end="50778" title="Sylvie Simmons" label="Sylvie Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="50789" end="50793" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744505" start="52539" end="52568" title="American Music Awards of 1982" label="American Music Awards of 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441676" start="52573" end="52605" title="American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Band/Duo/Group" label="Favorite Pop/Rock Band/Duo/Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q77433" start="52684" end="52691" title="Leganés" label="Leganés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="52698" end="52704" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650585" start="53110" end="53119" title="ACDC Lane" label="ACDC Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919098" start="53147" end="53164" title="City of Melbourne" label="City of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684340" start="53188" end="53193" title="slash (punctuation)" label="slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q109284110" start="53273" end="53288" title="Swanston Street" label="Swanston Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508213" start="53560" end="53575" title="Highway to Hell (song)" label="Highway to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="53662" end="53674" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692946" start="53988" end="53998" title="Ted Albert" label="Ted Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653393" start="54056" end="54081" title="APRA Music Awards of 2003" label="APRA Music Awards of 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="54212" end="54243" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="54379" end="54411" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="54441" end="54451" title="Rick Rubin" label="Rick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="54557" end="54587" title="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="54749" end="54752" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="54828" end="54831" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848237" start="55028" end="55049" title="Music Victoria Awards" label="Music Victoria Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="55410" end="55451" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="55576" end="55586" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="55591" end="55603" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43932" start="55809" end="55820" title="Angus Young" label="Angus Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q345400" start="55879" end="55888" title="Phil Rudd" label="Phil Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q318694" start="55938" end="55952" title="Cliff Williams" label="Cliff Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q295948" start="56013" end="56026" title="Brian Johnson" label="Brian Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319593" start="56069" end="56081" title="Stevie Young" label="Stevie Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756558" start="56184" end="56193" title="Matt Laug" label="Matt Laug"/>
<link wikidata="Q598026" start="56219" end="56231" title="Chris Chaney" label="Chris Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q503701" start="56305" end="56317" title="George Young (rock musician)" label="George Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885" start="56493" end="56501" title="Axl Rose" label="Axl Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q44653" start="56547" end="56560" title="Malcolm Young" label="Malcolm Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q555933" start="56609" end="56622" title="Colin Burgess (musician)" label="Colin Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q555131" start="56647" end="56663" title="Larry Van Kriedt" label="Larry Van Kriedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q346480" start="56698" end="56708" title="Dave Evans (singer)" label="Dave Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319828" start="56866" end="56876" title="Rob Bailey (musician)" label="Rob Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369038" start="56898" end="56909" title="Peter Clack" label="Peter Clack"/>
<link wikidata="Q204162" start="56932" end="56941" title="Bon Scott" label="Bon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q55356810" start="56972" end="56984" title="Paul Matters" label="Paul Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q358208" start="57010" end="57020" title="Mark Evans (musician)" label="Mark Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q433927" start="57049" end="57061" title="Simon Wright (musician)" label="Simon Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q348704" start="57084" end="57095" title="Chris Slade" label="Chris Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q131302848" start="57167" end="57179" title="High Voltage (1975 album)" label="High Voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="57194" end="57205" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836104" start="57220" end="57226" title="T.N.T. (album)" label="T.N.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q836320" start="57267" end="57279" title="High Voltage (1976 album)" label="High Voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q290268" start="57325" end="57352" title="Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap" label="Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap"/>
<link wikidata="Q832786" start="57374" end="57391" title="Let There Be Rock" label="Let There Be Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q846880" start="57413" end="57421" title="Powerage" label="Powerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q285929" start="57443" end="57458" title="Highway to Hell" label="Highway to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q155715" start="57480" end="57493" title="Back in Black" label="Back in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q304605" start="57515" end="57552" title="For Those About to Rock We Salute You" label="For Those About to Rock We Salute You"/>
<link wikidata="Q285905" start="57574" end="57593" title="Flick of the Switch" label="Flick of the Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q901854" start="57615" end="57630" title="Fly on the Wall (AC/DC album)" label="Fly on the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q178039" start="57652" end="57670" title="Blow Up Your Video" label="Blow Up Your Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q165617" start="57692" end="57707" title="The Razors Edge (AC/DC album)" label="The Razors Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q591875" start="57729" end="57740" title="Ballbreaker" label="Ballbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q826136" start="57762" end="57777" title="Stiff Upper Lip (album)" label="Stiff Upper Lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q157534" start="57799" end="57808" title="Black Ice (album)" label="Black Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121886" start="57830" end="57842" title="Rock or Bust" label="Rock or Bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q100127054" start="57864" end="57872" title="Power Up (album)" label="Power Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q20045415" start="58149" end="58169" title="Highway to Hell Tour" label="Highway to Hell Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839258" start="58184" end="58202" title="Back in Black Tour" label="Back in Black Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466890" start="58217" end="58245" title="For Those About to Rock Tour" label="For Those About to Rock Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q113576397" start="58260" end="58284" title="Flick of the Switch Tour" label="Flick of the Switch Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463253" start="58299" end="58319" title="Fly on the Wall Tour" label="Fly on the Wall Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146275" start="58334" end="58351" title="Who Made Who World Tour" label="Who Made Who Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928533" start="58361" end="58390" title="Blow Up Your Video World Tour" label="Blow Up Your Video World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299656" start="58400" end="58422" title="Razors Edge World Tour" label="Razors Edge World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851562" start="58437" end="58459" title="Ballbreaker World Tour" label="Ballbreaker World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357419" start="58469" end="58495" title="Stiff Upper Lip World Tour" label="Stiff Upper Lip World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q804204" start="58510" end="58530" title="Black Ice World Tour" label="Black Ice World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878015" start="58545" end="58568" title="Rock or Bust World Tour" label="Rock or Bust World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q124516802" start="58583" end="58596" title="Power Up Tour" label="Power Up Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="58626" end="58660" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="List of best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607988" start="58663" end="58691" title="List of blues rock musicians" label="List of blues rock musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622010" start="58694" end="58723" title="List of hard rock bands (A–M)" label="List of hard rock bands (A–M)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733646" start="58726" end="58751" title="List of heavy metal bands" label="List of heavy metal bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="58858" end="58899" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149230" wikidata="Q5286074" url="?curid=149230" title="Do It Records">
<text>Do It Records was a British independent record label based in London, England. It was an early label of Adam and the Ants, releasing their debut album &quot;Dirk Wears White Sox&quot; in November 1979 (which in January 1980 was the first ever number one on the UK Independent Albums Chart and in February 1981 became a UK Top 20 album) as well as singles &quot;Zerox&quot; in June 1979 and &quot;Cartrouble&quot; in March 1980, the latter being not only a number one on the UK Independent Singles Chart but also the first collaboration between Adam Ant and Marco Pirroni, following the departure of the original Ants to form Bow Wow Wow.

The company was founded in 1978 by Robin Scott, Max Tregoning and Ian Tregoning. Over the next six years, it released several recordings by M, Adam and the Ants, Anthony Moore, Renaldo and the Loaf, the Mothmen and Yello, among others. After the label closed in 1983, the rights to its entire back catalogue were bought out by CBS, Adam Ant&#x27;s then label, to secure permanent control of the Ants&#x27; recording history with Do It. The back catalogue is now owned by Sony Music Entertainment, which bought out CBS in 1987.

==See also==
* Lists of record labels

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5286074" start="0" end="13" title="Do It Records" label="Do It Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="28" end="52" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798554" start="104" end="121" title="Adam and the Ants" label="Adam and the Ants"/>
<link wikidata="Q972368" start="157" end="177" title="Dirk Wears White Sox" label="Dirk Wears White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604413" start="261" end="288" title="UK Indie Chart" label="UK Independent Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604413" start="474" end="502" title="UK Indie Chart" label="UK Independent Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q348658" start="544" end="552" title="Adam Ant" label="Adam Ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307169" start="557" end="570" title="Marco Pirroni" label="Marco Pirroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q895390" start="625" end="636" title="Bow Wow Wow" label="Bow Wow Wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q707657" start="674" end="685" title="Robin Scott (singer)" label="Robin Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387178" start="779" end="780" title="M (band)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q573665" start="801" end="814" title="Anthony Moore" label="Anthony Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432708" start="816" end="836" title="Renaldo and the Loaf" label="Renaldo and the Loaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752434" start="838" end="849" title="the Mothmen" label="the Mothmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q639301" start="854" end="859" title="Yello" label="Yello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009264" start="966" end="969" title="CBS Records International" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="1110" end="1120" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="1182" end="1204" title="Lists of record labels" label="Lists of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149237" wikidata="Q507327" url="?curid=149237" title="The Allman Brothers Band">
<text>The Allman Brothers Band was an American rock band formed in Jacksonville, Florida, in 1969. Its founding members were brothers Duane Allman (slide guitar, lead guitar) and Gregg Allman (vocals, keyboards), as well as Dickey Betts (lead guitar, vocals), Berry Oakley (bass), Butch Trucks (drums), and Jai Johanny &quot;Jaimoe&quot; Johanson (drums). Subsequently based in Macon, Georgia, they incorporated elements of blues, jazz and country music and their live shows featured jam band-style improvisation and instrumentals.

The band&#x27;s first two studio albums, &quot;The Allman Brothers Band&quot; (1969) and &quot;Idlewild South&quot; (1970), both released by Capricorn Records, stalled commercially but their 1971 live album &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; was a critical and commercial breakthrough. It included extended versions of &quot;In Memory of Elizabeth Reed&quot; and &quot;Whipping Post&quot;, showcasing the group&#x27;s jamming style. Group leader Duane was killed in a motorcycle accident in 1971; however the band continued, releasing &quot;Eat a Peach&quot; in 1972, a dual studio/live album that cemented the band&#x27;s popularity and featured Gregg&#x27;s &quot;Melissa&quot; and Betts&#x27;s &quot;Blue Sky&quot;. Following the motorcycling death of Oakley in 1972, the group recruited keyboardist Chuck Leavell and bassist Lamar Williams for 1973&#x27;s &quot;Brothers and Sisters.&quot; The album included Betts&#x27;s hit single &quot;Ramblin&#x27; Man&quot; and instrumental &quot;Jessica&quot;, both of which went on to become classic rock radio staples and placed the group at the forefront of 1970s rock music. Internal turmoil overtook them soon after as the group dissolved in 1976, reforming briefly in 1978 with additional personnel changes and breaking up again in 1982. The band re-formed once more in 1989, releasing a string of new albums and touring heavily. A series of personnel changes in the late 1990s was capped by the departure of Betts. The group found stability during the 2000s with bassist Oteil Burbridge and guitarists Warren Haynes and Derek Trucks (the nephew of Butch) and became renowned for their month-long concert residencies at New York City&#x27;s Beacon Theatre each spring. The band retired in October 2014 after their final show at the Beacon Theatre. Butch Trucks and Gregg both died in 2017, and Betts died in 2024, leaving Jaimoe as the only surviving original member. 

The band was awarded seven Gold and four Platinum albums by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995. In 2010, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine ranked the band 52nd on its list of the &quot;100 Greatest Artists of All Time&quot;.

==History==
===Roots and formation (1965–1969)===

Guitarist Duane Allman and his younger brother Gregg grew up in Daytona Beach, Florida, after they moved from their native Nashville, Tennessee, in 1959. Duane and Gregg became friends with a black youth named Floyd Miles and the three began to spend their time at local rhythm &amp; blues clubs, where they participated in jam sessions with some of the bands. Miles later remembered, &quot;Gregg was a longhaired musician, so back then he was a freak. And I&#x27;m black. So we both knew what it was like to be discriminated against, which is probably why we got along so well. We had each other and we had the music.&quot; The brothers formed and performed in several local rock bands such as the Escorts and the Allman Joys. By 1967, the group was performing in St. Louis, where a Los Angeles-based recording executive discovered them; they consequently moved out West and were renamed the Hour Glass, releasing two unsuccessful albums for Liberty Records. Duane moved back to pursue a career as a session musician in Muscle Shoals, Alabama, while Gregg stayed in Los Angeles bound by contractual obligations with Liberty, who believed he could hold a solo career. The two were apart for the first time for a year, but reconvened in Miami, producing an album-length demo with the 31st of February, a group that included drummer Butch Trucks.

At FAME Studios in Muscle Shoals, Duane became the primary session guitarist, recording with artists such as Aretha Franklin and King Curtis. Duane suggested to Wilson Pickett they record a cover of &quot;Hey Jude&quot; by the Beatles; the single went to number 23 on the national charts. FAME signed Duane to a five-year recording contract, and he put together a group, including drummer Johnny Sandlin and keyboardist Paul Hornsby. Duane recruited Jai Johanny Johanson (Jaimoe) after hearing his drumming on a songwriting demo of Jackie Avery, and the two moved into his home on the Tennessee River. Allman invited bassist Berry Oakley to jam with the new group; the pair had met in a Macon, Georgia club some time earlier, and became quick friends. The group had immediate chemistry, and Duane&#x27;s vision for a &quot;different&quot; band, one with two lead guitarists and two drummers, began to come to fruition. Meanwhile, Phil Walden, who managed Otis Redding and several other R&amp;B acts, was looking to expand into rock acts. FAME owner Rick Hall became frustrated with the group&#x27;s recording methods, and offered the tracks recorded and their contract to Walden and Jerry Wexler of Atlantic Records, who purchased them for $10,000. Walden intended the upcoming group to be the centerpiece of his new Atlantic-distributed label, Capricorn.

Duane and Jaimoe moved to Jacksonville, Florida, in early March 1969, as Duane had become frustrated with being a &quot;robot&quot; of those at FAME. He invited anyone who wanted to join to the jam sessions that birthed the Allman Brothers Band. Dickey Betts, leader of Oakley&#x27;s previous band, the Second Coming, became the group&#x27;s second lead guitarist, while Butch Trucks, with whom Duane and Gregg had cut a demo less than a year prior, became the new group&#x27;s second drummer. The Second Coming&#x27;s Reese Wynans played keyboards, and Duane, Oakley, and Betts all shared vocal duties. The unnamed group began to perform free shows in Willow Branch Park in Jacksonville, with an ever-changing, rotating cast of musicians. Duane felt strongly his brother should be the vocalist of the new group (which effectively eliminated Wynans&#x27;s position, as Gregg also played keyboards). Gregg left Los Angeles and entered rehearsal on March 26, 1969, when the group was rehearsing Muddy Waters&#x27; &quot;Trouble No More&quot; Although Gregg was initially intimidated by the musicians, Duane pressured his brother into &quot;singing [his] guts out.&quot; Four days later, the group made their debut at the Jacksonville Armory. Although many potential band names were kicked around, including Beelzebub, the six-piece eventually decided on the Allman Brothers Band.

===Debut and early years (1969–1970)===
The group moved to Macon, Georgia, by May 1, where Walden was establishing Capricorn Records. Kim Payne, Mike Callahan and Joseph &quot;Red Dog&quot; Campbell became the band&#x27;s early crew members. &quot;Red Dog&quot; was a disabled Vietnam veteran who donated his monthly disability checks to the band&#x27;s cause. In Macon, the group stayed at friend Twiggs Lyndon&#x27;s apartment on 309 College Street, which became known as the communal home of the band and crew, nicknamed the Hippie Crash Pad. &quot;There were five or six occupied apartments in the building with the Hippie Crash Pad and you would expect they would call the police on us because we were constantly raising hell at three or four in the morning, but they all just moved out,&quot; said Trucks. Living meagerly, they found a friend in &quot;Mama Louise&quot; Hudson, cook and proprietor of the H&amp;H Soul Food Restaurant, who ran a tab when they were short of funds, early on made good with proceeds from Duane&#x27;s recording sessions on the side. The band&#x27;s image was radical in the just barely integrated Macon: &quot;A lot of the white folk around here did not approve of them long-haired boys, or of them always having a black guy with them,&quot; said Hudson. The band performed locally, as well as 80 miles north in Atlanta&#x27;s Piedmont Park, and practiced at the newly minted Capricorn nearly each day.

The group forged a strong brotherhood, spending countless hours rehearsing, consuming psychedelic drugs, and hanging out in Rose Hill Cemetery, where they wrote songs. Their first performances outside the South came on May 30 and 31 in Boston, opening for The Velvet Underground. In need of more material, the group remade old blues numbers such as &quot;Trouble No More&quot; and &quot;One Way Out&quot;, in addition to improvised jams such as &quot;Mountain Jam&quot;. Gregg, who had struggled to write in the past, became the band&#x27;s sole songwriter, composing songs such as &quot;Whipping Post&quot; and &quot;Black-Hearted Woman&quot;. The band was originally set to record their first album in Miami with producer Tom Dowd, who had worked with Cream and John Coltrane, but Dowd proved to be unavailable. Instead, they headed off for New York City in August 1969 to work with Atlantic house engineer Adrian Barber in his first producer credit. &quot;The Allman Brothers Band&quot; was recorded and mixed in two weeks, and proved a positive experience for the ensemble. New York came to be regarded within the group as their &quot;second home&quot;. &quot;The Allman Brothers Band&quot; was released in November 1969 through Atco and Capricorn Records, but received a poor commercial response, selling less than 35,000 copies upon initial release.

Executives suggested to Walden that he relocate the band to New York or Los Angeles to &quot;acclimate&quot; them to the industry. &quot;They wanted us to act &#x27;like a rock band&#x27; and we just told them to fuck themselves,&quot; remembered Trucks. For their part, the members of the band remained optimistic, electing to stay in the South. &quot;Everyone told us we&#x27;d fall by the wayside down there,&quot; said Gregg Allman, but the collaboration between the band and Capricorn Records &quot;transformed Macon from this sleepy little town into a very hip, wild and crazy place filled with bikers and rockers&quot;. The band rented a $165-a-month farmhouse on a lake outside of Macon, the busy comings and goings at which reminded them of New York City&#x27;s Idlewild Airport. Idlewild South was the home of rehearsals and parties, and was &quot;where the brotherhood came to pass,&quot; according to roadie Kim Payne; &quot;There was a pact made out there around a campfire—all for one and one for all ... Everybody believed [in the band] 100 percent.&quot; Much of the material presented on the band&#x27;s second album, &quot;Idlewild South&quot;, originated at the cabin. Oakley&#x27;s wife rented a large Tudor Revival home on 2321 Vineville Avenue in Macon and the band moved into what they dubbed &quot;the Big House&quot; in March 1970.

===Live reputation, &quot;At Fillmore East&quot;, and breakthrough (1970–1971)===

The band played continuously in 1970, performing over 300 dates on the road traveling in a Ford Econoline van and later, a Winnebago, nicknamed the Wind Bag. Walden doubted the band&#x27;s future, worrying whether they would ever catch on, but word of mouth spread due to the band&#x27;s relentless touring schedule, and crowds got larger. The close proximity of the Winnebago brought about heavy drug use within the group, and all in the group, with the exception of the brothers, were struggling to make a living. In one instance, touring manager Twiggs Lyndon stabbed and killed a promoter for not paying the band; he later cited temporary insanity. Later that year, Duane accidentally overdosed on opium after a show. The band&#x27;s sophomore album, &quot;Idlewild South&quot;, produced by Tom Dowd, was recorded gradually over a period of five months in various cities, including New York, Miami, and Macon, and contained two of the band&#x27;s best-known songs, &quot;Midnight Rider&quot; (later a hit for various artists, including a Top 20 solo effort by Gregg) and &quot;In Memory of Elizabeth Reed&quot;, which became one of the band&#x27;s famous concert numbers.

&quot;Idlewild South&quot; was issued by Atco and Capricorn Records in September 1970, less than a year after their debut. The album sold only &quot;marginally better than its predecessor, though the band had a growing national reputation and the album included songs that would become staples of the band&#x27;s repertoire—and eventually of rock radio.&quot; Shortly after completing recording, Dowd put Duane in contact with guitarist Eric Clapton, who invited him to contribute to his new project, Derek and the Dominos. Allman was a huge fan of Clapton&#x27;s work with Cream, and Clapton had been blown away by Allman&#x27;s session work on Wilson Pickett&#x27;s &quot;Hey Jude&quot; some years prior. They met after a show one night in Miami and jammed together until the next afternoon, with the two guitarists regarding one another as &quot;instant soulmates&quot;. Clapton invited Duane to join Derek and the Dominos, and by several accounts he considered it; in the end, he declined the offer and rejoined the Allman Brothers Band, returning after missing a string of several shows. The sessions were collected on &quot;Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs&quot;, issued that November.

Their fortunes began to change over the course of 1971, when the band&#x27;s average earnings doubled. &quot;We realized that the audience was a big part of what we did, which couldn&#x27;t be duplicated in a studio. A lightbulb finally went off; we needed to make a live album,&quot; said Gregg Allman. The resulting live album, &quot;At Fillmore East&quot;, was recorded over three nights—March 11, 12 and 13, 1971—at the Fillmore East in New York, for which the band was paid a nightly $1,250. &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; was released in July 1971 by Capricorn Records as a double album, &quot;people-priced&quot; for the cost of a single LP. While previous albums by the band had taken months to hit the charts (often near the bottom of the top 200), the record started to climb the charts after a matter of days. &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; peaked at number 13 on &quot;Billboard&quot; Top Pop Albums chart, and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America that October, becoming their commercial and artistic breakthrough. The album is considered among the best live albums of all time, and in 2004 was one of the albums selected for preservation in the Library of Congress, deemed &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot; by the National Recording Registry.

===&quot;Eat a Peach&quot; and Duane Allman&#x27;s and Berry Oakley&#x27;s deaths (1971–1972)===

Although &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; brought the band more success and wealth than ever before, many of the band and its entourage were struggling with heroin addiction. Four individuals—group leader Duane Allman, bassist Berry Oakley, and roadies Robert Payne and Red Dog Campbell—checked into the Linwood-Bryant Hospital for rehabilitation in October 1971. On October 29, 1971, Duane Allman, then 24, was killed in a motorcycle accident one day after returning to Macon. Allman was riding his motorcycle fast at the intersection of Hillcrest Avenue and Bartlett Street as a flatbed truck carrying a lumber crane approached. The truck stopped suddenly in the intersection, forcing Allman to swerve his Harley-Davidson Sportster motorcycle sharply to the left to avoid a collision. As he was doing so, he struck either the back of the truck or the ball on the lumber crane and was thrown from the motorcycle. The motorcycle bounced into the air, landed on Allman and skidded another 90 feet with Allman pinned underneath, crushing his internal organs. Though he was alive when he arrived at the hospital, despite immediate emergency surgery, he died several hours later from massive internal injuries.

After Duane&#x27;s death, the band held a meeting on their future; clearly all wanted to continue, and after a short period, the band returned to the road. &quot;We all had this thing in us and Duane put it there. He was the teacher and he gave something to us—his disciples—that we had to play out,&quot; said drummer Butch Trucks. The band returned to Miami in December to complete work on their third studio album, &quot;Eat a Peach&quot;. Completing its recording raised each member&#x27;s spirits; &quot;The music brought life back to us all, and it was simultaneously realized by every one of us. We found strength, vitality, newness, reason, and belonging as we worked on finishing &quot;Eat a Peach&quot;,&quot; said Allman. &quot;Those last three songs [...] just kinda floated right on out of us [...] The music was still good, it was still rich, and it still had that energy—it was still the Allman Brothers Band.&quot; Released in February 1972, &quot;Eat a Peach&quot; was the band&#x27;s second hit album, shipping gold and peaking at number four on &quot;Billboard&quot; Top 200 Pop Albums chart. &quot;We&#x27;d been through hell, but somehow we were rolling bigger than ever,&quot; said Gregg Allman.

The band performed nearly 90 shows in the following year, touring as a five-piece. The band also purchased 432 acres of land in Juliette, Georgia for $160,000 and nicknamed it &quot;the Farm&quot;; it soon became a group hangout and fulfilled bassist Oakley&#x27;s communal dreams. Oakley, however, was visibly suffering from the death of his friend: he drank excessively, heavily consumed drugs, and was losing weight quickly. According to friends and family, he appeared to have lost &quot;all hope, his heart, his drive, his ambition, [and] his direction&quot; following Duane&#x27;s death. &quot;Everything Berry had envisioned for everybody—including the crew, the women and children—was shattered on the day Duane died, and he didn&#x27;t care after that,&quot; said roadie Kim Payne. Oakley repeatedly wished to &quot;get high, be high, and stay high,&quot; causing quiet concern from all those around him. On November 11, 1972, slightly inebriated and overjoyed at the prospect of leading a jam session later that night, Oakley crashed his motorcycle into the side of a bus, just three blocks from where Duane had been killed. He declined hospital treatment and went home, but gradually grew delirious. He was taken to the hospital shortly thereafter and died of cerebral swelling caused by a fractured skull. Oakley was buried directly beside Duane at Rose Hill Cemetery in Macon.

===&quot;Brothers and Sisters&quot;, celebrity, and inner turmoil (1973–1976)===

The band unanimously decided to carry on and arranged auditions for new bassists, with a renewed fervor and determination. Several bassists auditioned and the band eventually chose Lamar Williams, an old friend of drummer Jai Johanny Johanson&#x27;s from Gulfport, Mississippi, two years removed from an Army stint in Vietnam. Chuck Leavell was asked to play piano for Allman&#x27;s solo album, &quot;Laid Back&quot; (1973), and gradually found himself contributing to the Allman Brothers as well. Dickey Betts became the group&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; leader during the recording process. &quot;It&#x27;s not like Dickey came in and said, &#x27;I&#x27;m taking over. I&#x27;m the boss. Do this and that.&#x27; It wasn&#x27;t overt; it was still supposedly a democracy, but Dickey started doing more and more of the songwriting,&quot; said road manager Willie Perkins. The band&#x27;s fourth studio album, &quot;Brothers and Sisters&quot;, was released in August 1973 and became their biggest success yet, peaking at number one and resulting in the band being considered &quot;the most popular band in the country.&quot; &quot;Ramblin&#x27; Man&quot;, Betts&#x27; country-infused number, received interest from radio stations immediately, and it rose to number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100.

The Allman Brothers Band returned to touring, playing larger venues, receiving more profit and dealing with less friendship, miscommunication, and spiraling drug problems. This culminated in a backstage brawl when the band played with the Grateful Dead at Washington&#x27;s RFK Stadium in June 1973, which resulted in the firing of three of the band&#x27;s longtime roadies. The band played arenas and stadiums almost solely as their drug use escalated. In 1974, the band was regularly making $100,000 per show, and was renting the Starship, a customized Boeing 720B used by Led Zeppelin and the Rolling Stones. &quot;When [we] got that goddamn plane, it was the beginning of the end,&quot; said Allman. Both Allman and Betts released top-20 solo albums in 1974 (&quot;The Gregg Allman Tour&quot; and &quot;Highway Call&quot;).

In July 1974 the band visited Europe for the first time. They had planned to tour Britain and Europe at the beginning of that year, but the 1973-74 energy crisis forced a last-minute postponement. They headlined 2 big out-door events. One, the &#x27;Summerconcert &#x27;74&#x27; at the Sportpark, Hilversum, the Netherlands, on July 18, attended by 20,000 spectators, and the second one, at &#x27;Bucolic Frolic&#x27;, the first Knebworth Park Festival, on July 20, where they played a well-received three-hour two-set performance in front of 70,000 fans, from all over Europe.

The sessions that produced 1975&#x27;s &quot;Win, Lose or Draw&quot;, the last album by the original Allman Brothers Band, were disjointed and inconsistent; Gregg Allman was largely living in Los Angeles and dating pop star Cher, and was, according to biographer Alan Paul, &quot;[becoming] more famous for being famous than for his music.&quot; His vocals were recorded there, as he could not be bothered to return to Macon. Upon its release, it was considered subpar and sold less than its predecessor; the band later remarked that they were &quot;embarrassed&quot; about the album.

From August 1975 to May 1976, the Allman Brothers Band played 41 shows to some of the biggest crowds of their career. Gradually, the members of the band grew apart during these tours, with sound checks and rehearsals &quot;[becoming] a thing of the past.&quot; Allman later pointed to a benefit for presidential candidate Jimmy Carter (an avowed fan of the group) as the only real &quot;high point&quot; in an otherwise &quot;rough, rough tour.&quot; The shows were considered lackluster and the members were excessive in their drug use. The &quot;breaking point&quot; came when Gregg Allman testified in the trial of security man Scooter Herring. Bandmates considered him a &quot;snitch&quot;, and he received death threats, leading to law-enforcement protection. Herring was convicted on five counts of conspiracy to distribute cocaine and received a 75-year prison sentence, which was later reduced prior to a presidential pardon from Carter. For his part, Allman always maintained that Herring had told him to take the deal to turn state&#x27;s evidence and that he (Herring) would take the fall; nevertheless, the band refused to communicate with Allman after the incident. As a result, the band finally broke up; Leavell, Williams, and Jaimoe continued playing together in Sea Level, Betts formed Great Southern, and Allman founded the Gregg Allman Band. The 1976 live album &quot;Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas&quot; was seen as &quot;the last gasp of a dying band,&quot;; this was unfortunate for the now-floundering Capricorn Records, as the label was relying on the band staying together to stay financially afloat.

===First reunion, subsequent break-up, and interim years (1979–1988)===
In 1978, Allman and Walden first approached Betts with the idea of a reunion. Their first public appearance together came at a Great Southern show in New York&#x27;s Central Park that summer, when Allman, Trucks, and Jaimoe joined the band for a few songs. Williams and Leavell declined to leave Sea Level, so the Allman Brothers Band hired guitarist Dan Toler and bassist David Goldflies from Great Southern. The band reunited with Tom Dowd at Criteria Studios in Miami to cut their reunion album, which was released in February 1979 as &quot;Enlightened Rogues&quot;, a term Duane had used to describe the band. While the band &quot;tried to make it happen,&quot; they later concluded that the chemistry was not there; the album was a minor commercial success, which was credited to the production work from Dowd. Betts filed a lawsuit against Walden for nonpayment of record and publishing royalties, and Betts&#x27;s lawyer, Steve Massarsky, began managing the group. Betts won the lawsuit, and the rest of the band filed suit while Capricorn declared bankruptcy that October. Massarsky led the successful effort to sign the band with Arista, which pushed the band to &quot;modernize&quot; their sound. &quot;[Arista founder] Clive Davis destroyed any hope that we had that we could make the thing work again,&quot; said Trucks later. &quot;He wanted us to be a Southern American version of Led Zeppelin and brought in outside producers and it just kept getting worse.&quot;

Their first Arista effort, &quot;Reach for the Sky&quot; (1980), was produced by Nashville songwriters Mike Lawler and Johnny Cobb. Bonnie Bramlett, who toured with the band near the end of the decade, sang lead on one song. Lawler soon became a part of the band&#x27;s touring ensemble, incorporating center-stage keytar solos &quot;that most fans consider the band&#x27;s nadir.&quot; Drugs remained a problem with the band, particularly among Betts and Allman. Although the album was made with the intention of creating a hit single, the genre of Southern rock was waning considerably in the mainstream. The band again grew apart, firing longtime roadie &quot;Red Dog&quot; and replacing Jaimoe with Toler&#x27;s brother Frankie, who had been a member of Great Southern. The main point of contention was Jaimoe&#x27;s insistence that his wife and manager, Candace Oakley (Berry&#x27;s sister), handle his business affairs. &quot;One of the real blights on the history of the Allman Brothers Band was that Jaimoe, this gentle man, was fired from this organization,&quot; said Allman later. Not long after, &quot;the band changed managers, hiring the promoter John Scher after Massarsky eased himself out, reportedly saying, &#x27;It&#x27;s a million-dollar headache and a quarter-million-dollar job.&#x27;&quot;

For their second and final album with Arista, &quot;Brothers of the Road&quot; (1981), they collaborated with a &quot;name producer&quot; (John Ryan, of Styx and the Doobie Brothers), who pushed the band even harder to change their sound. &quot;Straight from the Heart&quot; was the album&#x27;s single, which became a minor hit but heralded the group&#x27;s last appearance on the top 40 charts. The band, considering their post-reunion albums &quot;embarrassing&quot;, subsequently broke up in 1982 after clashing with Clive Davis, who rejected every producer the band suggested for a possible third album, including Tom Dowd and Johnny Sandlin. &quot;We broke up in &#x27;82 because we decided we better just back out or we would ruin what was left of the band&#x27;s image,&quot; said Betts. The band&#x27;s final performance came on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in January 1982, where they performed &quot;Southbound&quot; and &quot;Leavin. The members regrouped occasionally in the intervening years; in 1986, Betts and Allman toured together, with each opening for one another and collaborating for a set. The full Allman Brothers Band—Allman, Betts, Trucks, Jaimoe, Leavell and Dan Toler—also reunited twice in 1986 for the Volunteers Jam and Crackdown on Crack concerts. Allman&#x27;s solo career began looking up when he released his first solo album in over a decade in 1987, &quot;I&#x27;m No Angel&quot;. The title track became a surprise hit on radio, peaking at No. 49 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and No. 1 on the magazine&#x27;s Mainstream Rock Tracks chart.

===Second reunion and heavy touring (1989–1996)===

The Allman Brothers Band celebrated its twentieth anniversary in 1989, and the band reunited for a summer tour, with Jaimoe once again on drums. In addition, they featured guitarist Warren Haynes and pianist Johnny Neel, both from the Dickey Betts Band, and bassist Allen Woody, who was hired after open auditions held at Trucks&#x27; Florida studio. The classic rock radio format had given the band&#x27;s catalog songs new relevance, as did a multi-CD retrospective box set, &quot;Dreams&quot;. Epic, who had worked with Allman on his solo career, signed the band. Danny Goldberg became the band&#x27;s manager; he had previously worked with acts such as Led Zeppelin and Bonnie Raitt. The group were initially reluctant to tour, but found they performed solidly; in addition, former roadies such as &quot;Red Dog&quot; returned. The band returned to the studio with longtime producer Tom Dowd for 1990&#x27;s &quot;Seven Turns&quot;, which was considered a return to form. &quot;Good Clean Fun&quot; and &quot;Seven Turns&quot; each became big hits on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart. The addition of Haynes and Woody had &quot;reenergized&quot; the ensemble. Neel left the group in 1990, and the band added percussionist Marc Quiñones, formerly of Spyro Gyra, the following year.

The band performed 87 shows in 1991, and 77 the following year. The band did not renew Goldberg&#x27;s contract as manager, and as a result, their tour manager, Bert Holman, became the band&#x27;s full-time manager in 1991 and remained so for the rest of their career. Their next studio effort, &quot;Shades of Two Worlds&quot; (1991), produced the crowd favorite &quot;Nobody Knows&quot;. The band also released a live album, &quot;An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: First Set&quot;, recorded at their 1992 residency at New York&#x27;s Beacon Theatre. The band performed ten consecutive shows there (establishing themselves as a &quot;New York rite of spring&quot;, according to biographer Alan Paul), which set the stage for their return nearly every year afterward. The band grew contentious over a 1993 tour, in which Betts was arrested when he shoved two police officers. Struggling to find a replacement guitarist, they brought in David Grissom (then touring with John Mellencamp), and also Jack Pearson, a Nashville-based friend of Haynes (the original replacement, Zakk Wylde, filled in for a show but his onstage antics did not fit with the band). Haynes was both opening with his own band and headlining with the Allman Brothers, and began to consider leaving the group, due to their increasing lack of communication.

Despite the growing tension, Haynes remained a member and Betts returned. Their third post-reunion record, &quot;Where It All Begins&quot; (1994), was recorded entirely live on a film soundstage (without an audience). &quot;The Allman Brothers was a year-by-year thing. There was no indication that it was capable of staying together for years to come. We all looked at it as each tour could be the last one, and there was no reason to think otherwise,&quot; said Haynes. The band continued to tour with greater frequency, attracting younger generations with their headlining of the H.O.R.D.E. Festival. The group were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in January 1995; Allman was severely inebriated and could not make it through his acceptance speech. Seeing the ceremony broadcast on television later, Allman was mortified, providing a catalyst for his final, successful attempt to quit alcohol and substance abuse. During the 1996 run at the Beacon, turmoil came to a breaking point between Allman and Betts, nearly causing a cancellation of a show and causing another band breakup. &quot;We were upstairs in our dressing rooms [...] I&#x27;m sitting there thinking, &#x27;This is it. This is how it finally ends,&#x27;&quot; said Trucks. Haynes and Woody left to focus on Gov&#x27;t Mule, feeling as though a break was imminent with the Allman Brothers Band.

===Later years (1997–2014)===

The group recruited Oteil Burbridge of the Aquarium Rescue Unit to replace Woody on bass, and Jack Pearson on guitar. Concerns arose over the increasing loudness of Allman Brothers shows, which were largely centered on Betts. Pearson, struggling with tinnitus, left as a result following the 1999 Beacon run. Trucks phoned his nephew, Derek Trucks, to join the band for their thirtieth anniversary tour. Trucks was very young, at age 20, and younger than any of the original members when the band formed. &quot;It was an honor to be part of such a great institution from the start,&quot; said Derek Trucks. &quot;When I first got the gig, I was just trying to maintain the spirit of the whole thing while hopefully bringing some fire to it, hoping to hold up my end while also expressing my own voice.&quot; The Beacon run in 2000, captured on &quot;Peakin&#x27; at the Beacon&quot;, was ironically considered among the band&#x27;s worst performances; an eight-show spring tour led to even more strained relations in the group. &quot;It had ceased to be a band—everything had to be based around what Dickey was playing,&quot; said Allman. Anger boiled over within the group towards Betts, which led to all original members sending him a letter, informing him of their intentions to tour without him for the summer.

All involved contend that the break was temporary, but Betts responded by hiring a lawyer and suing the group, which led to a permanent divorce. &quot;I had no idea that I would be snapped out of the picture. I thought it was cruel and impersonal,&quot; said Betts. Allman was finally sober and felt that more miserable shows with Betts would be a waste of time. Betts later received a cash settlement, which is subject to a confidentiality agreement; he went on to record new music with a new band. Jimmy Herring joined the band for the summer tour, where the band fought negative press; fans contended that attending shows by an Allman Brothers Band without Betts was pointless. Herring exited shortly after the tour, as he felt guilty that he would replace Betts. That August, former bassist Allen Woody was found dead in a hotel room in New York. Warren Haynes set up a benefit show for his former bandmate, which featured the Allman Brothers Band. With Derek Trucks unavailable, he sat in for the set. In 2001, Haynes rejoined the band for their Beacon run: &quot;It was my first time with the band in four years and it was very comfortable,&quot; he remarked.

This incarnation of the Allman Brothers Band was well-regarded among fans and the general public, and remained stable and productive. &quot;This band is the greatest one since Duane and Berry, and why shouldn&#x27;t it be?&quot; said Jaimoe. The band released their final studio recording, &quot;Hittin&#x27; the Note&quot; (2003), to critical acclaim. The record was the first to feature Derek Trucks and the only Allman Brothers album to not feature Betts. The band continued to tour throughout the 2000s, remaining a top touring act, regularly attracting more than 20,000 fans. The decade closed with a successful run at the Beacon Theatre, in celebration of the band&#x27;s fortieth anniversary. &quot;That [2009 run] was the most fun I&#x27;ve ever had in that building,&quot; said Allman, and it was universally regarded within the band as a career highlight. The run featured numerous special guests, including Eric Clapton, whom all in the band regarded as the most &quot;special&quot; guest, due to his association with Duane. Allman had a liver transplant in 2010, and suffered health setbacks for the following two years. He went to rehab in 2012 for addiction following his medical treatments.

David &quot;Frankie&quot; Toler died at a hospice care in Bradenton, Florida on June 4, 2011, after a long illness following a liver transplant at the age of 59.

In 2012, the Allman Brothers started their own music festival, The Peach, which features many associated acts and many genres in addition to two Allman Brothers performances. They played a run at the Beacon in 2013 per tradition and after continued to tour. In 2014, Haynes and Derek Trucks announced their intention to depart the group at the end of the year. The group intended their 2014 run of Beacon shows to be their last, but the residency was cut short when Allman developed bronchitis. However, in September 2014, the group played the iconic &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; album at the Lockn&#x27; music festival in Arrington, Virginia.

In early 2014, Warren Haynes and Derek Trucks announced that they would be leaving the band at the end of the year and the group decided to retire from touring. Gregg Allman stated, &quot;This is it—this is the end of it. Forty-five years is enough and I want to do something else anyway.&quot; The Allman Brothers Band performed its final show on October 28, 2014, at the Beacon Theatre. The show was the 238th straight sellout for the band at the Beacon. The concert consisted of three sets, comprising mostly music from their first five records, with no guest musicians sitting in. &quot;We had a band meeting and decided no guest sit-ins. We&#x27;re going out with just the band,&quot; Allman told reporters. Following the sets, which ran into the early morning hours, the band joined center stage and took a bow, with Allman recalling the group&#x27;s first rehearsal 45 years prior: &quot;I was called to come and meet these guys in Jacksonville, Florida, [...] on March 26, 1969. Now, we&#x27;re gonna do the first song we ever played.&quot; Following this, the band performed &quot;Trouble No More&quot; by Muddy Waters. During the night&#x27;s intermissions, a video screen displayed a message: &quot;The road indeed goes on forever. So stay calm, eat a peach and carry on...&quot;

===Subsequent activities===
In January 2017, founding member Butch Trucks died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound. That May, founding member Gregg Allman died from complications arising from liver cancer at the age of 69, putting an end to any possibilities of a reunion.

In January 2020, the five surviving members of the final Allman Brothers lineup, calling themselves the Brothers, announced their intentions to hold a show to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the band on March 10 at Madison Square Garden. The concert lasted over four hours, with Duane Trucks taking the place of his uncle on drums, proto-Allmans member Reese Wynans taking the place of Gregg Allman on organ, and Warren Haynes taking on Gregg Allman&#x27;s vocal parts. In addition pianist and past member Chuck Leavell joined the band for about half the numbers played. (Dickey Betts was invited to participate but his health precluded him from traveling although he wished the event be successful.) Like the final Beacon show, the Brothers 50 concert was dominated by material from the group&#x27;s first five albums. The show was one of the last large concerts to take place before the 2020 coronavirus pandemic in North America forced the shutdown of such events; some people accordingly did not go to it, and indeed especially due to the older demographic of the group&#x27;s fan base, Derek Trucks would subsequently wonder whether it had been wise to move forward with it.

Following the death of Dickey Betts on April 18, 2024, drummer Jaimoe became the last surviving original member of the Allman Brothers Band.

==Musical style and influences==

The Allman Brothers Band have generally been considered one of the pioneering bands in Southern rock, although the group distanced itself from the term. Guitarist Dickey Betts was most vocal about this classification, which he considered unfair: &quot;I think it&#x27;s limiting. I&#x27;d rather just be known as a progressive rock band from the South. I&#x27;m damned proud of who I am and where I&#x27;m from, but I hate the term &#x27;Southern rock.&#x27; I think calling us that pigeonholed us and forced people to expect certain types of music from us that I don&#x27;t think are fair.&quot;
Gregg Allman also saw the &quot;Southern rock&quot; tag as redundant, saying it was like saying &quot;rock rock&quot; due to rock and roll being born in the South. The band was certainly at the forefront of the genre&#x27;s popularity in the early 1970s; the breakthrough of &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; led their hometown of Macon to become flooded with &quot;Southern rock&quot; groups. Despite this, the group has continued to remove itself from the term. &quot;The problem I have is a lot of people associate it with rednecks and rebel flags and backward mentality. That has never been representative of the Allman Brothers Band,&quot; said guitarist Warren Haynes.

The group largely infused hints of the blues, jazz, and country into their music. They all avidly shared their record collections with one another during the early days of the band. For example, Betts was into country music and the guitar work of Chuck Berry, while Trucks was largely into groups such as the Rolling Stones and the Grateful Dead. Duane and Gregg Allman grew infatuated with rhythm and blues in their teens, collecting records by James Brown, B.B. King, Sonny Boy Williamson, and Howlin&#x27; Wolf. The brothers were also heavily influenced by guitarist Taj Mahal and his 1968 eponymous debut album. It was this influence that led both to their discovery of their now famous slide guitar style. Drummer Jai Johanny &quot;Jaimoe&quot; Johanson largely introduced the group to jazz. While Betts commented that he was interested in artists such as Howard Roberts prior, Jaimoe &quot;really fired us up on it,&quot; introducing his bandmates to Miles Davis and John Coltrane. Duane Allman was also inspired by Howard Roberts, Wes Montgomery, Tal Farlow, and Kenny Burrell. The source of the band&#x27;s modal jamming in their earliest days was Coltrane&#x27;s rendition of &quot;My Favorite Things&quot; and Davis&#x27; &quot;All Blues&quot;, which Jaimoe occasionally stole from: &quot;I did a lot of copying, but only from the best.&quot; This type of jazz-infused jamming is expressed in the instrumental &quot;In Memory of Elizabeth Reed&quot;, which focuses heavily on improvisation. &quot;Whipping Post&quot; was notable for its inclusion of blues-ballad themes, and became one of the most popular (and longest) compositions. Later, Betts generally led the band in a more &quot;country&quot; direction following Duane&#x27;s passing; their only hit single &quot;Ramblin&#x27; Man&quot; was considered so unusually &quot;country&quot; for the group that they were initially reluctant to record it.

Duane Allman had the idea of having two lead guitarists, which was inspired by Curtis Mayfield; &quot;[he] wanted the bass, keyboards, and second guitar to form patterns behind the solo rather than just comping,&quot; said Allman. Their style and incorporation of guitar harmonies was very influential on later musicians. &quot;The pair also had a wide range of complementary techniques, often forming intricate, interlocking patterns with each other and with the bassist, Berry Oakley, setting the stage for dramatic flights of improvised melodies.&quot; Dickey Betts&#x27; playing was very melody-based; &quot;My style is just a little too smooth and round to play the blues stuff straight, because I&#x27;m such a melody guy that even when I&#x27;m playing the blues, I go for melody first,&quot; he said. His listening of country and string bluegrass growing up influenced this considerably: &quot;I played mandolin, ukulele, and fiddle before I ever touched a guitar, which may be where a lot of the major keys I play come from.&quot; He later characterized their style as &quot;question and answer, anticipation and conclusion,&quot; which involved allowing each musician&#x27;s downbeat to arrive in a different spot, while also keeping consideration of the bass guitar lines.

The group also held an improvisational approach to live performances, which connected the band with jam band culture. &quot;Jazz and blues musicians have been doing this for decades, but I think they really brought that sense that anyone onstage can inspire anyone else at any given time to rock music,&quot; said Haynes. &quot;We sure didn&#x27;t set out to be a &quot;jam band&quot; but those long jams just emanated from within the band, because we didn&#x27;t want to just play three minutes and be over,&quot; said Allman. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; referred to the group as &quot;without question the first great jam band, and they took the jam to heights that it had not previously reached.&quot;

==Legacy==
The Allman Brothers Band were considerably influential within the Southern United States. Their arrival on the musical scene paved the way for several other notable Southern rock bands—among those Lynyrd Skynyrd, the Marshall Tucker Band and Wet Willie—to achieve commercial success, and also &quot;almost single-handedly&quot; made Capricorn Records into &quot;a major independent label&quot;. Billy Gibbons of ZZ Top, writing for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, wrote that the group &quot;defined the best of every music from the American South in that time. They were the best of all of us.&quot; He went on to call the band &quot;a true brotherhood of players—one that went beyond race and ego. It was a thing of beauty.&quot; The band&#x27;s extended popularity through heavy touring in the early 1990s created a new generation of fans, one that viewed the Allmans as pioneers of &quot;latter-day collegiate jam rock&quot;.
AllMusic praised the band&#x27;s history: &quot;they went from being America&#x27;s single most influential band to a shell of their former self trading on past glories, to reach the 21st century resurrected as one of the most respected rock acts of their era.&quot;

In 2012, an official historic marker was erected on the site of the July 1970 Second Atlanta International Pop Festival near Byron, Georgia. The Allman Brothers Band had played two sets at the festival, which was a significant event in their career. The marker text reads, in part: &quot;Over thirty musical acts performed, including... Macon&#x27;s Allman Brothers Band on their launching pad to national fame.&quot; Official sponsors of the marker included the Georgia Allman Brothers Band Association, The Allman Brothers Band Museum at the Big House, and &quot;Hittin&#x27; the Note&quot;. In 2003, the band released a recording of their festival opening and closing performances, &quot;Live at the Atlanta International Pop Festival: July 3 &amp; 5, 1970&quot;.

In 2018, Devon Allman (son of Gregg Allman), Duane Betts (son of Dickey Betts), and Berry Duane Oakley (son of Berry Oakley) formed a band called the Allman Betts Band.

Written by author Alan Paul, &quot;Brothers and Sisters: The Allman Brothers Band and the Album That Defined the 70s&quot; was published by St. Martin&#x27;s Press on July 25, 2023, celebrating the album of the same name&#x27;s fiftieth anniversary. The book examines the making of the album while also presenting a broad cultural history of the era, covering stories of how the band rescued Jimmy Carter&#x27;s flailing presidential campaign, Gregg Allman&#x27;s marriage to Cher, and how the band&#x27;s success led to an eventual breakup.

==Awards and recognition==

* Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance, 1996, &quot;Jessica&quot; (also famous for being the theme for the TV series &quot;Top Gear&quot;).
* Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, 2012
* Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, 1995
* &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s &quot;Greatest...of All Time&quot; lists:
** 100 Greatest Artists of All Time (2004): No. 52
** 500 Greatest Albums of All Time (2003): No. 49 for &quot;At Fillmore East&quot;
** 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time (2003):
*** No. 2 Duane Allman
*** No. 23 Warren Haynes
*** No. 58 Dickey Betts
*** No. 81 Derek Trucks
** 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time (2011):
*** No. 9 Duane Allman
*** No. 16 Derek Trucks
*** No. 61 Dickey Betts

** 250 Greatest Guitarists of All Time (2023):
*** No. 10 Duane Allman
*** No. 80 Derek Trucks
*** No. 120 Warren Haynes
*** No. 145 Dickey Betts

==Personnel==
;Final lineup
* Gregg Allman – keyboards, guitar, vocals 
* Jai Johanny &quot;Jaimoe&quot; Johanson – drums, percussion 
* Butch Trucks – drums, timpani 
* Warren Haynes – guitar, slide guitar, vocals 
* Marc Quiñones – percussion, drums, background vocals 
* Oteil Burbridge – bass, vocals 
* Derek Trucks – guitar, slide guitar 

;Former members
* Duane Allman – guitar, slide guitar 
* Dickey Betts – guitar, slide guitar, vocals 
* Berry Oakley – bass, vocals 
* Chuck Leavell – keyboards, background vocals 
* Lamar Williams – bass 
* David Goldflies – bass 

* Dan Toler – guitar 
* Mike Lawler – keyboards 
* David &quot;Frankie&quot; Toler – drums 
* Johnny Neel – keyboards, harmonica, vocals 
* Allen Woody – bass, background vocals 
* Jack Pearson – guitar, slide guitar, vocals 
* Jimmy Herring – guitar 
==Discography==
The Allman Brothers Band placed more emphasis on their live performances rather than albums. &quot;We get kind of frustrated doing the [studio] records,&quot; said Duane Allman in 1970. Consequently, this listing includes all studio albums and major live releases (several other live releases have been issued retrospectively).
* &quot;The Allman Brothers Band&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Idlewild South&quot; (1970)
* &quot;At Fillmore East&quot; (1971, live)
* &quot;Eat a Peach&quot; (1972, part live)
* &quot;Brothers and Sisters&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Win, Lose or Draw&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas&quot; (1976, live)
* &quot;Enlightened Rogues&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Reach for the Sky&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Brothers of the Road&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Seven Turns&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Shades of Two Worlds&quot; (1991)
* &quot;An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: First Set&quot; (1992, live)
* &quot;Where It All Begins&quot; (1994)
* &quot;An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: 2nd Set&quot; (1995, live)
* &quot;Peakin&#x27; at the Beacon&quot; (2000, live)
* &quot;Hittin&#x27; the Note&quot; (2003)
* &quot;One Way Out&quot; (2004, live)

==See also==
* Gregg Allman Band
* The Allman Brothers Band Museum (the &quot;Big House&quot;)
* The Peach Music Festival
* Wanee Music Festival

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Works cited===
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* &quot;The Allman Brothers Band: Dreams&quot; liner notes
* Freeman, Scott. &quot;Midnight Riders: The Story of the Allman Brothers Band&quot;, Little, Brown &amp; Co. 1995.
* Leavell, Chuck with J. Marshall Craig. &quot;Between Rock and a Home Place&quot;, Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2004.
* Perkins, Willie. &quot;No Saints, No Saviors&quot;, Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2005.
* Perkins, Willie. &quot;Diary of a Rock and Roll Tour Manager&quot;, Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2022.
* Poe, Randy. &quot;Skydog: The Duane Allman Story&quot;, Milwaukee, WI: Backbeat Books, 2006.
* Reid, Jan. &quot;Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs by Derek and the Dominos&quot; (Rock of Ages). New York: Rodale, Inc., 2006.
* Reynolds, Dean. &quot;The Complete Allman Brothers Band Discography&quot;, 2000.
* Smith, Michael Buffalo Smith. 2019. &quot;The road goes on forever: Fifty years of the Band.&quot; Macon, GA: Mercer University Press.
* Wynne, Ben. &quot;Something in the Water: A History of Music in Macon, Georgia, 1823-1980.&quot; Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2021.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q507327" start="0" end="24" title="The Allman Brothers Band" label="The Allman Brothers Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="41" end="45" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="61" end="82" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="128" end="140" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q503264" start="173" end="185" title="Gregg Allman" label="Gregg Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q935983" start="218" end="230" title="Dickey Betts" label="Dickey Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320923" start="254" end="266" title="Berry Oakley" label="Berry Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017855" start="275" end="287" title="Butch Trucks" label="Butch Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123411" start="301" end="340" title="Jaimoe" label="Jai Johanny &amp;quot;Jaimoe&amp;quot; Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219656" start="372" end="386" title="Macon, Georgia" label="Macon, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="418" end="423" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="425" end="429" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="434" end="447" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="478" end="486" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="493" end="506" title="improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="511" end="523" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q538876" start="574" end="598" title="The Allman Brothers Band (album)" label="The Allman Brothers Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q902215" start="622" end="636" title="Idlewild South" label="Idlewild South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984458" start="668" end="685" title="Capricorn Records" label="Capricorn Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087498" start="740" end="756" title="At Fillmore East" label="At Fillmore East"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846984" start="846" end="873" title="In Memory of Elizabeth Reed" label="In Memory of Elizabeth Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993733" start="890" end="903" title="Whipping Post (song)" label="Whipping Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278394" start="1062" end="1073" title="Eat a Peach" label="Eat a Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812617" start="1187" end="1194" title="Melissa (The Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Melissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929858" start="1224" end="1232" title="Blue Sky (song)" label="Blue Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q499033" start="1324" end="1337" title="Chuck Leavell" label="Chuck Leavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480936" start="1350" end="1364" title="Lamar Williams" label="Lamar Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q388509" start="1387" end="1407" title="Brothers and Sisters (album)" label="Brothers and Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289232" start="1464" end="1481" title="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Man (The Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402021" start="1511" end="1518" title="Jessica (instrumental)" label="Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="1558" end="1570" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108500" start="2043" end="2058" title="Oteil Burbridge" label="Oteil Burbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q599341" start="2074" end="2087" title="Warren Haynes" label="Warren Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q370726" start="2092" end="2104" title="Derek Trucks" label="Derek Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q264186" start="2212" end="2226" title="Beacon Theatre (New York City)" label="Beacon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="2468" end="2472" title="Gold (RIAA certification)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="2482" end="2490" title="Platinum (RIAA certification)" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="2505" end="2546" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="2581" end="2607" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2632" end="2645" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="2707" end="2739" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="2809" end="2821" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q503264" start="2846" end="2851" title="Gregg Allman" label="Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q490595" start="2863" end="2885" title="Daytona Beach, Florida" label="Daytona Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="2922" end="2942" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="3564" end="3573" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3583" end="3594" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913350" start="3692" end="3702" title="Hour Glass (band)" label="Hour Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392321" start="3742" end="3757" title="Liberty Records" label="Liberty Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q79245" start="3820" end="3842" title="Muscle Shoals, Alabama" label="Muscle Shoals, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="4035" end="4040" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189360" start="4078" end="4098" title="the 31st of February" label="the 31st of February"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017855" start="4130" end="4142" title="Butch Trucks" label="Butch Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424408" start="4148" end="4160" title="FAME Studios" label="FAME Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="4254" end="4269" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345099" start="4274" end="4285" title="King Curtis" label="King Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312270" start="4306" end="4320" title="Wilson Pickett" label="Wilson Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="4350" end="4358" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4368" end="4379" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123411" start="4595" end="4615" title="Jaimoe" label="Jai Johanny Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="4730" end="4745" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320923" start="4770" end="4782" title="Berry Oakley" label="Berry Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q219656" start="4832" end="4846" title="Macon, Georgia" label="Macon, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085727" start="5075" end="5086" title="Phil Walden" label="Phil Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="5100" end="5112" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331436" start="5194" end="5203" title="Rick Hall" label="Rick Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q537722" start="5328" end="5340" title="Jerry Wexler" label="Jerry Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="5344" end="5360" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984458" start="5490" end="5499" title="Capricorn Records" label="Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="5528" end="5549" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="5696" end="5708" title="jam sessions" label="jam sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q935983" start="5748" end="5760" title="Dickey Betts" label="Dickey Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499458" start="6021" end="6033" title="Reese Wynans" label="Reese Wynans"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="6495" end="6507" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846431" start="6520" end="6535" title="Trouble No More (song)" label="Trouble No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q202492" start="6807" end="6816" title="Beelzebub" label="Beelzebub"/>
<link wikidata="Q219656" start="6940" end="6954" title="Macon, Georgia" label="Macon, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284710" start="7044" end="7079" title="Joseph L. Campbell" label="Joseph &amp;quot;Red Dog&amp;quot; Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7158" end="7173" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="7996" end="8013" title="Racial integration" label="barely integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="8229" end="8236" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363884" start="8244" end="8257" title="Piedmont Park" label="Piedmont Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="8407" end="8424" title="psychedelic drugs" label="psychedelic drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686811" start="8445" end="8463" title="Rose Hill Cemetery (Macon, Georgia)" label="Rose Hill Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="8526" end="8531" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="8557" end="8563" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="8577" end="8599" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093357" start="8708" end="8719" title="One Way Out (song)" label="One Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925016" start="8772" end="8784" title="Mountain Jam" label="Mountain Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993733" start="8909" end="8922" title="Whipping Post (song)" label="Whipping Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341906" start="9045" end="9053" title="Tom Dowd" label="Tom Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="9075" end="9080" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="9085" end="9098" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684841" start="9230" end="9243" title="Adrian Barber" label="Adrian Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q538876" start="9280" end="9304" title="The Allman Brothers Band (album)" label="The Allman Brothers Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q585643" start="9554" end="9558" title="Atco Records" label="Atco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984458" start="9563" end="9580" title="Capricorn Records" label="Capricorn Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="10449" end="10465" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="Idlewild Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q902215" start="10819" end="10833" title="Idlewild South" label="Idlewild South"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10900" end="10913" title="Tudor Revival architecture#21st-century Tudor Revival" label="Tudor Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199105" start="11000" end="11013" title="The Allman Brothers Band Museum" label="the Big House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842770" start="12094" end="12108" title="Midnight Rider" label="Midnight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846984" start="12200" end="12227" title="In Memory of Elizabeth Reed" label="In Memory of Elizabeth Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="12733" end="12745" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q724406" start="12797" end="12818" title="Derek and the Dominos" label="Derek and the Dominos"/>
<link wikidata="Q312270" start="12942" end="12956" title="Wilson Pickett" label="Wilson Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="12970" end="12978" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q843511" start="13426" end="13461" title="Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs" label="Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087498" start="13828" end="13844" title="At Fillmore East" label="At Fillmore East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072023" start="13916" end="13929" title="Fillmore East" label="Fillmore East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="14070" end="14082" title="double album" label="double album"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="14369" end="14378" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="14385" end="14399" title="Billboard 200" label="Top Pop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="14425" end="14429" title="RIAA certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="14437" end="14478" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="14677" end="14696" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="14779" end="14806" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="15060" end="15066" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="15108" end="15120" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320923" start="15130" end="15142" title="Berry Oakley" label="Berry Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q650927" start="15484" end="15497" title="flatbed truck" label="flatbed truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207631" start="15611" end="15636" title="Harley-Davidson Sportster" label="Harley-Davidson Sportster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017855" start="16430" end="16442" title="Butch Trucks" label="Butch Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278394" start="16535" end="16546" title="Eat a Peach" label="Eat a Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="17140" end="17144" title="RIAA certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="17181" end="17190" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="17197" end="17215" title="Billboard 200" label="Top 200 Pop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394342" start="17458" end="17475" title="Juliette, Georgia" label="Juliette, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430248" start="18103" end="18109" title="roadie" label="roadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="18601" end="18618" title="Traumatic brain injury" label="cerebral swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480936" start="18984" end="18998" title="Lamar Williams" label="Lamar Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123411" start="19025" end="19045" title="Jaimoe" label="Jai Johanny Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="19058" end="19079" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="19121" end="19128" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q499033" start="19130" end="19143" title="Chuck Leavell" label="Chuck Leavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473748" start="19204" end="19213" title="Laid Back (album)" label="Laid Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="19344" end="19352" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q388509" start="19718" end="19738" title="Brothers and Sisters (album)" label="Brothers and Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289232" start="19933" end="19950" title="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Man (The Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="19970" end="19977" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="20078" end="20107" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="20345" end="20362" title="the Grateful Dead" label="the Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="20366" end="20376" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q153312" start="20384" end="20395" title="RFK Stadium" label="RFK Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430248" start="20476" end="20483" title="road crew" label="roadies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766355" start="20638" end="20650" title="the Starship" label="the Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q833212" start="20665" end="20675" title="Boeing 720" label="Boeing 720"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="20685" end="20697" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="20702" end="20720" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606493" start="20879" end="20900" title="The Gregg Allman Tour" label="The Gregg Allman Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759881" start="20917" end="20929" title="Highway Call" label="Highway Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757793" start="21563" end="21580" title="Win, Lose or Draw (album)" label="Win, Lose or Draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="21742" end="21746" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q587231" start="21814" end="21837" title="famous for being famous" label="famous for being famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="22426" end="22438" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="22934" end="22941" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="23030" end="23036" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439932" start="23383" end="23392" title="Sea Level (band)" label="Sea Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606496" start="23446" end="23463" title="Gregg Allman Band" label="Gregg Allman Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026680" start="23491" end="23534" title="Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas" label="Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="23982" end="23994" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214500" start="24167" end="24176" title="Dan Toler" label="Dan Toler"/>
<link wikidata="Q507327" start="24189" end="24204" title="David Goldflies" label="David Goldflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379072" start="24360" end="24378" title="Enlightened Rogues" label="Enlightened Rogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="24955" end="24961" title="Arista Records" label="Arista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101938" start="25046" end="25057" title="Clive Davis" label="Clive Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="25211" end="25223" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930950" start="25329" end="25346" title="Reach for the Sky (The Allman Brothers Band album)" label="Reach for the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296646" start="25428" end="25443" title="Bonnie Bramlett" label="Bonnie Bramlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112687" start="25611" end="25617" title="keytar" label="keytar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="25821" end="25831" title="hit single" label="hit single"/>
<link wikidata="Q852767" start="25846" end="25859" title="Southern rock" label="Southern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214500" start="25999" end="26004" title="Dan Toler" label="Toler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645399" start="26663" end="26683" title="Brothers of the Road (album)" label="Brothers of the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q590102" start="26764" end="26768" title="Styx (band)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q506670" start="26773" end="26792" title="the Doobie Brothers" label="the Doobie Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039196" start="26856" end="26879" title="Straight from the Heart (The Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Straight from the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="27455" end="27474" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146405" start="28007" end="28024" title="I&amp;#x27;m No Angel (album)" label="I&amp;#x27;m No Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966530" start="28036" end="28047" title="I&amp;#x27;m No Angel (1987 song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q868813" start="28168" end="28190" title="Mainstream Rock Tracks" label="Mainstream Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q599341" start="28433" end="28446" title="Warren Haynes" label="Warren Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q258900" start="28459" end="28470" title="Johnny Neel" label="Johnny Neel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731957" start="28517" end="28528" title="Allen Woody" label="Allen Woody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="28606" end="28618" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306686" start="28734" end="28740" title="Dreams (The Allman Brothers Band album)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="28748" end="28752" title="Epic Records" label="Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="28908" end="28920" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="28925" end="28937" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q532309" start="29169" end="29180" title="Seven Turns" label="Seven Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839646" start="29233" end="29247" title="Good Clean Fun (The Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Good Clean Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032508" start="29264" end="29275" title="Seven Turns (song)" label="Seven Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q868813" start="29310" end="29332" title="Mainstream Rock Tracks" label="Mainstream Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280079" start="29477" end="29490" title="Marc Quiñones" label="Marc Quiñones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892509" start="29504" end="29514" title="Spyro Gyra" label="Spyro Gyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958937" start="29838" end="29858" title="Shades of Two Worlds" label="Shades of Two Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29970" end="30021" title="An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: First Set" label="An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: First Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q264186" start="30081" end="30095" title="Beacon Theatre (New York City)" label="Beacon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234438" start="30481" end="30494" title="David Grissom" label="David Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q345431" start="30514" end="30529" title="John Mellencamp" label="John Mellencamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q144746" start="30617" end="30627" title="Zakk Wylde" label="Zakk Wylde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993308" start="30986" end="31005" title="Where It All Begins" label="Where It All Begins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627983" start="31456" end="31475" title="H.O.R.D.E." label="H.O.R.D.E. Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="31510" end="31536" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q126953" start="32161" end="32176" title="Gov&amp;#x27;t Mule" label="Gov&amp;#x27;t Mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108500" start="32300" end="32315" title="Oteil Burbridge" label="Oteil Burbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141756" start="32323" end="32343" title="Col. Bruce Hampton and The Aquarium Rescue Unit" label="Aquarium Rescue Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="32531" end="32539" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q370726" start="32615" end="32627" title="Derek Trucks" label="Derek Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157888" start="33130" end="33156" title="Peakin&amp;#x27; at the Beacon" label="Peakin&amp;#x27; at the Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053818" start="34021" end="34046" title="confidentiality agreement" label="confidentiality agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179055" start="34096" end="34109" title="Jimmy Herring" label="Jimmy Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785968" start="35059" end="35080" title="Hittin&amp;#x27; the Note" label="Hittin&amp;#x27; the Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="35681" end="35693" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q582121" start="36028" end="36046" title="Bradenton, Florida" label="Bradenton, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="36616" end="36626" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27947729" start="38625" end="38637" title="Duane Trucks" label="Duane Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499458" start="38699" end="38711" title="Reese Wynans" label="Reese Wynans"/>
<link wikidata="Q499033" start="38852" end="38865" title="Chuck Leavell" label="Chuck Leavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q86695115" start="39235" end="39277" title="2020 coronavirus pandemic in North America" label="2020 coronavirus pandemic in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q852767" start="39790" end="39803" title="Southern rock" label="Southern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="40018" end="40034" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135775" start="40821" end="40829" title="rednecks" label="rednecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q913583" start="40834" end="40844" title="rebel flag" label="rebel flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="41010" end="41015" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="41017" end="41021" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="41027" end="41034" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="41218" end="41229" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="41276" end="41294" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="41299" end="41316" title="the Grateful Dead" label="the Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="41362" end="41378" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="41417" end="41428" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="41430" end="41439" title="B.B. King" label="B.B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q918571" start="41441" end="41461" title="Sonny Boy Williamson I" label="Sonny Boy Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44780" start="41467" end="41484" title="Howlin&amp;#x27; Wolf" label="Howlin&amp;#x27; Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q353023" start="41541" end="41550" title="Taj Mahal (musician)" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487323" start="41574" end="41585" title="Taj Mahal (album)" label="debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="41662" end="41674" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123411" start="41690" end="41729" title="Jaimoe" label="Jai Johanny &amp;quot;Jaimoe&amp;quot; Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="41762" end="41766" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631895" start="41832" end="41846" title="Howard Roberts" label="Howard Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="41928" end="41939" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="41944" end="41957" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q298601" start="42009" end="42023" title="Wes Montgomery" label="Wes Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q489424" start="42025" end="42035" title="Tal Farlow" label="Tal Farlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q255355" start="42041" end="42054" title="Kenny Burrell" label="Kenny Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q546331" start="42162" end="42180" title="My Favorite Things (song)" label="My Favorite Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600918" start="42209" end="42218" title="All Blues" label="All Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846984" start="42397" end="42424" title="In Memory of Elizabeth Reed" label="In Memory of Elizabeth Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289232" start="42751" end="42768" title="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Man (The Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Ramblin&amp;#x27; Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q310170" start="42966" end="42981" title="Curtis Mayfield" label="Curtis Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="43158" end="43167" title="harmonies" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="43732" end="43741" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="43798" end="43806" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="43808" end="43815" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="43821" end="43827" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="44195" end="44210" title="improvisational" label="improvisational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="44272" end="44280" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="44706" end="44719" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q158462" start="45084" end="45098" title="Lynyrd Skynyrd" label="Lynyrd Skynyrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061590" start="45100" end="45124" title="the Marshall Tucker Band" label="the Marshall Tucker Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695160" start="45129" end="45139" title="Wet Willie (band)" label="Wet Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984458" start="45220" end="45237" title="Capricorn Records" label="Capricorn Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q369898" start="45282" end="45295" title="Billy Gibbons" label="Billy Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q136591" start="45299" end="45305" title="ZZ Top" label="ZZ Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="45325" end="45338" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="45811" end="45819" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816092" start="46157" end="46198" title="Atlanta International Pop Festival (1970)" label="Second Atlanta International Pop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199105" start="46584" end="46615" title="The Allman Brothers Band Museum" label="The Allman Brothers Band Museum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46770" end="46838" title="Live at the Atlanta International Pop Festival: July 3 &amp;amp; 5, 1970" label="Live at the Atlanta International Pop Festival: July 3 &amp;amp; 5, 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267690" start="46856" end="46868" title="Devon Allman" label="Devon Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q69938948" start="46892" end="46903" title="Duane Betts" label="Duane Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q106462808" start="46993" end="47014" title="the Allman Betts Band" label="the Allman Betts Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577283" start="47035" end="47044" title="Alan Paul" label="Alan Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445044" start="47157" end="47180" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q388509" start="47215" end="47244" title="Brothers and Sisters (album)" label="album of the same name&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="47409" end="47421" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q503264" start="47461" end="47480" title="Gregg Allman" label="Gregg Allman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="47493" end="47497" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542186" start="47590" end="47641" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402021" start="47655" end="47662" title="Jessica (Allman Brothers Band song)" label="Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040066" start="47726" end="47734" title="Top Gear (1977 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="47745" end="47778" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="47805" end="47831" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="47846" end="47859" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="47913" end="47945" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="47964" end="47995" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087498" start="48021" end="48037" title="At Fillmore East" label="At Fillmore East"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="48101" end="48113" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q599341" start="48125" end="48138" title="Warren Haynes" label="Warren Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935983" start="48150" end="48162" title="Dickey Betts" label="Dickey Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q370726" start="48174" end="48186" title="Derek Trucks" label="Derek Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="48244" end="48256" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q370726" start="48268" end="48280" title="Derek Trucks" label="Derek Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q935983" start="48292" end="48304" title="Dickey Betts" label="Dickey Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="48364" end="48376" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q370726" start="48388" end="48400" title="Derek Trucks" label="Derek Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q599341" start="48413" end="48426" title="Warren Haynes" label="Warren Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935983" start="48439" end="48451" title="Dickey Betts" label="Dickey Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q503264" start="48483" end="48495" title="Gregg Allman" label="Gregg Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123411" start="48527" end="48566" title="Jaimoe" label="Jai Johanny &amp;quot;Jaimoe&amp;quot; Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017855" start="48590" end="48602" title="Butch Trucks" label="Butch Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q599341" start="48623" end="48636" title="Warren Haynes" label="Warren Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280079" start="48671" end="48684" title="Marc Quiñones" label="Marc Quiñones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108500" start="48727" end="48742" title="Oteil Burbridge" label="Oteil Burbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q370726" start="48761" end="48773" title="Derek Trucks" label="Derek Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q313820" start="48817" end="48829" title="Duane Allman" label="Duane Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q935983" start="48856" end="48868" title="Dickey Betts" label="Dickey Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320923" start="48903" end="48915" title="Berry Oakley" label="Berry Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q499033" start="48934" end="48947" title="Chuck Leavell" label="Chuck Leavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480936" start="48982" end="48996" title="Lamar Williams" label="Lamar Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214500" start="49034" end="49043" title="Dan Toler" label="Dan Toler"/>
<link wikidata="Q258900" start="49126" end="49137" title="Johnny Neel" label="Johnny Neel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731957" start="49172" end="49183" title="Allen Woody" label="Allen Woody"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179055" start="49260" end="49273" title="Jimmy Herring" label="Jimmy Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q538876" start="49636" end="49660" title="The Allman Brothers Band (album)" label="The Allman Brothers Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q902215" start="49682" end="49696" title="Idlewild South" label="Idlewild South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087498" start="49718" end="49734" title="At Fillmore East" label="At Fillmore East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278394" start="49762" end="49773" title="Eat a Peach" label="Eat a Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q388509" start="49806" end="49826" title="Brothers and Sisters (album)" label="Brothers and Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757793" start="49848" end="49865" title="Win, Lose or Draw (album)" label="Win, Lose or Draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026680" start="49887" end="49930" title="Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas" label="Wipe the Windows, Check the Oil, Dollar Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379072" start="49958" end="49976" title="Enlightened Rogues" label="Enlightened Rogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930950" start="49998" end="50015" title="Reach for the Sky (Allman Brothers Band album)" label="Reach for the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645399" start="50037" end="50057" title="Brothers of the Road (album)" label="Brothers of the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q532309" start="50079" end="50090" title="Seven Turns" label="Seven Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958937" start="50112" end="50132" title="Shades of Two Worlds" label="Shades of Two Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50154" end="50205" title="An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: First Set" label="An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: First Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993308" start="50233" end="50252" title="Where It All Begins" label="Where It All Begins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50274" end="50323" title="An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: 2nd Set" label="An Evening with the Allman Brothers Band: 2nd Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157888" start="50351" end="50377" title="Peakin&amp;#x27; at the Beacon" label="Peakin&amp;#x27; at the Beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785968" start="50405" end="50426" title="Hittin&amp;#x27; the Note" label="Hittin&amp;#x27; the Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093356" start="50448" end="50459" title="One Way Out (The Allman Brothers Band album)" label="One Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606496" start="50495" end="50512" title="Gregg Allman Band" label="Gregg Allman Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199105" start="50515" end="50546" title="The Allman Brothers Band Museum" label="The Allman Brothers Band Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089867" start="50577" end="50601" title="The Peach Music Festival" label="The Peach Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967336" start="50604" end="50624" title="Wanee Music Festival" label="Wanee Music Festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149239" wikidata="Q623751" url="?curid=149239" title="Bernicia">
<text>Bernicia () was an Anglo-Saxon kingdom established by Anglian settlers of the 6th century in what is now southeastern Scotland and North East England.

The Anglian territory of Bernicia was approximately equivalent to the modern English counties of Northumberland, Tyne and Wear, and Durham, as well as the Scottish counties of Berwickshire and East Lothian, stretching from the Forth to the Tees. In the early 7th century, it merged with its southern neighbour, Deira, to form the kingdom of Northumbria, and its borders subsequently expanded considerably.

== Etymologies ==
Bernicia occurs in Old Welsh poetry as &quot;Bryneich&quot; or &quot;Byrneich&quot; and in the 9th-century &quot;Historia Brittonum&quot;, (§ 61) as &quot;Berneich&quot;, &quot;Birneich&quot;, &quot;Bernech&quot; and &quot;Birnech&quot;. Academics agree the name was originally Celtic. This name was then adopted by the Anglian settlers who rendered it in Old English as &quot;Bernice&quot; (Northumbrian dialect) or &quot;Beornice&quot; (West Saxon dialect). The counter hypothesis suggesting these names represent a Brythonic adaption of an earlier English form is considered less probable.

Local linguistic evidence suggests continued political activity in the area from the time of the Roman retreat from Britain and before the arrival of the Angles. Important Anglian centres in Bernicia bear names of British origin, or are known by British names elsewhere: Bamburgh is called &quot;Din Guaire&quot; in the &quot;Historia Brittonum&quot;; Dunbar (where Saint Wilfrid was once imprisoned) represents &quot;Dinbaer&quot;; and the name of Coldingham is given by Bede as &quot;Coludi urbs&quot; (&quot;town of Colud&quot;), where &quot;Colud&quot; seems to represent the British form, possibly for the hill-fort of St Abb&#x27;s Head.

Analysis of a potential derivation has not produced a consensus. The most commonly cited etymology gives the meaning as &quot;Land of the Mountain Passes&quot; or &quot;Land of the Gaps&quot; (tentatively proposed by Kenneth H. Jackson). An earlier derivation from the tribal name of the Brigantes has been dismissed as linguistically unsound. In 1997 John T. Koch suggested the conflation of a probable primary form *&quot;Bernech&quot; with the native form *&quot;Brïγent&quot; for the old &quot;civitas Brigantum&quot; as a result of Anglian expansion in that territory during the 7th century.

== Political history and memory ==
The Brythonic kingdom of the area was formed from what had once been the southern lands of the Votadini, possibly as part of the division of a supposed &#x27;great northern realm&#x27; of Coel Hen in c. AD 420. This northern realm is referred to by Welsh scholars as &quot;Yr Hen Ogledd&quot; or, literally, &quot;The Old North&quot;. The kingdom may have been ruled from the site that later became the English Bamburgh, which certainly features in Welsh sources as &quot;Din Guardi&quot;. Near this high-status residence lay the island of Lindisfarne (formerly known, in Welsh, as &quot;Ynys Medcaut&quot;), which became the seat of the Bernician bishops. It is unknown when the Angles finally conquered the whole region, but around 604 is likely.

== Kings of British Bryneich ==
There are several Old Welsh pedigrees of princely &quot;Men of the North&quot; (&quot;Gwŷr y Gogledd&quot;) that may represent the kings of the British kingdom in the area, which may have been called &quot;Bryneich&quot;. John Morris surmised that the line of a certain Morcant Bulc referred to these monarchs, chiefly because he identified this man as the murderer of Urien Rheged who was, at the time, besieging Lindisfarne.

==English Bernicia==

Some of the Angles of Bernicia () may have been employed as mercenaries along Hadrian&#x27;s Wall during the late Roman period. Others are thought to have migrated north (by sea) from Deira ( or &quot;Dere&quot;) in the early 6th century. The first Anglian king in the historical record is Ida, who is said to have obtained the throne and the kingdom about 547. His sons spent many years fighting a united force from the surrounding Brythonic kingdoms until their alliance collapsed into civil war.

===A forcibly united Northumbria===
Ida&#x27;s grandson, Æthelfrith (Æðelfriþ), united Deira with his own kingdom by force around the year 604. He ruled the two kingdoms (united as Northumbria) until he was defeated and killed by Rædwald of East Anglia (who had given refuge to Edwin, son of Ælle, king of Deira) around the year 616. Edwin then became king. The early part of Edwin&#x27;s reign was possibly spent fighting enemies from the Brythonic exiles of the old British kingdom, operating out of Gododdin. After this, it is said that on Easter Day 627 Edwin converted to Christianity in return for Elmet (a Cumbric-speaking kingdom that once existed in the modern-day West Riding of Yorkshire, near Leeds), joining the kingdom of Northumbria; which drew him into direct conflict with Wales proper.

Following the disastrous Battle of Hatfield Chase on 12 October 633, in which Edwin was defeated and killed by Cadwallon ap Cadfan of Gwynedd and Penda of Mercia, Northumbria was divided back into Bernicia and Deira. Bernicia was then briefly ruled by Eanfrith, son of Æthelfrith, but after about a year he went to Cadwallon to sue for peace and was killed. Eanfrith&#x27;s brother Oswald then raised an army and finally defeated Cadwallon at the Battle of Heavenfield in 634.

After this victory, Oswald appears to have been recognised by both Bernicians and Deirans as king of a properly united Northumbria. The kings of Bernicia were thereafter supreme in that kingdom, although Deira had its own sub-kings at times during the reigns of Oswiu and his son Ecgfrith.

=== Rump of Northumbria ===

After the decisive defeat of Northumbrian forces by the Viking Great Heathen Army, at the Battle of York in 867, the united Kingdom of Northumbria disintegrated. The lands north of the Tyne remained a de facto independent kingdom called Bamburgh after the stronghold of its high-reeves. The lands between Tyne and Tees were granted to the Community of St. Cuthbert, forming an ecclesiastical buffer zone between Jórvík and Bamburgh. In 927 Ealdred accepted West Saxon overlordship; however, the lands north of the Tees remained outside of the West Saxon administrative system of shires and hundreds until after the Norman invasion. 

In 973, Scots sovereignty over northern Bernicia, now known as Lothian, was acknowledged by Edgar of England.
===Kings of Bernicia===

(see also List of monarchs of Northumbria)

*Ida, son of Eoppa (547–559)
*Glappa, possibly Ida&#x27;s brother (559–560)
*Adda, son of Ida (560–568)
*Æthelric, son of Ida (568–572)
*Theodric, son of Ida (572–579)
*Frithuwald, possibly Adda&#x27;s son (579–585)
*Hussa, possibly Adda&#x27;s son (585–593)
*Æthelfrith, son of Æthelric (593–616)

Under Deiran rule 616–633)
*Eanfrith of Bernicia, son of Æthelfrith (633–634)

Under Oswald son of Æthelfrith, Bernicia was united with Deira to form Northumbria from 634 onward until the Viking invasion of the 9th Century.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Bede, &quot;Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum&quot;.
* Jackson, Kenneth H. (1953). &quot;Language and History in Early Britain&quot;. Edinburgh University Press.
* Jackson, Kenneth H. (1969). &quot;The Gododdin: The Oldest Scottish poem&quot;. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
* Koch, John T. (1997). &quot;The Gododdin of Aneurin: Text and context from Dark-Age North Britain&quot;. Cardiff: University of Wales Press. 
* Rollason, David W. (2003). &quot;Northumbria, 500–1100: Creation and Destruction of a Kingdom&quot;. Cambridge. .

== Further reading ==
* Alcock, Leslie, &quot;Kings and Warriors, Craftsmen and Priests in Northern Britain AD 550–850.&quot; Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, Edinburgh, 2003. 
* Alcock, Leslie, &quot;Arthur&#x27;s Britain: History and Archaeology, AD 367–634.&quot; Penguin, London, 1989. 
* Higham, N.J., &quot;The Kingdom of Northumbria AD 350–1100.&quot; Sutton, Stroud, 1993. 
* Lowe, Chris, &quot;The Making of Scotland: Angels, Fools and Tyrants: Britons and Angles in Southern Scotland.&quot; Canongate, Edinburgh, 1999. 
* Morris, John, &quot;The Age of Arthur.&quot; Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, London, 1973. 
* Rollason, David, &quot;Northumbria, 500–1100: Creation and Destruction of a Kingdom.&quot; 2008.
* Ziegler, Michelle. &quot;The Politics of Exile in Early Northumbria.&quot; &quot;The Heroic Age&quot; 2 (1999). Online.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="0" end="8" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="19" end="30" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="54" end="61" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="118" end="126" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="131" end="149" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="249" end="263" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23080" start="265" end="278" title="Tyne and Wear" label="Tyne and Wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="284" end="290" title="County Durham" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q786649" start="328" end="340" title="Berwickshire" label="Berwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="345" end="357" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="379" end="384" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="392" end="396" title="River Tees" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="463" end="468" title="Deira" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="493" end="504" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="596" end="605" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q740004" start="690" end="708" title="Historia Brittonum" label="Historia Brittonum"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="855" end="861" title="Britons (Celtic people)" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="933" end="944" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1095" end="1104" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="1442" end="1450" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="1523" end="1529" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q719721" start="1543" end="1550" title="Wilfrid" label="Wilfrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011149" start="1620" end="1630" title="Coldingham" label="Coldingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="1643" end="1647" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919733" start="1795" end="1813" title="St Abb&amp;#x27;s Head" label="St Abb&amp;#x27;s Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058259" start="2033" end="2051" title="Kenneth H. Jackson" label="Kenneth H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="2104" end="2113" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182558" start="2168" end="2180" title="John T. Koch" label="John T. Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q534149" start="2544" end="2552" title="Votadini" label="Votadini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304442" start="2637" end="2645" title="Coel Hen" label="Coel Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="2725" end="2735" title="Hen Ogledd" label="Hen Ogledd"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="2860" end="2868" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="2989" end="3000" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="3075" end="3079" title="diocese" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="3097" end="3104" title="Bishop of Lindisfarne" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="3249" end="3258" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="3287" end="3303" title="Hen Ogledd" label="Men of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q950483" start="3453" end="3464" title="John Morris (historian)" label="John Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328010" start="3501" end="3513" title="Morcant Bulc" label="Morcant Bulc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263208" start="3600" end="3612" title="Urien Rheged" label="Urien Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="3645" end="3656" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="3741" end="3752" title="mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="3759" end="3778" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="3795" end="3800" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="3865" end="3870" title="Deira (kingdom)" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q437743" start="3971" end="3974" title="Ida of Bernicia" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q272196" start="4238" end="4248" title="Æthelfrith of Northumbria" label="Æthelfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="4268" end="4273" title="Deira (kingdom)" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q468836" start="4411" end="4433" title="Rædwald of East Anglia" label="Rædwald of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="4459" end="4464" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271396" start="4473" end="4492" title="Ælla of Deira" label="Ælle, king of Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345964" start="4683" end="4691" title="Gododdin" label="Gododdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333032" start="4785" end="4790" title="Elmet" label="Elmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="4794" end="4801" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="4855" end="4879" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="4886" end="4891" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758473" start="5011" end="5035" title="Battle of Hatfield Chase" label="Battle of Hatfield Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q962398" start="5097" end="5116" title="Cadwallon ap Cadfan" label="Cadwallon ap Cadfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816814" start="5120" end="5127" title="Kingdom of Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q332123" start="5132" end="5147" title="Penda of Mercia" label="Penda of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881239" start="5238" end="5246" title="Eanfrith of Bernicia" label="Eanfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="5368" end="5374" title="Oswald of Northumbria" label="Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q956923" start="5433" end="5454" title="Battle of Heavenfield" label="Battle of Heavenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q468847" start="5726" end="5731" title="Oswiu of Northumbria" label="Oswiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q453676" start="5744" end="5752" title="Ecgfrith of Northumbria" label="Ecgfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419965" start="5847" end="5865" title="Great Heathen Army" label="Great Heathen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q98785100" start="5884" end="5895" title="Battle of York (867)" label="York in 867"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="5985" end="5993" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="6021" end="6029" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q931900" start="6224" end="6231" title="Ealdred I of Bamburgh" label="Ealdred"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="6399" end="6414" title="Norman Invasion of England" label="Norman invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="6481" end="6488" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="6510" end="6526" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="Edgar of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q878231" start="6563" end="6594" title="List of monarchs of Northumbria" label="List of monarchs of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q437743" start="6598" end="6601" title="Ida of Bernicia" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q739164" start="6627" end="6633" title="Glappa of Bernicia" label="Glappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q352784" start="6674" end="6678" title="Adda of Bernicia" label="Adda"/>
<link wikidata="Q272249" start="6702" end="6710" title="Æthelric of Bernicia" label="Æthelric"/>
<link wikidata="Q878662" start="6734" end="6742" title="Theodric of Bernicia" label="Theodric"/>
<link wikidata="Q881478" start="6766" end="6776" title="Frithuwald of Bernicia" label="Frithuwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q743085" start="6814" end="6819" title="Hussa of Bernicia" label="Hussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q272196" start="6857" end="6867" title="Æthelfrith of Northumbria" label="Æthelfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="6902" end="6907" title="Deira" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q881239" start="6924" end="6944" title="Eanfrith of Bernicia" label="Eanfrith of Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="7032" end="7037" title="Deira (kingdom)" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="7046" end="7057" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="7084" end="7090" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="7152" end="7156" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="7164" end="7202" title="Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum" label="Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058259" start="7212" end="7231" title="Kenneth H. Jackson" label="Jackson, Kenneth H."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149240" wikidata="Q126852" url="?curid=149240" title="America (band)">
<text>America are a British-American rock band formed in London in 1970 by English-born American Dewey Bunnell and Americans Dan Peek and Gerry Beckley. The trio met as sons of US Air Force personnel stationed in London, where they began performing live. Achieving significant popularity in the 1970s, the trio was famous for its close vocal harmonies and light acoustic folk rock sound. The band released a string of hit albums and singles, many of which found airplay on pop and soft rock stations.

The band came together shortly after the members&#x27; graduation from high school in the late 1960s. In 1970 Peek joined the band and they signed a record deal with Warner Bros. The following year, they released their self-titled debut album, which included the transatlantic hits &quot;A Horse with No Name&quot; and &quot;I Need You&quot;. Their second album, &quot;Homecoming&quot; (1972), included the single &quot;Ventura Highway&quot;. Over the next several years, the band continued to release hit songs, including &quot;Muskrat Love&quot; on &quot;Hat Trick&quot; (1973), &quot;Tin Man&quot; and &quot;Lonely People&quot; on &quot;Holiday&quot; (1974) and &quot;Sister Golden Hair&quot; and &quot;Daisy Jane&quot; on their 1975 record &quot;Hearts&quot;. It was also in 1975 when America released &quot;&quot;, a compilation of hit singles, which was certified multi-platinum in the United States and Australia. Peek left the group in 1977 and their commercial fortunes declined, though they returned to the top 10 in 1982 with the single &quot;You Can Do Magic&quot;. The band&#x27;s final Top 40 hit was &quot;The Border&quot;, which reached no. 33 on the Billboard Hot 100 in 1983. The group continues to record material and tour regularly. Its 2007 album &quot;Here &amp; Now&quot; was a collaboration with a new generation of musicians who have credited the band as an influence.

America won a Grammy Award for Best New Artist and were nominated for Best Pop Vocal Group at the 15th Annual Grammy Awards in 1973. The group was inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2006 and received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2012.

==History==
===Early success (1970–1973)===
While their fathers were stationed at the United States Air Force base at RAF South Ruislip near London in the mid-1960s, Gerry Beckley, Dewey Bunnell, and Dan Peek attended London Central High School at Bushey Hall, where they met while playing in two different bands.

Peek left for the United States for a failed attempt at college during 1969. Soon after his return to the UK the following year, the three began making music together. Starting out with borrowed acoustic guitars, they developed a style that incorporated three-part vocal harmony with the style of contemporary folk-rock acts such as Crosby, Stills, &amp; Nash.

Eventually, the trio dubbed itself America, inspired by the Americana jukebox in their local mess hall, and chose it because they did not want anyone to think they were British musicians trying to sound American. They played their first gigs in the London area, including some highlights at the Roundhouse in London&#x27;s Chalk Farm district. They were eventually taken on by producer Ian Samwell, best known for writing Cliff Richard&#x27;s 1958 breakthrough hit &quot;Move It&quot;, and his partner Jeff Dexter, and through their efforts were eventually contracted to Kinney Records (UK) in March 1971 by Ian Ralfini and assigned to the UK Warner Bros. label.

Their first album, America (1971), was recorded at Trident Studios in London and produced by Samwell and Dexter, who became the trio&#x27;s manager. Dexter also gave the band their first major gig, 20 December 1970, at &quot;Implosion&quot; at the Roundhouse, Chalk Farm, as the opening act for The Who, Elton John, Patto, and the Chalk Farm Salvation Army Band and Choir, for a Christmas charity event. Although the trio initially planned to record the album in a similar manner to The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;, Samwell convinced them to perfect their acoustic style, instead.

The debut album, &quot;America&quot;, was released in late December 1971 to only moderate success, although it sold well in the Netherlands, where Dexter had taken them as a training ground to practice their craft. Samwell and Dexter subsequently brought the trio to Morgan Studios to record several additional songs. One of them was a Bunnell composition called &quot;Desert Song&quot;, which Dexter previously demonstrated during studio rehearsals in Puddletown, Dorset, at the home of Arthur Brown. The song had its public debut at the Harrogate Festival, four days later, to great audience response. After several performances and a TV show, it was retitled &quot;A Horse with No Name&quot;. The song became a major worldwide hit in early 1972. It sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc by the RIAA in March 1972. America&#x27;s debut album was released in the U.S. that same month, with the hit song added, and quickly went platinum. The album resulted in a second major chart success with Beckley&#x27;s &quot;I Need You&quot;, which peaked at number 9 on the US charts.

After their initial success, the trio played a series of North American club and college dates in early 1972, and decided to dismiss Samwell and Dexter and relocate to Los Angeles, California, signing with the David Geffen/Elliot Roberts stable at Lookout Management. By 1973, the band had left Lookout to go with John Hartmann and Harlan Goodman after the latter two had broken away from Geffen/Roberts to set up their own management firm.

The recording of a second album was delayed by the relocation, as well as by an injury to Peek&#x27;s arm. Deciding not to replace Samwell, the group opted to produce the album themselves. The trio began their move away from a mainly acoustic style to a more rock style with the help of Hal Blaine on drums and Joe Osborn on bass. With Peek playing lead electric guitar on more tracks, the group expanded from an acoustic trio to embrace a fuller live sound, adding Dave Atwood (who had played as a session musician on their debut album) on drums and David Dickey (formerly of the group Captain) on bass in late 1972. But their next tour was delayed until January 1973 after Peek fell ill with hepatitis. On 11 March 1973, Atwood was replaced by Dickey&#x27;s former Captain bandmate, Willie Leacox.

America&#x27;s second album, &quot;Homecoming&quot;, was released in November 1972. Awarded a gold disc in December 1972, the album&#x27;s million sales figure was confirmed by the RIAA in 1975. The group reached the top 10 again with Bunnell&#x27;s &quot;Ventura Highway&quot;. Based on their first two albums, the group won a Grammy Award for Best New Artist of 1972.

The group&#x27;s output grew increasingly ambitious. Their third offering, &quot;Hat Trick&quot;, was released in October 1973 following several months of recording at the Record Plant Studios in Los Angeles. Again self-produced, the album featured strings, harmonicas, an eight-minute title track, and tap dancing. Beckley, Bunnell, and Peek were once again joined by Blaine on drums, while Osborn was replaced by their touring bassist, David Dickey. The album was not as successful as &quot;Homecoming&quot;, featuring only one modestly successful single, &quot;Muskrat Love&quot; (number 67 in the US), penned by Texas folk singer Willis Alan Ramsey. A Captain &amp; Tennille cover of the song reached the top 10 in late 1976.

===George Martin years (1974–1979)===
After the disappointing commercial performance of &quot;Hat Trick&quot;, America chose to enlist an outside producer for their next album. They were able to secure the services of producer George Martin and recording engineer Geoff Emerick, who played a major role in shaping the sound of the Beatles. Sessions took place at AIR Studios in London.

The resulting album, &quot;Holiday&quot;, was released in June 1974 (by this time the group had consciously begun naming their albums with titles starting with the letter &quot;H&quot;). With Martin&#x27;s guidance, the album&#x27;s style was very different from America&#x27;s first three efforts, as he enhanced America&#x27;s acoustic sound with strings and brass.

During the summer/fall of 1974, bassist Calvin &quot;Fuzzy&quot; Samuels (formerly of Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young and Manassas) was called to fill in for Dickey, who had come to Europe but then flown home inadvertently. Samuels played some shows and also appeared live with the group on the German TV program &quot;Musikladen&quot; on November 13, 1974.

The trio soon found themselves in the top 10 once again with the first single from &quot;Holiday&quot;, the Bunnell-penned &quot;Tin Man&quot;, which reached number four, featuring cryptic lyrics set to a &quot;Wizard of Oz&quot; theme. &quot;Lonely People&quot; (written by Peek) followed &quot;Tin Man&quot; into the top 10 in early 1975, becoming Dan Peek&#x27;s only credited song to reach that high on Billboard, peaking at number five.

Martin worked with the trio again for their next LP, &quot;Hearts&quot;, recorded in Sausalito, California, and released in March 1975. America scored its second chart-topping success with Beckley&#x27;s &quot;Sister Golden Hair&quot; in mid-1975, a song that featured a memorable opening guitar riff admittedly inspired by George Harrison&#x27;s &quot;My Sweet Lord&quot; and frank relationship lyrics inspired by Jackson Browne. The follow-up single, Beckley&#x27;s ballad &quot;Daisy Jane&quot;, also scored among the top 20 shortly after. Peek&#x27;s reggae-influenced &quot;Woman Tonight&quot; was a third success (No. 44 in the US) from the album towards the end of the year.

Warner Bros. released a compilation of America&#x27;s best-known tracks in December 1975, &quot;&quot;, which went platinum. Martin, who produced the album, also remixed the tracks culled from the group&#x27;s first three albums.

During early 1976, the group recorded its sixth studio album at Caribou Ranch near Nederland, Colorado, inspiring the album&#x27;s title, &quot;Hideaway&quot;, which Martin produced. Released in April 1976, the album&#x27;s two singles, &quot;Today&#x27;s the Day&quot; and &quot;Amber Cascades&quot;, managed to reach Nos. 23 and 75, respectively, on the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop chart. The two singles hit number one and 17, respectively, on the &quot;Billboard&quot; adult contemporary chart. Songs such as &quot;Jet Boy Blue&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Let It Get You Down&quot; were programmed on FM stations.

Martin&#x27;s implementation of more complex instrumentation on America&#x27;s albums proved somewhat overwhelming to the band on stage, often compelling them to switch from instrument to instrument during songs. For their 1976 tour, the group expanded their stage line-up to include Jim Calire on keyboards and sax and Tom Walsh on percussion, so they could more comfortably perform Martin&#x27;s arrangements.

Martin and the trio went to Hawaii during late 1976 to work on the group&#x27;s seventh studio album, which was recorded in a beach house on the island of Kauai. The album, &quot;Harbor&quot;, released in February 1977, continued the trend of decreasing sales for the group. It was their first album to fail to score either platinum or gold, and none of its three singles charted.

In May 1977 Dan Peek left the band. In his 2004 autobiography, &quot;An American Band&quot;, Peek states that he was voted out after missing a tour rehearsal but Bunnell later denied this was the case, saying that the decision to leave had been Peek&#x27;s, after he recently had renewed his Christian faith following years of recreational drug use and had begun to seek a different artistic direction from Beckley or Bunnell. Nevertheless, Peek goes on to say in his book that he takes full blame for the group&#x27;s fracturing.

Peek contracted with Pat Boone&#x27;s Lamb &amp; Lion Records and issued his first solo album, &quot;All Things Are Possible&quot;, in 1978. The album, produced by Chris Christian, was successful and Peek became a pioneering artist in the emerging Christian popular music genre. The title track entered the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop charts in early 1979, peaking at No. 78.

Meanwhile, Beckley and Bunnell decided to continue as America, ending their contract with Warner Bros. with the release of their first concert LP, &quot;Live&quot;, during October 1977. Recorded at the Greek Theater in Los Angeles, the performance featured a backing orchestra conducted by Elmer Bernstein. The concert was recorded shortly after Peek left the group. The album was only mildly successful on the popular charts; whereas all of their previous albums, even &quot;Harbor&quot;, had at least made the top 30, &quot;Live&quot; just barely made it onto the album chart, peaking at No. 129.

===Capitol years (1979–1985)===

After more than two years without new studio material, Beckley and Bunnell presented the group&#x27;s new style with a cover of The Mamas &amp; the Papas&#x27; &quot;California Dreamin&#x27;&quot; in March 1979. It was featured on the soundtrack for the 1979 movie &quot;California Dreaming&quot;. Although the movie was unsuccessful and the soundtrack was issued by an obscure distributor known as American International, the single reached number 56 on the charts.

America&#x27;s first studio album without Peek, &quot;Silent Letter&quot;, was released in June 1979 on their new label, Capitol Records. The album, once again produced by George Martin, was recorded in Montserrat in the West Indies with the members of the live band: David Dickey, Willie Leacox, Michael Woods (their former roadie, who joined their touring band in late 1977 on lead guitar), Jim Calire and Tom Walsh. The group began to use songs from other songwriters as they sought to increase their commercial success. The album scored no higher than number 110 on the charts, leading Bunnell sarcastically to dub the album &quot;Silent Record&quot;. During the latter part of 1979, Calire and Walsh were dropped from the on-stage line-up. Session bassist Bryan Garofalo replaced Dickey in 1980 and Bradley Palmer took over from Garafalo in 1981.

America continued to evolve as the 1980s began. For their next album, &quot;Alibi&quot;, released in August 1980, Beckley and Bunnell sought fresh personnel in the form of producers Matthew McCauley and Fred Mollin. They also employed players from the West Coast, such as the Eagles&#x27; Timothy B. Schmit, Leland Sklar and Steve Lukather, to help improve their sound. &quot;Alibi&quot; eschewed the strings and brass of a typical George Martin project in favour of a more popular-rock style. It also became the third studio album in a row without a successful single in the United States, although Beckley&#x27;s &quot;Survival&quot; scored the top of the charts in Italy. The album&#x27;s sales peaked at number 142.

America&#x27;s next album, &quot;View from the Ground&quot;, released in July 1982, had the group finally score another commercial success. The album, recorded under the working title &quot;Two Car Garage&quot;, featured a number of songs produced by the duo themselves. As with &quot;Alibi&quot; (1980), Beckley and Bunnell brought in a number of high-profile musicians, including the Beach Boys&#x27; Carl Wilson, Toto&#x27;s Jeff Porcaro, Christopher Cross and Dean Parks. Former Argent guitarist Russ Ballard, though, had the greatest effect on the group&#x27;s fortunes. Ballard produced and played all of the instruments and sang most of the background vocals on a song he crafted especially for the band, called &quot;You Can Do Magic&quot;. The song rose quickly through the pop charts and scored as high as number eight on the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop-singles chart for a number of weeks during October 1982, the band&#x27;s first major success in seven years. Following &quot;Magic&quot; was the single &quot;Right Before Your Eyes&quot;. Written by Ian Thomas (brother of comedian Dave Thomas of &quot;Strange Brew&quot; fame), and produced by Bobby Colomby, the single barely missed a spot in the top 40 during early 1983. Although &quot;View from the Ground&quot; failed to achieve gold-rated sales, it scored as high as number 41 on the album charts, a significant improvement over the previous few releases.

Having had success with Ballard, Beckley and Bunnell asked the former Argent performer to produce their next album, &quot;Your Move&quot;, in its entirety. In the end, Ballard wrote most of the songs and performed most of the instruments in addition to his production duties. For the most part, Beckley and Bunnell were singers on an album that Ballard had crafted for them, although they did contribute some of their own material. On one track, Bunnell decided to rewrite Ballard&#x27;s lyrics, and the successful song &quot;The Border&quot; was the result. Set to the backing of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and the saxophone work of Raphael Ravenscroft, the single scored number 33 on the charts in August 1983. &quot;The Border&quot; was much more successful on the adult contemporary charts, where it scored number four (even bettering &quot;You Can Do Magic&quot;). It also made number 24 on the Dutch top 40. A second single, Ballard&#x27;s &quot;Cast the Spirit&quot;, failed to chart. The album itself, released in June 1983, was reasonably successful at number 81, but something of a disappointment, when compared to its predecessor.

America&#x27;s work was also featured on several soundtracks during this period. Beckley and Bunnell provided vocals to several Jimmy Webb compositions for the film &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; in 1982. The soundtrack became popular in Germany and the group frequently plays its title track when touring in that country. America also recorded &quot;Love Comes Without Warning&quot; for the 1984 Steve Martin comedy &quot;The Lonely Guy&quot;.

Dan Peek emerged from several years of musical obscurity during May 1984, releasing his second solo Christian album, &quot;Doer of the Word&quot;, on Home Sweet Home Records. Once again produced by Chris Christian, the album&#x27;s title track featured Beckley on backing vocals. Peek issued two more solo albums over the next few years: &quot;Electro Voice&quot; (1986) and &quot;Crossover&quot; (1987).

Meanwhile, America opted for a decidedly different style from their previous offerings for their 12th studio album, &quot;Perspective&quot;, released in September 1984. Ballard was out and synthesizers and drum machines were in. Several different producers, including Richie Zito, Matthew McCauley (who had already produced the aforementioned track &quot;Love Comes Without Warning&quot; that appeared earlier that year in the film &quot;The Lonely Guy&quot;) and Richard James Burgess, helped create an electronic popular style that was very common during the 1980s but drastically different from America&#x27;s usual style. &quot;Special Girl&quot;, the album&#x27;s first single, was culled from hired songwriters and failed to make the Hot 100. The next single, &quot;Can&#x27;t Fall Asleep to a Lullaby&quot;, was co-written by Bunnell, Journey&#x27;s Steve Perry, Robert Haimer, and Bill Mumy, the latter of &quot;Lost in Space&quot; and &quot;Babylon 5&quot; fame. Although neither track was played on popular radio, both did achieve minor success on the adult contemporary charts. The album peaked at number 185 during a three-week stint on the charts in October 1984.

Their mainstream commercial success over, Beckley and Bunnell ended their Capitol contract with &quot;In Concert&quot;, released in July 1985. The album was recorded at the Arlington Theater in Santa Barbara, California on 1 June 1985. &quot;In Concert&quot; became the first America album to miss the charts entirely.

===Return to basics (1985–1998)===
Beckley and Bunnell spent the latter half of the 1980s focusing on their live show, performing well over 100 times a year around the world. While America remained a hot ticket on the touring circuit, they were unable to land a recording contract in the years after they left the Capitol label.

By the early 1990s, the development of compact discs led to the reissuing of many older popular albums, providing acts such as America with revived sales. During 1991, America was able to offer four new tracks as part of a collection issued by Rhino Records called &quot;&quot;, which was designed to complement the group&#x27;s original 1975 retrospective.

America&#x27;s resurgence caught the eye of Chip Davis of American Gramaphone Records, who signed the group to his label. In May 1994, America released its first new studio album in a decade, &quot;Hourglass&quot;. Produced primarily by Beckley and Bunnell, with help from Hank Linderman and Steve Levine, the album featured an eclectic group of songs. Despite garnering generally positive reviews, the album was a commercial failure.

During 1995, Beckley delivered his debut solo album. Entitled &quot;Van Go Gan&quot;, the album experimented with various styles and sounds. Comedian Phil Hartman (who during his career as a graphic artist had designed several America album covers) was featured as the voice of a televangelist preacher on &quot;Playing God&quot;. Although it was named as one of the top-10 music CDs of the year in Japan in 1995, the album was not released outside Japan until four years later.

America fans were also treated to a concert album in 1995. Released by the King Biscuit Flower Hour Records, Inc., the concert was actually taken from a 1982 instalment of the &quot;King Biscuit Flower Hour&quot; radio show. Known as &quot;In Concert&quot; (not to be confused with the 1985 Capitol release of the same name), King Biscuit experienced modest success with the album (though America themselves did not; it failed to break the charts).

This success resulted in a new record deal with King Biscuit&#x27;s subsidiary label, Oxygen Records. After rumours that Steely Dan producer Gary Katz would produce the project came and went, the album eventually reached stores in September 1998. The new album, entitled &quot;Human Nature&quot; after the name of Beckley&#x27;s home recording studio, was accompanied by a modest commercial blitz. The first single, Beckley&#x27;s &quot;From a Moving Train&quot;, featured a strongly acoustic style. The track received considerable airplay and moderate success in adult contemporary formats. Reports claimed that the song was a major success in the popular charts in Spain. A second attempt at a single in &quot;Wednesday Morning&quot; was somewhat less successful. The album failed to garner the sales that Oxygen was expecting and America was once again without a record deal.

===New millennium (1999–2006)===
The next few years had the group&#x27;s catalogue expand with a number of side projects, reissues of older albums on CD, and several major retrospective releases. In July 2000 Rhino released &quot;Highway: 30 Years of America&quot;, a three-CD box set which included 64 remastered tracks spanning the group&#x27;s career. Included were a handful of alternative mixes and demos such as an early take of a stripped-down &quot;Ventura Highway&quot;.

A year later, in August 2001, Rhino released a trimmed-down single disc compilation, &quot;The Complete Greatest Hits&quot;, which assembled all of the group&#x27;s 17 charting &quot;Billboard&quot; singles. The disc also included two newly recorded songs, &quot;World of Light&quot; and &quot;Paradise&quot;. Peaking at number 152 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; album charts in October 2001, &quot;The Complete Greatest Hits&quot; was America&#x27;s first charting album since &quot;Perspective&quot; in 1984.

On the solo front, in February 2000, Beckley released &quot;Go Man Go&quot;, an album of remixed tracks from &quot;Van Go Gan&quot;. The original &quot;Van Go Gan&quot; finally had a domestic release that July with bonus tracks. June was the roll-out of another Beckley side project, &quot;Like A Brother&quot;, recorded with Robert Lamm and Carl Wilson under the name Beckley-Lamm-Wilson. Dan Peek resurfaced in 1999 with a new website and his first solo release in many years, &quot;Bodden Town&quot;.

As part of a contemporary trend of recycling oldies recordings to create new hits, Janet Jackson&#x27;s 2001 single &quot;Someone to Call My Lover&quot; sampled the &quot;Ventura Highway&quot; guitar riff and rose to number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop charts.

In October 2002 the group released its first Christmas album, &quot;Holiday Harmony&quot;. Produced by Andrew Gold, the album received positive reviews for its imaginative blending of elements of classic America tunes into familiar holiday standards. Included were three new tracks, including a Bunnell-penned ode to &quot;Ventura Highway&quot; called &quot;Christmas in California&quot;, featuring Beckley on lead vocals. One month later, America released a live album, &quot;The Grand Cayman Concert&quot;. Recorded the previous April in the Cayman Islands, the concert featured just Beckley and Bunnell on acoustic guitars, a throwback to the earliest days of their career. Included were their most familiar songs along with a few that were almost never performed live, such as &quot;Wind Wave&quot; and &quot;Pigeon Song&quot;. Both albums failed to chart.

After this, the band ceased recording and concentrated on their consistently lucrative touring schedule.

In early 2003, Bradley Palmer left the touring band after 22 years and was replaced, first by Chas Frichtell, then by Trent Stroh, until Richard Campbell (formerly toured with Three Dog Night, Natalie Cole and Dave Mason) came in permanently.

Record labels occasionally offered new DVDs, such as a re-release of America&#x27;s 1979 concert film, &quot;Live in Central Park&quot;, a 2004 concert at the Sydney Opera House and a 2005 show at the Ventura Concert Theater joined with Stephen Bishop and Andrew Gold directed by Sheldon Osmond. Also in 2005, America appeared on the PBS concert series &quot;Soundstage&quot; with long-time friend Christopher Cross and a guest appearance by rock photographer Henry Diltz on banjo.

In April 2006 after a few solo concerts, Beckley released his third solo album, &quot;Horizontal Fall&quot;, which was largely ignored by both critics and buyers. His 2011 follow-up, &quot;Unfortunate Casino&quot;, met a similar fate.

===Recent activity and death of Dan Peek (2006–present)===

As the second half of the first decade of the 2000s began, the group remained very much active and popular in the nostalgia concert circuit. Though the group had occasionally issued new material on minor labels, their offerings had been largely ignored by the greater commercial music industry and record-buying public.

However, a fateful connection provided a sudden and unexpected change in fortune for the group. Around 2005, Beckley began correspondence with Adam Schlesinger of the independent rock music group Fountains of Wayne. Beckley had been a fan of the 2003 Fountains of Wayne album &quot;Welcome Interstate Managers&quot;, and Schlesinger turned out to be a fan of America&#x27;s work. The exchange of songs between the two resulted in them recording a few tracks together. The recordings came to the attention of SonyBMG&#x27;s new Burgundy Records label, which was impressed both by the quality of the material and by the possibility of pairing America with other independent artists. The company contracted America to record a new album with Schlesinger and his musical partner, James Iha, formerly of the Smashing Pumpkins, at the production helm. Entitled &quot;Here &amp; Now&quot; (2007), it would be America&#x27;s first major-label studio album since &quot;Perspective&quot; in 1984.

The recording sessions at Stratosphere Sound in New York City, which ran through July, included guest musicians such as Ryan Adams, Ben Kweller, Stephen Bishop, Rusty Young and members of the groups Nada Surf and My Morning Jacket.

In an effort to aim the album toward both younger and older audiences, the label decided to bundle the new album with a second disc comprising live performances of every track from &quot;&quot;, previously recorded at XM Radio as part of XM&#x27;s &quot;Then Again...Live&quot; series, recorded with longtime America drummer Willie Leacox, guitarist Michael Woods and bassist Richard Campbell. In the run-up to the album&#x27;s scheduled release on 16 January 2007, America attracted publicity unknown to it since the early 1980s. The release itself was well received by critics, and &quot;Here &amp; Now&quot; went all the way to number 52 in the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts.

In addition to receiving growing support from a new generation of musicians, America finally began to receive acclamation from the entertainment industry. In 2006 America was inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame. And on 6 February 2012 the group was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for their contributions to music at 6752 Hollywood Boulevard. The band continued to perform over 100 shows per year.
America&#x27;s follow-up to &quot;Here &amp; Now&quot; (2007) was released on 26 July 2011. Entitled &quot;Back Pages&quot;, the album was a collection of twelve tracks covering songs from artists ranging from Bob Dylan and Joni Mitchell to Adam Schlesinger and the Gin Blossoms. Released on the E1 Music label, the album was produced by Fred Mollin, who had originally worked with America 31 years before on &quot;Alibi&quot;. The album was recorded in Nashville, Tennessee, with the help of a number of studio musicians. The release of &quot;Back Pages&quot; was briefly overshadowed by the publicity surrounding the sudden death of founding member Dan Peek on 24 July 2011.

In February 2014 lead guitarist and background vocalist Michael Woods (Woodz), who had been with the touring band since the fall of 1977, announced his retirement from the band due to ill health. His replacement was America&#x27;s current guitar tech and Nashville musician Bill Worrell, who had previously subbed for Woodz on tour in 2009.

In March 2014 long-time Beach Boys and Brian Wilson vocalist/guitarist Jeff Foskett subbed for Beckley at some concerts and long-time drummer Willie Leacox retired from the band in July 2014, after an almost 42-year tenure, and was replaced by former Reel Big Fish drummer Ryland Steen.

In November 2014 America recorded a live performance at Infinity Hall in Hartford, CT for Connecticut Public Television that was subsequently aired nationwide in June 2015, and afterwards streamed online. During late summer 2015, guitarist/keyboardist Andy Barr, from the group Cobra Starship, came in for Worrell, who had a broken wrist. After healing, Worrell returned to the group until leaving for a solo career in October 2016. Barr then joined America permanently, but left himself for a solo career and was replaced by Steve Fekete in 2018. Long time America bassist David Dickey died on 3 December 2016 at his home in Sweetwater, Texas.

In May 2019 Gonzo Multimedia released a deluxe boxed set of America&#x27;s 2018 show at the London Palladium titled &quot;America Live at The Palladium&quot; featuring their greatest hits. America cancelled a string of shows in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, America&#x27;s 50th Anniversary Tour was postponed and then went ahead in the summer of 2021 going forward.

2020 also saw the release of the book &quot;America, the Band, An Authorized Biography&quot; by journalist Jude Warne.

In early 2024, it was announced that Gerry Beckley would be retiring from touring to spend more time at home with his family. Andy Barr, who had done stints with the band in 2015, and again in 2016-2018, was being brought back to replace Gerry on the road.

==Dan Peek==

From the time Dan Peek left the group in May 1977, and up until his death in July 2011, speculation abounded as to whether he could or would return to the band. On Peek&#x27;s 1978 solo debut album, &quot;All Things Are Possible&quot;, Beckley and Bunnell sang back-up vocals on the track &quot;Love Was Just Another Word&quot;. According to Peek and Bunnell, in June 1983, Peek even joined the group onstage to perform a few songs during a concert at the Greek Theater in Los Angeles. On Peek&#x27;s 1984 follow-up album, &quot;Doer of the Word&quot;, Beckley provided prominent backing vocals on the title track. In November 1999, credible rumours began to spread, that unreleased demo recordings from the early 1980s featuring Beckley and Bunnell collaborating with Peek would be released on CD sometime in early 2000. No such recordings have been released to date.

The questions about a possible reunion of the original trio began not long after Peek left the group. When asked about the prospects for a reunion in the early 1980s, Beckley and Bunnell stated that they were happy for Peek in that he had found a new life and a new direction, but that it was unlikely there would be a reunion. &quot;All things are possible, like [Dan] says&quot;, Beckley told radio host Lew Irwin in 1982, but &quot;it just doesn&#x27;t seem in the cards.&quot; Within a few years, however, Peek had begun to entertain just such thoughts publicly. &quot;Like they said and like I said, all things are possible&quot;, Peek told interviewer Steve Orchard in 1985. &quot;I really have my fingers crossed. I would love to get back together [with them] and do some things.&quot;

Although Beckley and Bunnell had over the years become increasingly firm in their position that a reunion with Peek was unlikely, and could in fact be counterproductive, record companies tried to persuade them to change their minds. Bunnell noted to Steve Orchard in 1998, that &quot;[w]e had a few labels say that they would be interested in recording us if we would bring Dan back or if we could put together the original trio.&quot; Beckley and Bunnell chose to maintain their decision to remain a duo.

In 2000, Peek began posting a number of weekly episodes to his website relating to his experiences prior to and during his years in America. Peek raised a few eyebrows both for his candid discussion of his experiences with drugs and religion and for his observations of Beckley and Bunnell. Eventually, Peek compiled the material into a book entitled &quot;An American Band&quot;, which was released in late 2004.

Certain sources have suggested erroneously that a reunion with Peek actually did occur. A &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; rock music discography book, printed during the mid-1990s, contained an apocryphal entry for America stating that Dan Peek had reunited with Beckley and Bunnell for a tour in 1993 with The Beach Boys. This misinformation has been so widely disseminated that the Australian rock journalist and historian Glenn A. Baker erroneously assumed this to be true in an interview question posed to Beckley and Bunnell on the &quot;Live at the Sydney Opera House&quot; DVD.

Furthermore, during an interview airing on 7 June 2010 on the &quot;Steel Pier Radio Show with Ed Hurst&quot; airing on WIBG Radio, Peek was asked about the reunion prospects and more or less ruled them out.

The last song Peek recorded was &quot;Kiss Me on the Waves&quot; (2011) with the Spanish band Etcetera, as guest singer. The song was written by Guillermo Albelo and included in the album &quot;Steps on the Water&quot;.

Continuous speculations of Peek reuniting with America finally came to an end when Peek died in his home in Farmington, Missouri, of fibrinous pericarditis on 24 July 2011, at the age of 60.

==Personnel==
;Current members
* Gerry Beckley – lead and backing vocals, keyboards, guitars, bass, harmonica 
* Dewey Bunnell – lead and backing vocals, guitars, percussion 

;Former members
* Dan Peek – lead and backing vocals, guitars, bass, keyboards, harmonica 

;Current touring musicians
* Richard Campbell – bass, vocals 
* Ryland Steen – drums, percussion, backing vocals 
* Andy Barr – guitars, banjo, keyboards, lead and backing vocals 
* Steve Fekete - guitars, keyboards, backing vocals 

;Former touring musicians
* David Dickey – bass, backing vocals 
* David Atwood – drums, percussion 
* Willie Leacox – drums, percussion 
* Calvin &quot;Fuzzy&quot; Samuel – bass 
* Jim Calire – keyboards, saxophone 
* Tom Walsh – percussion 
* Michael Woods – guitars, keyboards, vocals 
* Bryan Garofalo – bass 
* Bradley Palmer – bass, vocals 
* Trent Stroh – bass, backing vocals 
* Chas Frichtell – bass, backing vocals 
* Bill Worrell – guitars, banjo, keyboards, backing vocals 
;Timeline
==Discography==
===Studio albums===

* &quot;America&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Homecoming&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Hat Trick&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Holiday&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Hearts&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Hideaway&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Harbor&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Silent Letter&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Alibi&quot; (1980)
* &quot;View from the Ground&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Your Move&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Perspective&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Hourglass&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Human Nature&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Holiday Harmony&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Here &amp; Now&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Back Pages&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Lost &amp; Found&quot; (2015)
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*
*Photos of America – Gerry and Dewey
*Official America page at Burgundy Records
*Official America fan page
*America Blog page
*Live Concert Recording of America at the Blossom Music Center, Ohio on 5 September 1982 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q126852" start="0" end="7" title="America (band)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="31" end="35" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025584" start="91" end="104" title="Dewey Bunnell" label="Dewey Bunnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186230" start="119" end="127" title="Dan Peek" label="Dan Peek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153698" start="132" end="145" title="Gerry Beckley" label="Gerry Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="171" end="183" title="United States Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="365" end="374" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="467" end="470" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="475" end="484" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="662" end="673" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q463081" start="715" end="738" title="America (America album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q943979" start="784" end="804" title="A Horse with No Name" label="A Horse with No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978529" start="821" end="831" title="I Need You (America song)" label="I Need You"/>
<link wikidata="Q643264" start="865" end="875" title="Homecoming (America album)" label="Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637648" start="916" end="931" title="Ventura Highway" label="Ventura Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942839" start="1025" end="1037" title="Muskrat Love" label="Muskrat Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280909" start="1053" end="1062" title="Hat Trick (America album)" label="Hat Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807782" start="1077" end="1096" title="Tin Man (America song)" label="&amp;quot;Tin Man&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671635" start="1107" end="1120" title="Lonely People" label="Lonely People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880326" start="1136" end="1143" title="Holiday (America album)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456243" start="1167" end="1185" title="Sister Golden Hair" label="Sister Golden Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953938" start="1202" end="1212" title="Daisy Jane" label="Daisy Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692947" start="1246" end="1252" title="Hearts (America album)" label="Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="1366" end="1380" title="multiplatinum" label="multi-platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057094" start="1550" end="1566" title="You Can Do Magic (song)" label="You Can Do Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844606" start="1617" end="1627" title="The Border (America song)" label="The Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1663" end="1680" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Billboard Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736887" start="1770" end="1784" title="Here &amp;amp; Now (America album)" label="Here &amp;amp; Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="1905" end="1937" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Grammy Award for Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q638060" start="1989" end="2014" title="15th Annual Grammy Awards" label="15th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426142" start="2056" end="2080" title="Vocal Group Hall of Fame" label="Vocal Group Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2116" end="2138" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2235" end="2258" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275575" start="2267" end="2284" title="RAF South Ruislip" label="RAF South Ruislip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153698" start="2315" end="2328" title="Gerry Beckley" label="Gerry Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025584" start="2330" end="2343" title="Dewey Bunnell" label="Dewey Bunnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186230" start="2349" end="2357" title="Dan Peek" label="Dan Peek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670207" start="2367" end="2393" title="London Central Elementary High School" label="London Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275210" start="2397" end="2408" title="RAF Bushey Hall" label="Bushey Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="2797" end="2823" title="Crosby, Stills, &amp;amp; Nash" label="Crosby, Stills, &amp;amp; Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780197" start="3121" end="3131" title="Roundhouse (venue)" label="Roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648511" start="3149" end="3159" title="Chalk Farm" label="Chalk Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982820" start="3212" end="3223" title="Ian Samwell" label="Ian Samwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="3248" end="3261" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q899267" start="3297" end="3304" title="Move It" label="Move It"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385828" start="3328" end="3339" title="Jeff Dexter (DJ)" label="Jeff Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q463081" start="3509" end="3523" title="America_(America_album)" label="America (1971)"/>
<link wikidata="Q907523" start="3541" end="3556" title="Trident Studios" label="Trident Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="3785" end="3792" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="3794" end="3804" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908061" start="3806" end="3811" title="Patto" label="Patto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3973" end="3984" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="3997" end="4039" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296666" start="4380" end="4394" title="Morgan Studios" label="Morgan Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="4525" end="4537" title="Demo (music)" label="demonstrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217628" start="4566" end="4576" title="Puddletown" label="Puddletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q708782" start="4601" end="4613" title="Arthur Brown (musician)" label="Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q215829" start="4652" end="4661" title="Harrogate" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q943979" start="4781" end="4801" title="A Horse with No Name" label="A Horse with No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="4913" end="4922" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="4930" end="4934" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="5061" end="5069" title="music recording sales certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978529" start="5148" end="5158" title="I Need You (America song)" label="I Need You"/>
<link wikidata="Q115055" start="5420" end="5432" title="David Geffen" label="David Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365559" start="5433" end="5447" title="Elliot Roberts" label="Elliot Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570092" start="5939" end="5949" title="Hal Blaine" label="Hal Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211645" start="5963" end="5973" title="Joe Osborn" label="Joe Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="6346" end="6355" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637648" start="6709" end="6724" title="Ventura Highway" label="Ventura Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6781" end="6793" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="6798" end="6813" title="Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095593" start="6996" end="7016" title="Record Plant Studios" label="Record Plant Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942839" start="7388" end="7400" title="Muskrat Love" label="Muskrat Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022017" start="7458" end="7476" title="Willis Alan Ramsey" label="Willis Alan Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035077" start="7480" end="7502" title="Captain &amp;amp; Tennille" label="Captain &amp;amp; Tennille"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="7782" end="7795" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468612" start="7819" end="7832" title="Geoff Emerick" label="Geoff Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="7882" end="7893" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q743026" start="7918" end="7929" title="AIR Studios" label="AIR Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880326" start="7969" end="7976" title="Holiday (America album)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q110592004" start="8351" end="8383" title="Calvin &amp;quot;Fuzzy&amp;quot; Samuels" label="Calvin &amp;quot;Fuzzy&amp;quot; Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q10461933" start="8397" end="8429" title="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young" label="Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537930" start="8434" end="8442" title="Manassas (band)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q521381" start="8631" end="8641" title="Musikladen" label="Musikladen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807782" start="8800" end="8807" title="Tin Man (America song)" label="Tin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="8882" end="8894" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671635" start="8914" end="8927" title="Lonely People" label="Lonely People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692947" start="9173" end="9179" title="Hearts (America album)" label="Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q828729" start="9199" end="9220" title="Sausalito, California" label="Sausalito, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456243" start="9324" end="9342" title="Sister Golden Hair" label="Sister Golden Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="9438" end="9453" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476003" start="9467" end="9480" title="My Sweet Lord" label="My Sweet Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q355009" start="9529" end="9543" title="Jackson Browne" label="Jackson Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="9669" end="9675" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039514" start="10092" end="10105" title="Caribou Ranch" label="Caribou Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010528" start="10111" end="10130" title="Nederland, Colorado" label="Nederland, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752269" start="10172" end="10180" title="Hideaway (America album)" label="Hideaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812166" start="10271" end="10291" title="Today&amp;#x27;s the Day (America song)" label="Today&amp;#x27;s the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570802" start="10308" end="10322" title="Amber Cascades" label="Amber Cascades"/>
<link wikidata="Q201026" start="11212" end="11217" title="Kauai" label="Kauai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654545" start="11236" end="11242" title="Harbor (America album)" label="Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="11719" end="11726" title="born-again Christian" label="renewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="11766" end="11787" title="recreational drug use" label="recreational drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q342778" start="11992" end="12001" title="Pat Boone" label="Pat Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481012" start="12009" end="12032" title="Lamb &amp;amp; Lion Records" label="Lamb &amp;amp; Lion Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377904" start="12072" end="12095" title="All Things Are Possible (Dan Peek album)" label="All Things Are Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106152" start="12135" end="12150" title="Chris Christian" label="Chris Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="12278" end="12310" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; pop charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654682" start="12499" end="12503" title="Live (America album)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q111436" start="12636" end="12651" title="Elmer Bernstein" label="Elmer Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q211277" start="13107" end="13132" title="The Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas" label="The Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026811" start="13145" end="13169" title="California Dreamin&amp;#x27;" label="California Dreamin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020452" start="13250" end="13269" title="California Dreaming (1979 film)" label="California Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514596" start="13501" end="13514" title="Silent Letter (album)" label="Silent Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="13568" end="13583" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="13650" end="13660" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725657" start="14376" end="14381" title="Alibi (America album)" label="Alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086901" start="14503" end="14514" title="Fred Mollin" label="Fred Mollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="14576" end="14582" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q944128" start="14589" end="14606" title="Timothy B. Schmit" label="Timothy B. Schmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q304851" start="14608" end="14620" title="Leland Sklar" label="Leland Sklar"/>
<link wikidata="Q318483" start="14625" end="14639" title="Steve Lukather" label="Steve Lukather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928768" start="15054" end="15074" title="View from the Ground" label="View from the Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q504920" start="15424" end="15435" title="Carl Wilson" label="Carl Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="15437" end="15441" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q350353" start="15449" end="15461" title="Jeff Porcaro" label="Jeff Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q445438" start="15463" end="15480" title="Christopher Cross" label="Christopher Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144640" start="15485" end="15495" title="Dean Parks" label="Dean Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301367" start="15504" end="15510" title="Argent (band)" label="Argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355924" start="15521" end="15533" title="Russ Ballard" label="Russ Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057094" start="15746" end="15762" title="You Can Do Magic (song)" label="You Can Do Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018980" start="16041" end="16063" title="Right Before Your Eyes" label="Right Before Your Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147331" start="16082" end="16092" title="Ian Thomas (Canadian musician)" label="Ian Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627090" start="16114" end="16125" title="Dave Thomas (actor)" label="Dave Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621346" start="16135" end="16147" title="Strange Brew" label="Strange Brew"/>
<link wikidata="Q429879" start="16177" end="16190" title="Bobby Colomby" label="Bobby Colomby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219729" start="16568" end="16577" title="Your Move" label="Your Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844606" start="16972" end="16982" title="The Border (America song)" label="The Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="17031" end="17059" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q968645" start="17086" end="17105" title="Raphael Ravenscroft" label="Raphael Ravenscroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q176198" start="17766" end="17782" title="The Last Unicorn (film)" label="The Last Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746145" start="17802" end="17812" title="The Last Unicorn (album)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="17990" end="18002" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q774450" start="18016" end="18030" title="The Lonely Guy" label="The Lonely Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753779" start="18162" end="18178" title="Doer of the Word" label="Doer of the Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888745" start="18189" end="18212" title="Home Sweet Home Records" label="Home Sweet Home Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701399" start="18567" end="18578" title="Perspective (America album)" label="Perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330595" start="18713" end="18724" title="Richie Zito" label="Richie Zito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790940" start="18726" end="18742" title="Matthew McCauley (producer)" label="Matthew McCauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q774450" start="18883" end="18897" title="The Lonely Guy" label="The Lonely Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149885" start="18909" end="18930" title="Richard James Burgess" label="Richard James Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574578" start="19077" end="19089" title="Special Girl (song)" label="Special Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="19287" end="19294" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="19302" end="19313" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q748584" start="19334" end="19343" title="Bill Mumy" label="Bill Mumy"/>
<link wikidata="Q536137" start="19365" end="19378" title="Lost in Space" label="Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q210146" start="19395" end="19404" title="Babylon 5" label="Babylon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009186" start="19725" end="19735" title="In Concert (1985 America album)" label="In Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="19817" end="19842" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="20517" end="20530" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101497" start="20676" end="20686" title="Chip Davis" label="Chip Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743923" start="20690" end="20709" title="American Gramaphone" label="American Gramaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913384" start="20830" end="20839" title="Hourglass (America album)" label="Hourglass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20905" end="20919" title="Hank Linderman" label="Hank Linderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347107" start="20924" end="20936" title="Steve Levine" label="Steve Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q366834" start="21218" end="21230" title="Phil Hartman" label="Phil Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407240" start="21348" end="21361" title="televangelist" label="televangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196994" start="21730" end="21754" title="King Biscuit Flower Hour" label="King Biscuit Flower Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989359" start="21788" end="21798" title="In Concert (King Biscuit) (America album)" label="In Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009186" start="21834" end="21854" title="In Concert (1985 America album)" label="1985 Capitol release"/>
<link wikidata="Q852435" start="22119" end="22129" title="Steely Dan" label="Steely Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525348" start="22139" end="22148" title="Gary Katz" label="Gary Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937273" start="22275" end="22287" title="Human Nature (America album)" label="Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="22562" end="22580" title="adult contemporary music" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759776" start="23108" end="23136" title="Highway (America album)" label="Highway: 30 Years of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727141" start="23450" end="23476" title="The Complete Greatest Hits (America album)" label="The Complete Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="23542" end="23551" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="23698" end="23732" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; album charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701399" start="23841" end="23852" title="Perspective (America album)" label="Perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932993" start="24195" end="24206" title="Robert Lamm" label="Robert Lamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q504920" start="24211" end="24222" title="Carl Wilson" label="Carl Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186230" start="24259" end="24267" title="Dan Peek" label="Dan Peek"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="24457" end="24470" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q930634" start="24496" end="24520" title="Someone to Call My Lover" label="Someone to Call My Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="24611" end="24643" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; pop charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="24691" end="24706" title="Christmas music" label="Christmas album"/>
<link wikidata="Q747556" start="24714" end="24729" title="Holiday Harmony (America album)" label="Holiday Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q596698" start="24749" end="24760" title="Andrew Gold" label="Andrew Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639338" start="25123" end="25147" title="The Grand Cayman Concert (America album)" label="The Grand Cayman Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="25190" end="25204" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324607" start="25751" end="25767" title="Richard Campbell (American musician)" label="Richard Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474254" start="25790" end="25805" title="Three Dog Night" label="Three Dog Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q231942" start="25807" end="25819" title="Natalie Cole" label="Natalie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q918535" start="25824" end="25834" title="Dave Mason" label="Dave Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="26017" end="26035" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q490434" start="26059" end="26066" title="Ventura, California" label="Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498517" start="26095" end="26109" title="Stephen Bishop (musician)" label="Stephen Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="26192" end="26195" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132736" start="26318" end="26329" title="Henry Diltz" label="Henry Diltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824007" start="27101" end="27117" title="Adam Schlesinger" label="Adam Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q733863" start="27154" end="27172" title="Fountains of Wayne" label="Fountains of Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557460" start="27240" end="27267" title="Welcome Interstate Managers" label="Welcome Interstate Managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="27466" end="27473" title="SonyBMG" label="SonyBMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998737" start="27485" end="27501" title="Burgundy Records" label="Burgundy Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q433617" start="27734" end="27743" title="James Iha" label="James Iha"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="27757" end="27778" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736887" start="27819" end="27833" title="Here &amp;amp; Now (America album)" label="Here &amp;amp; Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701399" start="27918" end="27929" title="Perspective (America album)" label="Perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q437970" start="28066" end="28076" title="Ryan Adams" label="Ryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q774923" start="28078" end="28089" title="Ben Kweller" label="Ben Kweller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498517" start="28091" end="28105" title="Stephen Bishop (musician)" label="Stephen Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382667" start="28107" end="28118" title="Rusty Young (musician)" label="Rusty Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q668745" start="28145" end="28154" title="Nada Surf" label="Nada Surf"/>
<link wikidata="Q684097" start="28159" end="28176" title="My Morning Jacket" label="My Morning Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="28397" end="28405" title="XM Radio" label="XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324607" start="28555" end="28571" title="Richard Campbell (American musician)" label="Richard Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426142" start="29051" end="29075" title="Vocal Group Hall of Fame" label="Vocal Group Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="29134" end="29156" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="29198" end="29217" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242993" start="29381" end="29391" title="Back Pages" label="Back Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="29484" end="29493" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="29498" end="29511" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394249" start="29540" end="29552" title="Gin Blossoms" label="Gin Blossoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="29570" end="29578" title="E1 Music" label="E1 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725657" start="29689" end="29694" title="Alibi (America album)" label="Alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="29728" end="29748" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="30318" end="30328" title="Beach Boys" label="Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="30333" end="30345" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686443" start="30365" end="30377" title="Jeff Foskett" label="Jeff Foskett"/>
<link wikidata="Q665979" start="30545" end="30558" title="Reel Big Fish" label="Reel Big Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385160" start="30567" end="30579" title="Ryland Steen" label="Ryland Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030022" start="30638" end="30651" title="Infinity Hall" label="Infinity Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161584" start="30672" end="30701" title="Connecticut Public Television" label="Connecticut Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q524822" start="30860" end="30874" title="Cobra Starship" label="Cobra Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q981845" start="31208" end="31225" title="Sweetwater, Texas" label="Sweetwater, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q676755" start="31320" end="31336" title="London Palladium" label="London Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="31478" end="31495" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377904" start="32209" end="32232" title="All Things Are Possible (Dan Peek album)" label="All Things Are Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601897" start="32460" end="32473" title="Greek Theater (Los Angeles)" label="Greek Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753779" start="32533" end="32549" title="Doer of the Word" label="Doer of the Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="34686" end="34699" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="34891" end="34905" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568653" start="35009" end="35023" title="Glenn A. Baker" label="Glenn A. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900393" start="35733" end="35755" title="fibrinous pericarditis" label="fibrinous pericarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153698" start="35825" end="35838" title="Gerry Beckley" label="Gerry Beckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025584" start="35905" end="35918" title="Dewey Bunnell" label="Dewey Bunnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186230" start="35986" end="35994" title="Dan Peek" label="Dan Peek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324607" start="36089" end="36105" title="Richard Campbell (American musician)" label="Richard Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385160" start="36124" end="36136" title="Ryland Steen" label="Ryland Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q110592004" start="36434" end="36465" title="Calvin &amp;quot;Fuzzy&amp;quot; Samuel" label="Calvin &amp;quot;Fuzzy&amp;quot; Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26436439" start="36722" end="36734" title="Bill Worrell (musician)" label="Bill Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q463081" start="36835" end="36842" title="America (America album)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q643264" start="36864" end="36874" title="Homecoming (America album)" label="Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280909" start="36896" end="36905" title="Hat Trick (America album)" label="Hat Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880326" start="36927" end="36934" title="Holiday (America album)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692947" start="36956" end="36962" title="Hearts (America album)" label="Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752269" start="36984" end="36992" title="Hideaway (America album)" label="Hideaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654545" start="37014" end="37020" title="Harbor (America album)" label="Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514596" start="37042" end="37055" title="Silent Letter" label="Silent Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725657" start="37077" end="37082" title="Alibi (America album)" label="Alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928768" start="37104" end="37124" title="View from the Ground" label="View from the Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219729" start="37146" end="37155" title="Your Move" label="Your Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701399" start="37177" end="37188" title="Perspective (America album)" label="Perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913384" start="37210" end="37219" title="Hourglass (America album)" label="Hourglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937273" start="37241" end="37253" title="Human Nature (America album)" label="Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q747556" start="37275" end="37290" title="Holiday Harmony" label="Holiday Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736887" start="37312" end="37326" title="Here &amp;amp; Now (America album)" label="Here &amp;amp; Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242993" start="37348" end="37358" title="Back Pages" label="Back Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714805" start="37380" end="37396" title="Lost &amp;amp; Found (America album)" label="Lost &amp;amp; Found"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149242" wikidata="Q506008" url="?curid=149242" title="Deira">
<text>Deira ( ; Old Welsh/ or ; or ) was an area of Post-Roman Britain, and a later Anglian kingdom.

==Etymology==
The name of the kingdom is of Brythonic origin, and is derived from the Proto-Celtic , meaning &#x27;oak&#x27; ( in modern Welsh), in which case it would mean &#x27;the people of the Derwent&#x27;, a derivation also found in the Latin name for Malton, . It is cognate with the modern Irish word (); the names for County Londonderry and the city of Derry stem from this word.

==History==
=== Brythonic Deira===
Following the Roman withdrawal from Britain a number of successor kingdoms rose in northern England, reflecting pre-Roman tribal territories. The area between the Humber and River Tees known as or corresponds to the tribal lands of the Parisi, bordered to the west and north by the Brythonic kingdoms of Elmet () and Bernicia () respectively, and to the east by the North Sea.

Early Deira may have centred on Petuaria (modern Brough) and archaeological evidence shows that the town was refortified. Petuaria was a great tribal centre for the Parisi, but declined in importance from the mid-fourth century (possibly as the harbour silted up). After this period, Derventio (modern Malton) may have functioned as the region&#x27;s capital.

It is not known if Deira was ever an independent Brythonic kingdom, and no British king has been identified with the area from the surviving genealogies, poems or chronicles. However the area was subject to the same fractious inheritance traditions and changing power dynamic (following the Roman withdrawal) that allowed Elmet and Bernicia to become independent hereditary kingdoms in the early fifth century. In Welsh literature, Deira is part of the (The Old North) region, which was divided into many related kingdoms after the death of (Coel the Old).

=== Anglian Deira===
The kingdom, which was previously ruled by a British dynasty, was probably created in the third quarter of the fifth century when Anglian warriors invaded the Derwent Valley. Anglian Deira&#x27;s territory also extended from the Humber to the Tees, and from the sea to the western edge of the Vale of York. It later merged with the kingdom of Bernicia, its northern neighbour, to form the kingdom of Northumbria.

According to Simeon of Durham (writing early in the 12th century), it extended from the Humber to the Tyne, but the land was waste north of the Tees. After the Brythonic kingdom centred on , which may have been called Ebrauc, was taken by King Edwin, the city of became its capital, and (&quot;boar-place&quot;) was taken by the Angles.

Archaeology suggests that the Anglian royal house was in place by the middle of the fifth century, but the first certainly recorded king is Ælla in the late sixth century. After his death, Deira was subject to king Æthelfrith of Bernicia, who united the two kingdoms into Northumbria. Æthelfrith ruled until the accession of Ælla&#x27;s son Edwin, in 616 or 617, who also ruled both kingdoms until 633.

Osric, the nephew of Edwin, ruled Deira after Edwin, but his son Oswine was put to death by Oswiu in 651. For a few years subsequently, Deira was governed by Æthelwald son of Oswald of Bernicia.

Bede wrote of Deira in his &quot;Historia Ecclesiastica&quot; (completed in 731).

=== Anglian kings of Deira ===

== Notes ==
== References ==
*Higham, N.J. (1993). &quot;The Kingdom of Northumbria AD 350–1100.&quot; Stroud: Sutton. 
*
*


==Further reading==
*Geake, Helen &amp; Kenny, Jonathan (eds.) (2000). &quot;Early Deira: Archaeological studies of the East Riding in the fourth to ninth centuries AD.&quot; Oxford: Oxbow. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="0" end="5" title="Deira" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="10" end="19" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q977566" start="46" end="64" title="Post-Roman Britain" label="Post-Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="78" end="85" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="140" end="149" title="British language (Celtic)" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="182" end="194" title="Proto-Celtic language" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q546983" start="293" end="300" title="River Derwent, Yorkshire" label="Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="339" end="344" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280506" start="354" end="360" title="Malton, North Yorkshire" label="Malton"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="370" end="377" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="394" end="399" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q192208" start="423" end="441" title="County Londonderry" label="County Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="458" end="463" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632793" start="535" end="564" title="End of Roman rule in Britain" label="Roman withdrawal from Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="680" end="690" title="the Humber" label="the Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="695" end="705" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q953386" start="757" end="763" title="Parisi (tribe)" label="Parisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333032" start="825" end="830" title="Elmet" label="Elmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="838" end="846" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="887" end="896" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179412" start="931" end="939" title="Petuaria" label="Petuaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q990921" start="948" end="954" title="Brough, East Riding of Yorkshire" label="Brough"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513875" start="1183" end="1192" title="Derventio Brigantum" label="Derventio"/>
<link wikidata="Q280506" start="1201" end="1207" title="Malton, North Yorkshire" label="Malton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333032" start="1582" end="1587" title="Elmet" label="Elmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16880640" start="1674" end="1690" title="Welsh literature" label="Welsh literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q546983" start="1998" end="2012" title="River Derwent, Yorkshire" label="Derwent Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="2068" end="2074" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="2082" end="2086" title="River Tees" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102362" start="2132" end="2144" title="Vale of York" label="Vale of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="2182" end="2190" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="2239" end="2250" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q940417" start="2266" end="2282" title="Simeon of Durham" label="Simeon of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="2341" end="2347" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="2355" end="2359" title="River Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="2397" end="2401" title="River Tees" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q47349832" start="2471" end="2477" title="Ebrauc" label="Ebrauc"/>
<link wikidata="Q271396" start="2731" end="2735" title="Aella of Deira" label="Ælla"/>
<link wikidata="Q272196" start="2806" end="2816" title="Aethelfrith of Northumbria" label="Æthelfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="2932" end="2937" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q879949" start="2995" end="3000" title="Osric of Deira" label="Osric"/>
<link wikidata="Q879940" start="3060" end="3066" title="Oswine of Deira" label="Oswine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468847" start="3087" end="3092" title="Oswiu of Northumbria" label="Oswiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q272267" start="3153" end="3162" title="Aethelwald of Deira" label="Æthelwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="3170" end="3188" title="Oswald of Bernicia" label="Oswald of Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="3191" end="3195" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="3224" end="3246" title="Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum" label="Historia Ecclesiastica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702339" start="3453" end="3465" title="Helen Geake" label="Geake, Helen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149243" wikidata="Q39476" url="?curid=149243" title="Emma Watson">
<text>Emma Charlotte Duerre Watson (born 15 April 1990) is an English actress. Known for her roles in both blockbusters and independent films, she has received a selection of accolades, including a Young Artist Award and three MTV Movie Awards. Watson has been ranked among the world&#x27;s highest-paid actresses by &quot;Forbes&quot; and &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, and was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by &quot;Time&quot; magazine in 2015. Watson was also listed by &quot;Forbes&quot; as an honouree on the Forbes 30 under 30 list in 2015 and 2016.

Watson attended the Dragon School and trained in acting at the Oxford branch of Stagecoach Theatre Arts. As a child, she rose to stardom after landing her first professional acting role as Hermione Granger in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film series, having previously acted only in school plays. Watson made her first major forays beyond the Potter franchise starring in &quot;Ballet Shoes&quot; (2007), and lent her voice to &quot;The Tale of Despereaux&quot; (2008). After the final &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film, she took on a supporting role in &quot;My Week with Marilyn&quot; (2011), before starring as Sam, a flirtatious, free-spirited student in &quot;The Perks of Being a Wallflower&quot; (2012), to critical success. Further acclaim came from portraying Alexis Neiers in Sofia Coppola&#x27;s &quot;The Bling Ring&quot; (2013) and the titular character&#x27;s adoptive daughter in Darren Aronofsky&#x27;s biblical epic &quot;Noah&quot; (2014). That same year, Watson was honoured by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, winning British Artist of the Year. She also starred as Belle in the live-action musical romantic fantasy &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; (2017), and as Meg March in Greta Gerwig&#x27;s coming-of-age drama &quot;Little Women&quot; (2019).

From 2011 to 2014, Watson split her time between working on films and continuing her education, graduating from Brown University with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in English literature in May 2014. That year, she was appointed a UN Women Goodwill Ambassador and helped launch the UN Women campaign HeForShe, which advocates for gender equality. In 2018, she helped launch Time&#x27;s Up UK as a founding member. Watson was appointed to a G7 advisory body for women&#x27;s rights in 2019, consulting with leaders on foreign policy. Her modelling work has included campaigns for Burberry and Lancôme. She also lent her name to a clothing line for the sustainable brand People Tree. From 2020 to 2023, she sat on the board of directors of Kering, a luxury brand group, in her capacity as an advocate for sustainable fashion.

==Early life and education==
Emma Charlotte Duerre Watson was born on 15 April 1990 in Paris, to English lawyers Jacqueline Luesby and Chris Watson. Watson lived in Maisons-Laffitte near Paris until age five. Her parents divorced when she was five, and Watson moved to England to live with her mother in Oxfordshire while spending weekends at her father&#x27;s house in London. Watson has said she speaks some French, though &quot;not as well&quot; as she used to. After moving to Oxford with her mother and brother, she attended the Dragon School, remaining there until 2003. From age six, she wanted to become an actress, and trained at the Oxford branch of Stagecoach Theatre Arts, a part-time theatre school where she studied singing, dancing, and acting.

By age ten, Watson had performed in Stagecoach productions and school plays including &quot;Arthur: The Young Years&quot; and &quot;The Happy Prince&quot;, but she had never acted professionally prior to the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series. After the Dragon School, Watson moved on to Headington School, Oxford. While on film sets, she and her castmates were tutored for up to five hours a day. In June 2006, she took GCSE school examinations in ten subjects, achieving eight A* and two A grades. In May 2007, she took AS levels in English, Geography, Art, and History of Art. The following year, she dropped History of Art to pursue the three A levels, receiving an A grade in each subject.

Watson took a gap year after finishing secondary school, to film &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Parts 1&quot; &quot;&amp;&quot; &quot;2&quot; beginning in February 2009, but asserted that she intended to continue her studies and later confirmed she had chosen Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island. In March 2011, after 18 months at the university, Watson announced she was deferring her course for &quot;a semester or two&quot;, though she attended Worcester College, Oxford during the 2011–12 academic year as part of the Visiting Student Programme. In a 2014 interview on &quot;The Ellen DeGeneres Show&quot;, Watson said just before graduation that it took five years to finish her degree instead of four because, owing to her acting work, she &quot;ended up taking two full semesters off&quot;. On 25 May 2014, she graduated from Brown University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English literature. In 2023, she began a course of Master of Studies in creative writing at the University of Oxford, where she matriculated at Lady Margaret Hall. She completed the requirements for her Masters and progressed to studying a DPhil in 2025. 

==Acting career==

=== 1999–2009: &quot;Harry Potter&quot; and worldwide recognition ===

In 1999, casting began for &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot;, the film adaptation of British author J. K. Rowling&#x27;s best-selling novel. Casting agents found Watson through her Oxford theatre teacher. She had acted in school plays, but had no film acting experience. Her first audition took place when she was nine years old. Although Watson had to audition a total of eight times before earning the role, Rowling supported her casting after her first screen test. Prior to casting Watson, the producers considered Hatty Jones for the role.

The release of &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot; in 2001 was Watson&#x27;s debut screen performance. The film broke records for opening-day sales and opening-weekend takings and was the highest-grossing film of 2001. Critics singled out Watson for particular acclaim; &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; called her performance &quot;admirable&quot;, and &quot;IGN&quot; said she &quot;stole the show&quot;. Watson was nominated for five awards for her performance in &quot;Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot;, winning the Young Artist Award for Leading Young Actress. She was chosen as one of Entertainment Weekly&#x27;s Breakout Performers of 2001.

A year later, Watson reprised her role as Hermione in &quot;Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets&quot;, the second instalment of the series. Reviewers praised the lead actors&#x27; performances. The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; said Watson and her co-stars had matured between films, while &quot;The Times&quot; criticised director Chris Columbus for &quot;under-employing&quot; Watson&#x27;s hugely popular character. Watson received an Otto Award from the German magazine &quot;Bravo&quot; for her performance.

In 2004, &quot;Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban&quot; was released. Watson was appreciative of the more assertive role Hermione played, calling her &quot;charismatic&quot; and &quot;a fantastic role to play&quot;. Critics lauded Watson&#x27;s performance; A. O. Scott of &quot;The New York Times&quot; remarked: &quot;Luckily Mr. Radcliffe&#x27;s blandness is offset by Ms. Watson&#x27;s spiky impatience. Harry may show off his expanding wizardly skills ... but Hermione ... earns the loudest applause with a decidedly unmagical punch to Draco Malfoy&#x27;s deserving nose.&quot; Although &quot;Prisoner of Azkaban&quot; proved to be the lowest-grossing &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film in the entire series, Watson&#x27;s performance won her two Otto Awards and the Child Performance of the Year award from &quot;Total Film&quot;.

With &quot;Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire&quot; (2005), both Watson and the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film series reached new milestones. The film set records for a &quot;Harry Potter&quot; opening weekend and opening weekend in the UK. Critics praised the increasing maturity of Watson and her teenage co-stars; &quot;The New York Times&quot; called her performance &quot;touchingly earnest&quot;, and Peter Bradshaw of &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote that &quot;Watson&#x27;s gutsy, confident performance nicely shows that inside and outside the world of magic there is a growing discrepancy between a teenage girl&#x27;s status and her accelerating emotional and intellectual development.&quot; For Watson, much of the film&#x27;s humour sprang from the tension among the three lead characters as they matured. She said, &quot;I loved all the arguing. ... I think it&#x27;s much more realistic that they would argue and that there would be problems.&quot; Nominated for three awards for &quot;Goblet of Fire&quot;, Watson won a bronze Otto Award. Watson almost quit the franchise after &quot;Goblet of Fire&quot;, saying, &quot;I think I was scared. I don’t know if you ever felt like it got to a tipping point where you were like, &#x27;this is kind of forever now.&#x27;&quot;

In 2006, Watson played Hermione in &quot;The Queen&#x27;s Handbag&quot;, a special mini-episode of &quot;Harry Potter&quot; in celebration of Queen Elizabeth II&#x27;s 80th birthday. The fifth film in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series, &quot;Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix&quot;, was released in 2007. A huge financial success, the film set a record worldwide opening-weekend gross of $332.7 million. Watson won the inaugural National Movie Award for Best Female Performance. As the fame of the actress and the series continued to rise, Watson and her &quot;Harry Potter&quot; co-stars Daniel Radcliffe and Rupert Grint left imprints of their hands, feet and wands in front of Grauman&#x27;s Chinese Theatre in Hollywood on 9 July 2007. That month, Watson&#x27;s work on the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series was said to have earned her more than £10 million, and she acknowledged she would never have to work for money again.

Prior to the release of &quot;Order of the Phoenix&quot;, the future of the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series was in jeopardy, as all three lead actors were hesitant to sign on to continue their roles for the final installments. Watson was considerably more ambivalent than her co-stars during renegotiations. She explained that the decision was significant, as the films represented a further four-year commitment to the role, but eventually conceded that she &quot;could never let [the role of] Hermione go&quot;, signing for the role on 23 March 2007.

Watson&#x27;s first non-&quot;Potter&quot; role was the 2007 BBC film &quot;Ballet Shoes&quot;, a television adaptation of the 1936 novel of the same name by Noel Streatfeild. The film&#x27;s director, Sandra Goldbacher, commented that Watson was &quot;perfect&quot; for the starring role of aspiring actress Pauline Fossil: &quot;She has a piercing, delicate aura that makes you want to gaze and gaze at her.&quot; &quot;Ballet Shoes&quot; was broadcast in the UK on Boxing Day to 5.7 million viewers, to mixed reviews. The following year, she voiced the character Princess Pea in the animation &quot;The Tale of Despereaux&quot;, a children&#x27;s comedy, based on the 2003 novel of the same name, by Kate DiCamillo, starring Matthew Broderick, with &quot;Harry Potter&quot; co-star Robbie Coltrane also starring in the film. &quot;The Tale of Despereaux&quot; was released in December 2008 and grossed $87 million worldwide.

Principal photography for the sixth &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film began in late 2007, with Watson&#x27;s part being filmed from 18 December to 17 May 2008. &quot;Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince&quot; premiered on 15 July 2009, having been delayed from November 2008. With the lead actors in their late teens, critics were increasingly willing to review them on the same level as the rest of the franchise&#x27;s all-star cast, which the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; described as &quot;a comprehensive guide to contemporary UK acting&quot;. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; felt Watson had given &quot;[her] most charming performance to date&quot;, while &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; described the lead actors as &quot;newly liberated and energised, eager to give all they have to what&#x27;s left of the series&quot;.

Watson&#x27;s filming for the final instalment, &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows&quot;, began on 18 February 2009 and ended on 12 June 2010. For financial and scripting reasons, the original book was divided into two films which were shot consecutively. &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1&quot; was released in November 2010 while the second film was released in July 2011. &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2&quot; became a commercial and critical success. The highest-grossing film in the franchise, it grossed more than $1.3 billion worldwide and proved to be Watson&#x27;s most commercially successful film to date.

=== 2010–2016: Independent films and mainstream work ===

Watson appeared in a music video for One Night Only, after meeting lead singer George Craig at the 2010 Winter/Summer Burberry advertising campaign. The video, &quot;Say You Don&#x27;t Want It&quot;, was screened on Channel 4 on 26 June 2010 and released on 16 August. In her first post-&quot;Harry Potter&quot; film, Watson appeared in &quot;My Week with Marilyn&quot; (2011) as Lucy, a wardrobe assistant who briefly dates protagonist Colin Clark, portrayed by Eddie Redmayne.

In May 2010, Watson was reported to be in talks to star in Stephen Chbosky&#x27;s &quot;The Perks of Being a Wallflower,&quot; based on the 1999 novel of the same name. Filming began in summer of 2011, and the film was released in September 2012. Watson starred opposite Logan Lerman as Sam, a high school senior who befriends a fellow student called Charlie (Lerman), and helps him through his freshman year. The film opened to favourable reviews; David Sexton of the &quot;Evening Standard&quot; opined that Watson&#x27;s performance was &quot;plausible and touching&quot;, while &quot;The Atlantic&quot; reviewer thought that Watson &quot;sheds the memory of a decade playing Hermione in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series with an about-face as a flirtatious but insecure free spirit.

Watson joined the cast of the satirical crime film &quot;The Bling Ring&quot; on 29 February 2012, The Sofia Coppola-directed film is based on the real-life Bling Ring robberies, with Watson playing a fictionalised version of Alexis Neiers, a television personality who was one of seven teenagers involved in the robberies. The film was released in 2013. While the film mostly received mixed reviews, critics gave almost unanimous praise for Watson&#x27;s performance. Adam White of &quot;The Independent&quot; later stated that &quot;She prove[d] remarkable... Watson oozes casual disdain. Her sticky American vocal fry is clipped and monotone, as if she&#x27;s swallowed a Kardashian for breakfast.&quot; Watson also had a supporting role in the apocalyptic comedy &quot;This Is the End&quot; (2013), in which she, Seth Rogen, James Franco and many others played &quot;exaggerated versions of themselves&quot; and Watson memorably dropped the &quot;f-bomb&quot;. She said she could not pass up the opportunity to make her first comedy and &quot;work with some of the best comedians [...] in the world right now&quot;.

In June 2012, Watson was confirmed for the role as Ila, Shem&#x27;s wife, in Darren Aronofsky&#x27;s &quot;Noah&quot;, which began filming the following month, and was released in March 2014. Watson referred to the role as &quot;physically very demanding&quot; given the usage of special effects and did extensive research on childbirth to effectively portray a scene in the film. The film, a box office success, received mixed reviews for its direction and casting; &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; wrote that &quot;Watson anchors the film&#x27;s rawest emotional scenes... Sitting on an Icelandic beach with Russell Crowe, her hair wild and eyes burning, Watson is quiet but ferocious.&quot; In March 2013, it was reported that Watson was in negotiations to star as the title character in Kenneth Branagh&#x27;s live-action Disney adaptation of &quot;Cinderella&quot;. Watson was offered the role, but turned it down because she did not connect with the character. The role ultimately went to Lily James.

Watson performed the background vocals in the second chorus of the song &quot;Pantomime&quot; by singer Ben Hammersley, alongside Ólafur Arnalds. The song was released on 20 January 2014.

Watson joined Judi Dench, Robert Downey Jr., Mike Leigh, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, and Mark Ruffalo as recipients of the 2014 Britannia Awards, presented on 30 October in Los Angeles. Watson was awarded British Artist of the Year and she dedicated the prize to Millie, her pet hamster who died as Watson was filming &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot;. Watson starred in two 2015 releases, the thrillers &quot;Colonia&quot;, opposite Daniel Brühl and Michael Nyqvist; and &quot;Regression&quot; by Alejandro Amenábar, alongside Ethan Hawke and her &quot;Harry Potter&quot; co-star David Thewlis. Both of these films received generally negative reviews; &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; critic blamed &quot;Regression&quot;″s script for her &quot;pure dramatic cardboard&quot; role. She also appeared in an episode of BBC&#x27;s &quot;The Vicar of Dibley&quot;, in which she played Reverend Iris. In February 2016, Watson announced she was taking a year-long break from acting. She planned to spend the time on her &quot;personal development&quot; and her women&#x27;s rights work.

=== 2017–present: Recent career and hiatus ===

Watson starred as Belle in the 2017 live-action Disney adaptation of &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; directed by Bill Condon, and starring opposite Dan Stevens as the Beast. She was given autonomy within Belle&#x27;s portrayal; she re-characterised her as an assistant to her inventor father and incorporated bloomers and boots into her wardrobe. The film grossed over $1.2 billion at the worldwide box office and emerged as the second-highest-grossing film of 2017 and the 17th-highest-grossing film of all time. Her reported fee was $3 million upfront with profit participation, bringing her salary up to $15 million. The film garnered positive reviews; Richard Roeper of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; thought her performance was &quot;all pluck and spunk and sass and smarts and fierce independence as Belle&quot;. Watson later said &quot;When I finished the film, it kind of felt like I had made that transition into being a woman on-screen&quot;.

In the same year, she starred opposite Tom Hanks in the film adaptation of Dave Eggers&#x27; novel &quot;The Circle&quot; as Mae Holland, who begins working at a powerful tech corporation and enters a perilous situation concerning surveillance and freedom. The film received negative reviews but was a moderate box office success. In 2019, Watson starred as Meg March in Greta Gerwig&#x27;s adaptation of Louisa May Alcott&#x27;s novel &quot;Little Women&quot;, co-starring with Saoirse Ronan, Florence Pugh, Laura Dern, Timothée Chalamet, and Meryl Streep. On the premise, Watson has stated &quot;I think [&quot;Little Women&quot;] was good literary device to explain that there&#x27;s not one way to be a feminist... [Meg&#x27;s] way of being a feminist is making the choice – because that&#x27;s really, for me anyway, what feminism is about. Her choice is that she wants to be a full-time mother and wife.&quot; &quot;Forbes&quot; stated that &quot;Watson has perhaps the most challenging [...] role, as the proverbial straight woman of the sisters who is put on the defensive when her dreams end up being the most conventional of the lot.&quot; The film was critically acclaimed and grossed over $218 million against its $40 million budget.

In 2020, Watson discussed her future career plans, stating: &quot;Having been so public in making films and being so active on social [media] in my activism, I am curious to embrace a role where I work to amplify more voices, to continue to learn from those with different experiences&quot;, adding that her work would include &quot;fewer red carpets and more conference meetings&quot;. In 2021, various reports surfaced stating that Watson was engaged or retiring. Watson and her representatives refuted these reports; she later labelled the speculation as clickbait and cited her relative public absence to continued social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2022, Watson reunited with multiple cast members of the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; film series for an HBO Max special titled &quot;Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts&quot;. The following year, Watson revealed in an interview with the &quot;Financial Times&quot; that a reason why she had not acted in almost five years was because she &quot;wasn&#x27;t very happy&quot; with the profession and that she felt &quot;a bit caged&quot;. However, she went on to say that she will &quot;absolutely&quot; return to acting while also saying, &quot;But I&#x27;m happy to sit and wait for the next right thing. I love what I do. It&#x27;s finding a way to do it where I don&#x27;t have to fracture myself into different faces and people. And I just don&#x27;t want to switch into robot mode any more.&quot;

==Fashion career==
In 2005, Watson began her modelling career with a photo shoot for &quot;Teen Vogue&quot;, which made her the youngest person to cover the magazine. Three years later, the British press reported that Watson was to replace Keira Knightley as the face of Chanel, but this was denied by both parties. In June 2009, following several months of rumours, Watson confirmed she would be partnering with Burberry as the face of their Autumn/Winter 2009 campaign, for which she received an estimated six-figure fee. She also appeared in Burberry&#x27;s 2010 Spring/Summer campaign alongside her brother Alex, musicians George Craig and Matt Gilmour, and model Max Hurd. In February 2011, Watson was awarded the Style Icon award from British &quot;Elle&quot; by Dame Vivienne Westwood. Watson continued her involvement in fashion advertising when she announced she had been chosen as the face of Lancôme in March 2011.

In September 2009, Watson announced her involvement with People Tree, a fair trade fashion brand. Watson worked as a creative adviser for the company to create a spring line of clothing, which was released in February 2010; the range featured styles inspired by southern France and London. The collection, described by &quot;The Times&quot; as &quot;very clever&quot; despite their &quot;quiet hope that [she] would become tangled at the first hemp-woven hurdle&quot;, was widely publicised in magazines such as &quot;Teen Vogue&quot;, &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;, and &quot;People&quot;. Watson, who was not paid for the collaboration, admitted that competition for the range was minimal, but argued that &quot;Fashion is a great way to empower people and give them skills; rather than give cash to charity you can help people by buying the clothes they make and supporting things they take pride in&quot;; adding, &quot;I think young people like me are becoming increasingly aware of the humanitarian issues surrounding fast fashion and want to make good choices but there aren&#x27;t many options out there.&quot; Watson continued her involvement with People Tree, resulting in the release of a 2010 Autumn/Winter collection.
In 2013, Madame Tussauds in London unveiled a wax statue of Watson wearing an Elie Saab &quot;haute couture&quot; design donated to the museum by the designer. A spokesperson for the museum stated, &quot;[Watson] is one of the most requested personalities by our guests. She&#x27;s a true English rose known and loved by millions of film and fashion fans around the world&quot;. Watson was awarded Best British Style at the 2014 British Fashion Awards. The competition included David Beckham, Amal Clooney, Kate Moss, and Keira Knightley.

Watson has been described as &quot;an early adopter of sustainable fashion&quot; and is noted for dressing ethically on the red carpet. She wore a Calvin Klein gown to the 2016 Met Gala made out of recycled plastic bottles. Watson has supported Good On You, an app that acts as a directory for the sustainability level of fashion brands. In 2017, she began updating an Instagram account entitled &quot;The Press Tour&quot;, detailing the ethical brands she wore during the press tours for films such as &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; and &quot;The Circle&quot;. Watson guest-edited the March 2018 issue of &quot;Vogue Australia&quot; focusing on fashion sustainability, and was photographed by Peter Lindbergh for the magazine. In January 2020, she partnered with consignment website ThredUP to launch a &quot;Fashion Footprint Calculator&quot;, which allows website visitors to calculate the carbon impact of their wardrobes and ways to reduce it.

In June 2020, Watson was appointed the youngest member of the board of directors of Kering, the owner of various fashion brands such as Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent. Watson will chair Kering&#x27;s sustainability committee. Kering chairman François-Henri Pinault praised the new board members&#x27; &quot;knowledge and competences, and the multiplicity of their backgrounds and perspectives&quot;. Watson stated she &quot;hope[d] to influence decisions that will impact future generations and the world that we leave them&quot; and was &quot;extremely excited&quot; to collaborate with the Kering Foundation as part of their women&#x27;s rights work and looked forward to making a difference &quot;behind the scenes&quot;. She served in this capacity until 2023.

In August 2022, Watson became the face of Prada Beauty&#x27;s new fragrance Paradoxe. She starred in, directed, wrote and narrated the short film for the fragrance&#x27;s promotional campaign. In January 2024, Watson became the face of Prada&#x27;s Re-Nylon collection, the sustainable product line of the brand.

==Activism and advocacy==

Watson is an outspoken feminist. She has promoted education for girls, travelling to Bangladesh and Zambia to do so. In July 2014, she was appointed a UN Women Goodwill ambassador. That September, an admittedly nervous Watson delivered an address at UN Headquarters in New York City to launch the UN Women campaign HeForShe, which aims to urge men to advocate for gender equality. In that speech she said she began questioning gender-based assumptions at age eight when she was called &quot;bossy&quot;, a trait she has attributed to her being a &quot;perfectionist&quot;, whilst boys were not, and at 14 when she was &quot;sexualised by certain elements of the media&quot;. Watson&#x27;s speech described feminism as &quot;the belief that men and women should have equal rights and opportunities&quot; and declared that the perception of feminism as being &quot;man-hating&quot; is something that &quot;has to stop&quot;. The speech made worldwide headlines from both major news outlets and fashion blogs, and the organisation&#x27;s website crashed after press coverage of the event. Watson later said she received threats within less than twelve hours of making the speech, which left her &quot;raging. [...] If they were trying to put me off [women&#x27;s rights work], it did the opposite.&quot;

Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the executive director of UN Women, stated, &quot;For a time, there was a conversation about whether &#x27;feminism&#x27; was a good thing or a bad thing... [Her speech] gave us the word back.&quot; In 2015, Malala Yousafzai told Watson she decided to call herself a feminist after hearing her speech.

Also in September, Watson made her first country visit as a UN Women Goodwill ambassador to Uruguay, where she gave a speech at the Legislative Palace in Montevideo highlighting the need for women&#x27;s political participation. In November 2014, Watson designed a Paddington Bear statue, one of fifty located around London prior to the release of the film &quot;Paddington&quot;, which was auctioned to raise funds for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC). In December, the Ms. Foundation for Women named Watson its Feminist Celebrity of 2014, following an online poll. Watson also gave a speech about gender equality in January 2015, at the World Economic Forum&#x27;s annual winter meeting.

Watson took the top spot on the &quot;AskMen&quot; &quot;Top 99 Outstanding Women 2015&quot; list on the strength of having &quot;thrown her back&quot; into women&#x27;s rights issues. In the same year, Watson was included on the &quot;Time&quot; 100 list of the world&#x27;s most influential people, her first-ever appearance on the list. For its recap, former &quot;New York Times&quot; editor Jill Abramson noted Watson&#x27;s &quot;gutsy, smart take on feminism&quot; and called her effort to get men involved &quot;refreshing&quot;.

Watson has cited Gloria Steinem and Maya Angelou as influences. In January 2016, Watson started a feminist Goodreads book club: &quot;Our Shared Shelf&quot;. The goal of the club is to share feminist ideas and encourage discussion on the topic. One book is selected per month and is discussed in the last week of that month. The first book to be selected was &quot;My Life on the Road&quot; by Steinem, whom Watson would later interview that February at the How to: Academy in London. &quot;Our Shared Shelf&quot; ceased updates in January 2020, but continues to be open as a discussion board for recommendations.

On 2016 International Day of the Girl Child, Watson visited Malawi to meet with traditional chiefs and girls who returned to school after being freed from child marriage. Watson has partnered with organisations such as Book Fairies and Books on the Underground to leave literature on public transit for consumption.

In March 2017, Watson received backlash for a &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; photo shoot in which one of the shots had her breasts partly visible, for which some in the news media accused her of hypocrisy. Bemused by the controversy, she argued that &quot;feminism is not a stick with which to beat other women&quot; but is instead about freedom, liberation and equality, adding, &quot;I really don&#x27;t know what my tits have to do with it.&quot;

Watson has discussed her white privilege in feminist spaces; in an interview with British &quot;Vogue&quot;, she commented, &quot;I saw &#x27;white feminism&#x27; coming up again and again, and I was like, &#x27;Hey, this is clearly something that I have to meaningfully engage with. I have to understand this better&quot;. She has written about intersectionality for &quot;Our Shared Shelf&quot;, discussing her self-reflection on &quot;What are the ways I have benefited from being white? In what ways do I support and uphold a system that is structurally racist?&quot;

Watson is a founding member of Time&#x27;s Up UK and coordinated its launch at the 71st British Academy Film Awards. Watson also assisted in the establishment of nationwide industry guidelines on bullying and harassment, implemented by the British Film Institute and British Academy of Film and Television Arts. She donated £1 million to Time&#x27;s Up UK in February 2018 and later helped set up the organisation&#x27;s Justice and Equality Fund in October, which donated to women&#x27;s groups across the country. Marai Larasi, an activist on the issue of violence against women, was her guest to the 2018 Golden Globe Awards.

In July 2019, Watson helped launch a legal helpline for people who have suffered sexual harassment in the workplace. Legal advice is provided by Rights of Women, a charity which works to help women through the law. In the same year, she joined a G7 gender equality advisory group convened by the president of France, Emmanuel Macron, to &quot;call on G7 to make political and economic advances for women within their own countries&quot; as well as a &quot;centerpiece of foreign policy&quot;. She attended their first meeting at the Élysée Palace in Paris in February and attended the 45th G7 summit in August as part of the committee.

In an interview with Paris Lees, she voiced her support for transgender rights, reiterating this on Twitter amidst controversy concerning Rowling&#x27;s remarks on gender identity. Watson has spoken out in support of the Black Lives Matter movement; in June 2020, she shared anti-racism educational resources on social media in support of the George Floyd protests after initially participating in Blackout Tuesday, and uploaded a podcast episode onto Spotify interviewing Reni Eddo-Lodge about her book &quot;Why I&#x27;m No Longer Talking to White People About Race&quot;.

In July 2020, she partnered with Lodge and the WOW Foundation to spearhead a project reimagining the London Underground Map, renaming the 270 stops to spotlight women and non-binary people who have shaped the city&#x27;s history. The initiative will consult writers, museums, and librarians and is set to be published by Haymarket Books on International Women&#x27;s Day 2021. Watson was among the 400 signatories in a letter calling for the UK government to include women in &quot;decision-making roles&quot; at the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Glasgow.

In June 2021, it was reported that Watson was part of a group of investors funding $12.5 million into FabricNano, a startup developing sustainable alternatives to petrochemical products. In January 2022, Watson showed support for the Palestine cause by posting an image of a pro-Palestinian protest with a &quot;Solidarity is a verb&quot; banner on Instagram. This received backlash from former Israeli science minister Danny Danon, who posted on Twitter, &quot;10 points from Gryffindor for being an antisemite&quot;. Israeli ambassador to the UN Gilad Erdan also criticised her. Danon&#x27;s comment was criticised by Leah Greenberg, a co-executive director of Indivisible Project and Conservative Party peer Sayeeda Warsi. More than forty people, including Susan Sarandon, Mark Ruffalo, Miriam Margolyes, Gael García Bernal, Peter Capaldi, Maxine Peake, Viggo Mortensen, Steve Coogan and Charles Dance, supported Watson in a letter organised by Artists for Palestine UK.

Watson is an activist for environmental justice and climate change mitigation. In 2019, Swedish researchers from Lund University analysed the carbon footprints of ten celebrities including Watson&#x27;s. Watson&#x27;s carbon footprint was the lowest of the celebrities analysed, but her emissions from flying alone was still 15.1 tons of – three times the global average. At the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, Watson hosted a panel on climate change with guests including climate activist Greta Thunberg.

==Public image==

Watson has often been cited as a role model, though she shies away from the term, stating that &quot;it puts the fear of god into [her]&quot;. Her impact on teenage girls&#x27; view of women&#x27;s rights has been referred to as the &quot;Emma Watson effect&quot;, with respondents from a National Citizen Service survey stating that her work in activism had inspired them to label themselves feminists. In her initial post-&quot;Harry Potter&quot; career, she was noted to focus on smaller films rather than big-budget studio films. Adam White of &quot;The Independent&quot; states that Watson&#x27;s acting style possesses &quot;a very human sensitivity and quiet strength&quot;.

Describing Watson&#x27;s off-screen persona, Derek Blasberg of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; has called her &quot;shy&quot;, &quot;friendly, intelligent, and down to earth&quot;. Steinem has described her as &quot;way more like a real person than a movie star&quot;, while author bell hooks considers her to be part of &quot;a very different, new breed [of actors] who are interested in being whole and having a holistic life, as opposed to being identified with just wealth and fame.&quot;

Watson&#x27;s character in &quot;Harry Potter&quot; has had a significant impact on pop culture; the actress has commented, &quot;I have met fans [with] my face tattooed on their bod[ies]. I&#x27;ve met people who used the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; books to get through cancer. I don&#x27;t know how to explain it, but the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; phenomenon steps into a different zone.&quot; Watson has been the subject of substantial media attention since the beginning of her career; on her eighteenth birthday she was photographed by paparazzi attempting to take pictures up her skirt, and she has been victim of numerous stalking threats. Watson does not take selfies with fans, citing security concerns, and instead prefers to talk one-on-one during interactions.

In March 2009, she was ranked sixth on the &quot;Forbes&quot; list of &quot;Most Valuable Young Stars&quot; and in February 2010, she was Hollywood&#x27;s highest-paid female star, having earned an estimated £19 million in 2009. In 2017, &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked her among the world&#x27;s highest-paid actresses, with annual earnings of $14 million. In 2013, Watson was British &quot;GQ&quot;″s Woman of the Year and topped &quot;Empire&quot;″s list of the 100 Sexiest Movie Stars. Watson was found to be the sixth most admired woman in the world in global surveys conducted by YouGov in 2020.

==Personal life==

When asked about her faith in 2014, Watson described herself as a spiritual universalist. In February 2016, Watson was appointed visiting fellow at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford University.

Watson was in a relationship with tech entrepreneur William Knight, from 2017 for two years. She dated actor Chord Overstreet in 2018, and corporate executive Brandon Green from 2021 to 2023.

On coping with intense fame from a young age, she has said that remaining rooted in her own identity helped her eventually &quot;find peace&quot;. In 2013, she had become certified to teach yoga and meditation. As part of this certification, she attended a week-long meditation course at a Canadian facility, in which residents are not allowed to speak, in order &quot;to figure out how to be at home with myself&quot;. Regarding her meditation training, she stated in an interview with &quot;Elle Australia&quot; that an uncertain future meant finding &quot;a way to always feel safe and at home within myself. Because I can never rely on a physical place.&quot;

==Filmography==
===Film===

===Television===
===Music videos===
=== Theme park attractions ===
==Authored articles==

== Recognition and accolades ==
Throughout her career, Watson has received several awards and nominations, including a Young Artist Award for her portrayal of Hermione Granger in &quot;Harry Potter and the Philosopher&#x27;s Stone&quot; (2001). Additionally, she received nominations for three Critics&#x27; Choice Movie Awards, four Empire Awards, 14 MTV Movie &amp; TV Awards (winning three), six People&#x27;s Choice Awards (winning two), 12 Teen Choice Awards (winning eight).

Watson&#x27;s efforts in activism and philanthropy, most notably her support of women&#x27;s rights and her role in launching the UN Women campaign HeForShe, has received widespread media recognition and acclaim. Watson was listed among the 100 most influential people in the world by &quot;Time&quot; magazine in 2015. She has received several recognitions for her style, from the Teen Choice Awards and British Fashion Awards.

== See also ==
* List of &quot;Harry Potter&quot; cast members
* List of women&#x27;s rights activists from the United Kingdom

==Notes==

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==
* 
* Emma Watson at UN Women&#x27;s official website
* Emma Watson at Kering&#x27;s official website
* Emma Watson&#x27;s 2014 Speech at United Nations Headquarters – Official UN Video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39476" start="0" end="28" title="Emma Watson" label="Emma Charlotte Duerre Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="101" end="113" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="118" end="135" title="independent films" label="independent films"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841920" start="154" end="178" title="List of awards and nominations received by Emma Watson" label="a selection of accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="192" end="210" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q110145" start="221" end="237" title="MTV Movie Awards" label="MTV Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="317" end="323" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="340" end="351" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="384" end="424" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="434" end="438" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="495" end="501" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453732" start="530" end="548" title="Forbes 30 Under 30" label="Forbes 30 under 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q610999" start="593" end="606" title="Dragon School" label="Dragon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="636" end="642" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505816" start="653" end="676" title="Stagecoach Theatre Arts" label="Stagecoach Theatre Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q174009" start="762" end="778" title="Hermione Granger" label="Hermione Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="786" end="822" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129480" start="951" end="963" title="Ballet Shoes (film)" label="Ballet Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q840353" start="1006" end="1028" title="The Tale of Despereaux (film)" label="The Tale of Despereaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q581859" start="1129" end="1149" title="My Week with Marilyn" label="My Week with Marilyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q675468" start="1234" end="1265" title="The Perks of Being a Wallflower (film)" label="The Perks of Being a Wallflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721500" start="1338" end="1351" title="Alexis Neiers" label="Alexis Neiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="1355" end="1368" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077738" start="1382" end="1396" title="The Bling Ring" label="The Bling Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q192762" start="1464" end="1480" title="Darren Aronofsky" label="Darren Aronofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q286868" start="1508" end="1512" title="Noah (2014 film)" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="1570" end="1613" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502489" start="1671" end="1676" title="Belle (Disney character)" label="Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946102" start="1727" end="1747" title="Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="1769" end="1778" title="Meg March" label="Meg March"/>
<link wikidata="Q271967" start="1782" end="1794" title="Greta Gerwig" label="Greta Gerwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881140" start="1828" end="1840" title="Little Women (2019 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="1968" end="1984" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1992" end="2014" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="2018" end="2036" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q641576" start="2081" end="2089" title="UN Women" label="UN Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583669" start="2090" end="2109" title="Goodwill ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207708" start="2150" end="2158" title="HeForShe" label="HeForShe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="2180" end="2195" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q47073015" start="2224" end="2241" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Up (organization)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Up UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="2290" end="2292" title="Group of Seven" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="2367" end="2381" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390107" start="2429" end="2437" title="Burberry" label="Burberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541268" start="2442" end="2449" title="Lancôme" label="Lancôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221487" start="2519" end="2530" title="People Tree Ltd." label="People Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q931207" start="2588" end="2594" title="Kering" label="Kering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371232" start="2653" end="2672" title="sustainable fashion" label="sustainable fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2762" end="2767" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q463951" start="2840" end="2856" title="Maisons-Laffitte" label="Maisons-Laffitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="2979" end="2990" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="3156" end="3162" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q610999" start="3209" end="3222" title="Dragon School" label="Dragon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505816" start="3335" end="3358" title="Stagecoach Theatre Arts" label="Stagecoach Theatre Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689654" start="3721" end="3738" title="Headington School" label="Headington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501560" start="3854" end="3858" title="GCSE" label="GCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="3955" end="3964" title="Advanced Subsidiary level" label="AS levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="4080" end="4088" title="GCE Advanced Level" label="A levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493854" start="4143" end="4151" title="gap year" label="gap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q161678" start="4200" end="4246" title="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1" label="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Parts 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q232009" start="4277" end="4278" title="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="4403" end="4419" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="4423" end="4447" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q780745" start="4600" end="4625" title="Worcester College, Oxford" label="Worcester College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q94084" start="4674" end="4700" title="Visiting Student Programme" label="Visiting Student Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q839150" start="4731" end="4755" title="The Ellen DeGeneres Show" label="The Ellen DeGeneres Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="5180" end="5198" title="Lady Margaret Hall" label="Lady Margaret Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q102438" start="5416" end="5461" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="5507" end="5520" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q43361" start="5541" end="5546" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q542554" start="5863" end="5874" title="screen test" label="screen test"/>
<link wikidata="Q683360" start="5926" end="5937" title="Hatty Jones" label="Hatty Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="6251" end="6270" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="6333" end="6336" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="6490" end="6508" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="6561" end="6581" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q102244" start="6679" end="6718" title="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="6827" end="6844" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="6919" end="6928" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079" start="6955" end="6969" title="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)" label="Chris Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q593268" start="7103" end="7108" title="Bravo (magazine)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102448" start="7152" end="7192" title="Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="7401" end="7412" title="A. O. Scott" label="A. O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7422" end="7440" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q179641" start="7684" end="7696" title="Draco Malfoy" label="Draco Malfoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="7957" end="7967" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q102225" start="7987" end="8022" title="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376474" start="8383" end="8397" title="Peter Bradshaw" label="Peter Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="8407" end="8419" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q487719" start="9017" end="9027" title="Bravo Otto" label="Otto Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098208" start="9303" end="9327" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Handbag" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Handbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="9404" end="9422" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q102235" start="9506" end="9547" title="Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559175" start="9701" end="9721" title="National Movie Award" label="National Movie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122565" start="9952" end="9982" title="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre" label="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129480" start="10831" end="10843" title="Ballet Shoes (film)" label="Ballet Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213562" start="10853" end="10874" title="television adaptation" label="television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638201" start="10882" end="10909" title="Ballet Shoes (novel)" label="1936 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q467058" start="10913" end="10929" title="Noel Streatfeild" label="Noel Streatfeild"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416621" start="10957" end="10974" title="Sandra Goldbacher" label="Sandra Goldbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="11223" end="11233" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="11341" end="11350" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q840353" start="11357" end="11379" title="The Tale of Despereaux (film)" label="The Tale of Despereaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833450" start="11422" end="11453" title="The Tale of Despereaux" label="the 2003 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q467066" start="11458" end="11472" title="Kate DiCamillo" label="Kate DiCamillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28755" start="11483" end="11500" title="Matthew Broderick" label="Matthew Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="11540" end="11555" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="11684" end="11705" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161687" start="11846" end="11884" title="Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="12238" end="12257" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="13018" end="13039" title="List of highest-grossing films" label="highest-grossing film"/>
<link wikidata="Q900597" start="13272" end="13286" title="One Night Only (band)" label="One Night Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217951" start="13314" end="13326" title="George Craig (musician)" label="George Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429051" start="13401" end="13427" title="Say You Don&amp;#x27;t Want It" label="Say You Don&amp;#x27;t Want It"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="13451" end="13460" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q581859" start="13578" end="13598" title="My Week with Marilyn" label="My Week with Marilyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28288" start="13698" end="13712" title="Eddie Redmayne" label="Eddie Redmayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070360" start="13774" end="13789" title="Stephen Chbosky" label="Stephen Chbosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q675468" start="13803" end="13834" title="The Perks of Being a Wallflower (film)" label="The Perks of Being a Wallflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723889" start="13855" end="13882" title="The Perks of Being a Wallflower" label="1999 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q221068" start="13986" end="13998" title="Logan Lerman" label="Logan Lerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="14110" end="14118" title="freshman" label="freshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="14190" end="14206" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="14303" end="14315" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077738" start="14562" end="14576" title="The Bling Ring" label="The Bling Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="14608" end="14621" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926723" start="14662" end="14672" title="Bling Ring" label="Bling Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721500" start="14731" end="14744" title="Alexis Neiers" label="Alexis Neiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="14994" end="15009" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q607363" start="15278" end="15293" title="This Is the End" label="This Is the End"/>
<link wikidata="Q220308" start="15322" end="15332" title="Seth Rogen" label="Seth Rogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="15334" end="15346" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15456" end="15462" title="Fuck#F-bomb" label="f-bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028692" start="15682" end="15698" title="Wives aboard Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Shem&amp;#x27;s wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q192762" start="15703" end="15719" title="Darren Aronofsky" label="Darren Aronofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q286868" start="15733" end="15737" title="Noah (2014 film)" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="15906" end="15920" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="15952" end="15962" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="16099" end="16110" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q129817" start="16227" end="16240" title="Russell Crowe" label="Russell Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="16408" end="16423" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15046091" start="16431" end="16460" title="Cinderella (2015 Disney film)" label="live-action Disney adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191753" start="16470" end="16480" title="Cinderella (1950 film)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217306" start="16612" end="16622" title="Lily James" label="Lily James"/>
<link wikidata="Q292972" start="16755" end="16769" title="Ólafur Arnalds" label="Ólafur Arnalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="16828" end="16838" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="16840" end="16857" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q315756" start="16859" end="16869" title="Mike Leigh" label="Mike Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q232072" start="16871" end="16890" title="Julia Louis-Dreyfus" label="Julia Louis-Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="16896" end="16908" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q849771" start="16935" end="16951" title="Britannia Awards" label="Britannia Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18561606" start="17241" end="17248" title="Colonia Dignidad (film)" label="Colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58592" start="17265" end="17277" title="Daniel Brühl" label="Daniel Brühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q382278" start="17282" end="17297" title="Michael Nyqvist" label="Michael Nyqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16672410" start="17309" end="17319" title="Regression (film)" label="Regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q274070" start="17329" end="17347" title="Alejandro Amenábar" label="Alejandro Amenábar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484615" start="17359" end="17370" title="Ethan Hawke" label="Ethan Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q212790" start="17412" end="17425" title="David Thewlis" label="David Thewlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360590" start="17664" end="17683" title="The Vicar of Dibley" label="The Vicar of Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502489" start="17978" end="17983" title="Belle (Disney character)" label="Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946102" start="17991" end="18025" title="Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)" label="2017 live-action Disney adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179673" start="18035" end="18055" title="Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q361336" start="18074" end="18085" title="Bill Condon" label="Bill Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q958385" start="18109" end="18120" title="Dan Stevens" label="Dan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559802" start="18128" end="18133" title="Beast (Disney character)" label="Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q885342" start="18270" end="18278" title="bloomers" label="bloomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190868" start="18283" end="18287" title="boot" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958965" start="18390" end="18426" title="2017 in film" label="second-highest-grossing film of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419726" start="18520" end="18540" title="Profit sharing" label="profit participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201882" start="18617" end="18631" title="Richard Roeper" label="Richard Roeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="18645" end="18662" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="18957" end="18966" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010849" start="18974" end="18989" title="The Circle (2017 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q589497" start="18993" end="19004" title="Dave Eggers" label="Dave Eggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385288" start="19023" end="19033" title="The Circle (Eggers novel)" label="The Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="19149" end="19161" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="19276" end="19285" title="Meg March" label="Meg March"/>
<link wikidata="Q271967" start="19289" end="19301" title="Greta Gerwig" label="Greta Gerwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881140" start="19309" end="19319" title="Little Women (2019 film)" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="19323" end="19340" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="19360" end="19372" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q228603" start="19397" end="19410" title="Saoirse Ronan" label="Saoirse Ronan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277803" start="19412" end="19425" title="Florence Pugh" label="Florence Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="19427" end="19437" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877770" start="19439" end="19456" title="Timothée Chalamet" label="Timothée Chalamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="19462" end="19474" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="19840" end="19846" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332499" start="19941" end="19955" title="Straight man" label="straight woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17649781" start="20723" end="20732" title="clickbait" label="clickbait"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314010" start="20784" end="20801" title="social distancing" label="social distancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="20813" end="20830" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="20935" end="20942" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20964" end="21013" title="Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts" label="Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="21088" end="21103" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272618" start="21737" end="21747" title="Teen Vogue" label="Teen Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="21886" end="21901" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="21917" end="21923" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q390107" start="22059" end="22067" title="Burberry" label="Burberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="22401" end="22405" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158067" start="22415" end="22437" title="Vivienne Westwood" label="Dame Vivienne Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541268" start="22549" end="22556" title="Lancôme" label="Lancôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221487" start="22630" end="22641" title="People Tree Ltd." label="People Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q188485" start="22645" end="22655" title="fair trade" label="fair trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="23115" end="23127" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="23145" end="23151" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231404" start="23592" end="23604" title="fast fashion" label="fast fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="23808" end="23823" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q456638" start="23877" end="23886" title="Elie Saab" label="Elie Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="23893" end="23906" title="haute couture" label="haute couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160108" start="24088" end="24100" title="English rose (epithet)" label="English rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638103" start="24228" end="24250" title="British Fashion Awards" label="British Fashion Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="24277" end="24290" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769592" start="24292" end="24304" title="Amal Clooney" label="Amal Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q212531" start="24306" end="24315" title="Kate Moss" label="Kate Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371232" start="24394" end="24413" title="sustainable fashion" label="sustainable fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068628" start="24486" end="24498" title="Calvin Klein (company)" label="Calvin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16743915" start="24516" end="24524" title="Met Gala" label="Met Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682865" start="24953" end="24968" title="Vogue Australia" label="Vogue Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64539" start="25035" end="25050" title="Peter Lindbergh" label="Peter Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="25234" end="25247" title="carbon impact" label="carbon impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q931207" start="25375" end="25381" title="Kering" label="Kering"/>
<link wikidata="Q178516" start="25427" end="25432" title="Gucci" label="Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282172" start="25437" end="25455" title="Yves Saint Laurent (brand)" label="Yves Saint Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371822" start="25531" end="25553" title="François-Henri Pinault" label="François-Henri Pinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q931207" start="25881" end="25898" title="Kering Foundation" label="Kering Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="25916" end="25935" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q193136" start="26097" end="26102" title="Prada" label="Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="26419" end="26427" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q641576" start="26547" end="26555" title="UN Women" label="UN Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583669" start="26556" end="26575" title="Goodwill ambassador" label="Goodwill ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="26646" end="26661" title="Headquarters of the United Nations" label="UN Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207708" start="26711" end="26719" title="HeForShe" label="HeForShe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="26760" end="26775" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906864" start="27388" end="27400" title="fashion blog" label="fashion blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q540935" start="27698" end="27720" title="Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka" label="Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q32732" start="27930" end="27946" title="Malala Yousafzai" label="Malala Yousafzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q283417" start="28157" end="28175" title="Legislative Palace of Uruguay" label="Legislative Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="28179" end="28189" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="28290" end="28305" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055478" start="28388" end="28398" title="Paddington (film)" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403284" start="28449" end="28507" title="National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930073" start="28534" end="28558" title="Ms. Foundation for Women" label="Ms. Foundation for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="28702" end="28722" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866663" start="28792" end="28798" title="AskMen" label="AskMen"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="28984" end="29004" title="Time 100" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q441164" start="29150" end="29163" title="Jill Abramson" label="Jill Abramson"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="29310" end="29324" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q19526" start="29329" end="29341" title="Maya Angelou" label="Maya Angelou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359213" start="29400" end="29409" title="Goodreads" label="Goodreads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667619" start="29916" end="29951" title="International Day of the Girl Child" label="International Day of the Girl Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016489" start="30694" end="30709" title="white privilege" label="white privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351976" start="30751" end="30776" title="British Vogue" label="British &amp;quot;Vogue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47073015" start="31273" end="31290" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Up (organization)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Up UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475296" start="31325" end="31357" title="71st British Academy Film Awards" label="71st British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="31482" end="31504" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="31509" end="31552" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43228264" start="31845" end="31869" title="75th Golden Globe Awards" label="2018 Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482145" start="31915" end="31923" title="helpline" label="helpline"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="31953" end="31970" title="sexual harassment" label="sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="32118" end="32120" title="Group of Seven" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="32168" end="32187" title="president of France" label="president of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="32189" end="32204" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="32343" end="32357" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188190" start="32405" end="32418" title="Élysée Palace" label="Élysée Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q54749653" start="32457" end="32471" title="45th G7 summit" label="45th G7 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622207" start="32530" end="32540" title="Paris Lees" label="Paris Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517455" start="32569" end="32587" title="transgender rights" label="transgender rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="32609" end="32616" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32662" end="32688" title="Politics of J. K. Rowling#Transgender people" label="remarks on gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="32730" end="32748" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="32852" end="32873" title="George Floyd protests" label="George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q95994828" start="32907" end="32923" title="Blackout Tuesday" label="Blackout Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="32961" end="32968" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735129" start="32982" end="32997" title="Reni Eddo-Lodge" label="Reni Eddo-Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050412" start="33019" end="33076" title="Why I&amp;#x27;m No Longer Talking to White People About Race" label="Why I&amp;#x27;m No Longer Talking to White People About Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="33186" end="33208" title="London Underground Map" label="London Underground Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686984" start="33406" end="33421" title="Haymarket Books" label="Haymarket Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="33425" end="33455" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q68580968" start="33602" end="33647" title="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="33824" end="33837" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919440" start="34081" end="34092" title="Danny Danon" label="Danny Danon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663804" start="34209" end="34220" title="Gilad Erdan" label="Gilad Erdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80590115" start="34281" end="34295" title="Leah Greenberg" label="Leah Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096623" start="34324" end="34343" title="Indivisible Project" label="Indivisible Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="34348" end="34366" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q336455" start="34372" end="34385" title="Sayeeda Warsi" label="Sayeeda Warsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="34421" end="34435" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="34437" end="34449" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q234128" start="34451" end="34467" title="Miriam Margolyes" label="Miriam Margolyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179576" start="34469" end="34487" title="Gael García Bernal" label="Gael García Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q732661" start="34489" end="34502" title="Peter Capaldi" label="Peter Capaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853137" start="34504" end="34516" title="Maxine Peake" label="Maxine Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q171363" start="34518" end="34533" title="Viggo Mortensen" label="Viggo Mortensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="34535" end="34547" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="34552" end="34565" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479527" start="34662" end="34683" title="environmental justice" label="environmental justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="34688" end="34713" title="climate change mitigation" label="climate change mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="34749" end="34764" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="34778" end="34794" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="34923" end="34932" title="CO2 emission" label="emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q68580968" start="35015" end="35060" title="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="35064" end="35071" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q56434717" start="35152" end="35166" title="Greta Thunberg" label="Greta Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136974" start="35220" end="35230" title="role model" label="role model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971501" start="35476" end="35500" title="National Citizen Service" label="National Citizen Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="35741" end="35756" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261816" start="35915" end="35929" title="Derek Blasberg" label="Derek Blasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q259507" start="36144" end="36154" title="bell hooks" label="bell hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="36982" end="36990" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068677" start="37021" end="37027" title="selfie" label="selfie"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="37513" end="37515" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="37559" end="37565" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470929" start="37707" end="37713" title="YouGov" label="YouGov"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="37819" end="37831" title="Universalism" label="universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q94084" start="37872" end="37887" title="Visiting scholar" label="visiting fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="37891" end="37909" title="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford" label="Lady Margaret Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="37911" end="37928" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q53714" start="38040" end="38056" title="Chord Overstreet" label="Chord Overstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="38617" end="38631" title="Elle Australia" label="Elle Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="39026" end="39044" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q174009" start="39066" end="39082" title="Hermione Granger" label="Hermione Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q102438" start="39092" end="39137" title="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Philosopher&amp;#x27;s Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585305" start="39201" end="39234" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Awards" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q24616" start="39241" end="39254" title="Empire Awards" label="Empire Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q110145" start="39259" end="39284" title="MTV Movie &amp;amp; TV Awards" label="MTV Movie &amp;amp; TV Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="39306" end="39333" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q391629" start="39352" end="39370" title="Teen Choice Awards" label="Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="39469" end="39488" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="39519" end="39527" title="United Nations" label="UN Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207708" start="39537" end="39545" title="HeForShe" label="HeForShe"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="39630" end="39670" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="39680" end="39684" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q391629" start="39771" end="39789" title="Teen Choice Awards" label="Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638103" start="39794" end="39816" title="British Fashion Awards" label="British Fashion Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q669100" start="39836" end="39881" title="List of Harry Potter cast members" label="List of &amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot; cast members"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39884" end="39945" title="List of women&amp;#x27;s rights activists#United Kingdom" label="List of women&amp;#x27;s rights activists from the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q641576" start="40038" end="40046" title="UN Women" label="UN Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q931207" start="40088" end="40094" title="Kering" label="Kering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149245" wikidata="Q133405" url="?curid=149245" title="Bee Gees">
<text>The Bee Gees 
were a musical group formed in 1958 by brothers Barry, Robin, and Maurice Gibb. The trio were especially successful in popular music in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and later as prominent performers in the disco music era in the mid-to-late 1970s. The group sang recognisable three-part tight harmonies: Robin&#x27;s clear vibrato lead vocals were a hallmark of their earlier hits, while Barry&#x27;s R&amp;B falsetto became their signature sound during the mid-to-late 1970s and 1980s. The group wrote all their own original material, as well as writing and producing several major hits for other artists, and are regarded as one of the most important and influential acts in pop-music history. They have been referred to in the media as The Disco Kings, Britain&#x27;s First Family of Harmony, and The Kings of Dance Music.

Born on the Isle of Man to English parents, the Gibb brothers lived in Chorlton, Manchester, England, until the late 1950s. There, in 1955, they formed the skiffle/rock and roll group the Rattlesnakes. The family then moved to Redcliffe, in the Moreton Bay Region, Queensland, Australia, and later to Cribb Island. After achieving their first chart successes in Australia as the Bee Gees, they returned to the UK in January 1967, when producer Robert Stigwood began promoting them to a worldwide audience. The Bee Gees&#x27; &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; soundtrack (1977) was the turning point of their career, with both the film and soundtrack having a cultural impact throughout the world, enhancing the disco scene&#x27;s mainstream appeal. They won five Grammy Awards for &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot;, including Album of the Year.

The Bee Gees have sold over 120 million records worldwide, placing them among the best-selling music artists of all time, as well as the most successful trio in the history of contemporary music. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1997; the Hall&#x27;s citation stating at the time, &quot;Only Elvis Presley, the Beatles, Michael Jackson, Garth Brooks and Paul McCartney have outsold the Bee Gees.&quot; With nine number-one hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, the Bee Gees are the third-most successful band in &quot;Billboard&quot; charts history behind only the Beatles and the Supremes. Following Maurice&#x27;s sudden death in 2003 aged 53, Barry and Robin retired from the group after 45 years of activity. However, in 2009 Robin announced that he and Barry had agreed the Bee Gees would re-form and perform again. Robin died in 2012, aged 62, and Colin Petersen died in 2024, aged 78, leaving Barry, Vince Melouney, and Geoff Bridgford as the surviving members of the group.

==History==
===1955–1966: Music origins, Bee Gees formation and popularity in Australia===
Born on the Isle of Man in the late 1940s, the Gibb brothers moved to their father Hugh Gibb&#x27;s home town Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Manchester, England, in 1955. They formed a skiffle/rock-and-roll group, the Rattlesnakes, which consisted of Barry on guitar and vocals, Robin and Maurice on vocals, and friends Paul Frost on drums and Kenny Horrocks on tea-chest bass. In December 1957, the boys began to sing in harmony. The story is told that they were going to lip-sync to a record in the local Gaumont cinema (as other children had done on previous weeks), but, as they were running to the theatre, the fragile shellac 78-RPM record broke. The brothers had to sing live but received such a positive response from the audience that they decided to pursue a singing career. In May 1958, the Rattlesnakes disbanded when Frost and Horrocks left, so the Gibb brothers then formed Wee Johnny Hayes and the Blue Cats, with Barry as &quot;Johnny Hayes&quot;.

In August 1958, the Gibb family, including older sister Lesley and infant brother Andy (born in March 1958), emigrated to Australia and settled in Redcliffe, Queensland, just north-east of Brisbane. The young brothers began performing to raise pocket money. Speedway promoter and driver Bill Goode, who had hired the brothers to entertain the crowd at the Redcliffe Speedway in 1960, introduced them to Brisbane radio-presenter jockey Bill Gates. The crowd at the speedway would throw money onto the track for the boys, who generally performed during the interval of meetings (usually on the back of a truck that drove around the track) and, in a deal with Goode, any money they collected from the crowd they were allowed to keep. Gates named the group the &quot;BGs&quot; (later changed to &quot;Bee Gees&quot;) after his, Goode&#x27;s and Barry Gibb&#x27;s initials. The name was not specifically a reference to &quot;Brothers Gibb&quot;, despite popular belief.

During the next few years, they began working regularly at resorts on the Queensland coast. Through his songwriting, Barry sparked the interest of Australian star Col Joye, who helped the brothers get a recording deal in 1963 with Festival Records subsidiary Leedon Records under the name &quot;Bee Gees&quot;. The three released two or three singles a year, while Barry supplied additional songs to other Australian artists. In 1962 the Bee Gees were chosen as the supporting act for Chubby Checker&#x27;s concert at the Sydney Stadium.

From 1963 to 1966, the Gibb family lived at 171 Bunnerong Road, Maroubra, in Sydney. Just before his death, Robin Gibb recorded the song &quot;Sydney&quot; about the brothers&#x27; experience of living in that city. It was released on his posthumous album &quot;50 St. Catherine&#x27;s Drive&quot;. The house was demolished in 2016.

A minor hit in 1965, &quot;Wine and Women&quot;, led to the group&#x27;s first LP, &quot;The Bee Gees Sing and Play 14 Barry Gibb Songs&quot;. By 1966 Festival Records was, however, on the verge of dropping them from the Leedon roster because of their perceived lack of commercial success. At this time the brothers met the American-born songwriter, producer, and entrepreneur Nat Kipner, who had just been appointed A&amp;R manager of a new independent label, Spin Records. Kipner briefly took over as the group&#x27;s manager and successfully negotiated their transfer to Spin in exchange for granting Festival the Australian distribution rights to the group&#x27;s recordings. Through Kipner the Bee Gees met engineer-producer, Ossie Byrne, who produced (or co-produced with Kipner) many of the earlier Spin recordings, most of which were cut at his own small, self-built St Clair Studio in the Sydney suburb of Hurstville. Byrne gave the Gibb brothers virtually unlimited access to St Clair Studio over a period of several months in mid-1966. The group later acknowledged that this enabled them to significantly improve their skills as recording artists. During this productive time, they recorded a large batch of original material—including the song that became their first major hit, &quot;Spicks and Specks&quot; (on which Byrne played the trumpet coda)—as well as cover versions of current hits by overseas acts such as the Beatles. They regularly collaborated with other local musicians, including members of beat band Steve &amp; The Board, led by Steve Kipner, Nat&#x27;s teenage son.

Frustrated by their lack of success, the Gibbs began their return journey to England on 4 January 1967, with Ossie Byrne travelling with them. While at sea in January 1967, the Gibbs learned that &quot;Go-Set&quot;, Australia&#x27;s most popular and influential music newspaper, had declared &quot;Spicks and Specks&quot; the &quot;Best Single of the Year&quot;.

===1967–1969: International fame and touring years===
====&quot;Bee Gees&#x27; 1st&quot;, &quot;Horizontal&quot; and &quot;Idea&quot;====
Before their departure from Australia to England, Hugh Gibb sent demos to Brian Epstein, who managed the Beatles and directed NEMS, a British music store. Epstein passed the demo tapes to Robert Stigwood, who had recently joined NEMS. After an audition with Stigwood in February 1967, the Bee Gees signed a five-year contract whereby Polydor Records would release their records in the UK, and Atco Records would do so in the US. Work quickly began on the group&#x27;s first international album, and Stigwood launched a promotional campaign to coincide with its release.

Stigwood proclaimed that the Bee Gees were &quot;The most significant new musical talent of 1967&quot;, thus initiating the comparison of the Bee Gees to the Beatles. Before recording the first album, the group expanded to include Colin Petersen and Vince Melouney. &quot;New York Mining Disaster 1941&quot;, their second British single (their first-issued UK 45 rpm was &quot;Spicks and Specks&quot;), was issued to radio stations with a blank white label listing only the song title. Some DJs immediately assumed this was a new single by the Beatles and started playing the song in heavy rotation. This helped the song climb into the top 20 in both the UK and US.

No such chicanery was needed to boost the Bee Gees&#x27; next single, &quot;To Love Somebody&quot;, into the US Top 20. Originally written for Otis Redding, &quot;To Love Somebody&quot;, a soulful ballad sung by Barry, has since become a pop standard recorded by many singers. Another single, &quot;Holiday&quot;, released in the US, peaked at No. 16.

The parent album, &quot;Bee Gees 1st&quot; (their first internationally), peaked at No. 7 in the US and No. 8 in the UK. Bill Shepherd was credited as the arranger. After recording that album, the group recorded their first BBC session at the Playhouse Theatre, Northumberland Avenue, in London, with Bill Bebb as the producer, and they performed three songs. That session is included on &quot;BBC Sessions: 1967–1973&quot; (2008). After the release of &quot;Bee Gees&#x27; 1st&quot;, the group was first introduced in New York as &quot;the English surprise&quot;. At that time, the band made their first British TV appearance on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. Maurice recalled:

In late 1967, they began recording their second album. On 21 December 1967, in a live broadcast from Liverpool Anglican Cathedral for a Christmas television special called &quot;How On Earth?,&quot; they performed their own song, &quot;Thank You For Christmas&quot; which was written especially for the programme, as well as a medley of the traditional Christmas carols &quot;Silent Night&quot;, &quot;The First Noel&quot; and &quot;Mary&#x27;s Boy Child&quot; (the latter incorrectly noted as &quot;Hark! The Herald Angels Sing&quot; on tape boxes and subsequent release). The songs were all pre-recorded on 1 December 1967 and the group lip-synched their performance. The recordings were eventually released on the &quot;Horizontal&quot; reissue bonus disc in 2008. The folk group the Settlers and Radio 1 disc-jockey, Kenny Everett, also performed on the programme, which was presented by the Reverend Edward H. Patey, dean of the cathedral.

January 1968 began with a promotional trip to the US. Los Angeles Police were on alert in anticipation of a Beatles-type reception, and special security arrangements were being put in place. In February, &quot;Horizontal&quot; repeated the success of their first album, featuring the group&#x27;s first UK No. 1 single &quot;Massachusetts&quot; (a No. 11 US hit) and the No. 7 UK single &quot;World&quot;. The sound of the album &quot;Horizontal&quot; had a more &quot;rock&quot; sound than their previous release, although ballads like &quot;And the Sun Will Shine&quot; and &quot;Really and Sincerely&quot; were included. The &quot;Horizontal&quot; album reached No. 12 in the US and No. 16 in the UK.

With the release of &quot;Horizontal&quot;, they also embarked on a Scandinavian tour with concerts in Copenhagen. Around the same time, the Bee Gees turned down an offer to write and perform the soundtrack for the film &quot;Wonderwall&quot;, according to director Joe Massot.

On 27 February 1968, the band, backed by the 17-piece Massachusetts String Orchestra, began their first tour of Germany with two concerts at Hamburg Musikhalle. In March 1968, the band was supported by Procol Harum (who had a hit &quot;A Whiter Shade of Pale&quot;) on their German tour. As Robin&#x27;s partner Molly Hullis recalls: &quot;Germans were wilder than the fans in England at the heights of Beatlemania.&quot; The tour schedule took them to 11 venues in as many days with 18 concerts played, finishing with a brace of shows at the Stadthalle, Braunschweig.

After that, the group was off to Switzerland. As Maurice described it:

On 17 March, the band performed &quot;Words&quot; on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;. The other artists who performed on that night&#x27;s show were Lucille Ball, George Hamilton and Fran Jeffries. On 27 March 1968, the band performed at the Royal Albert Hall in London.
Two more singles followed in early 1968: the ballad &quot;Words&quot; (No. 8 UK, No. 15 US) and the double A-sided single &quot;Jumbo&quot; backed with &quot;The Singer Sang His Song&quot;. &quot;Jumbo&quot; only reached No. 25 in the UK and No. 57 in the US. The Bee Gees felt &quot;The Singer Sang His Song&quot; was the stronger of the two sides, an opinion shared by listeners in the Netherlands who made it a No. 3 hit.

Further Bee Gees chart singles followed: &quot;I&#x27;ve Gotta Get a Message to You&quot;, their second UK No. 1 (No. 8 US), and &quot;I Started a Joke&quot; (No. 6 US), both culled from the band&#x27;s third album &quot;Idea&quot;. &quot;Idea&quot; reached No. 4 in the UK and was another top 20 album in the US (No. 17).

After the tour and TV special to promote the album, Vince Melouney left the group, desiring to play more of a blues style music than the Gibbs were writing. Melouney did achieve one feat while with the Bee Gees: his &quot;Such a Shame&quot; (from &quot;Idea&quot;) is the only song on any Bee Gees album not written by a Gibb brother.

The band were due to begin a seven-week tour of the US on 2 August 1968, but on 27 July, Robin collapsed and fell unconscious. He was admitted to a London nursing home for nervous exhaustion, and the American tour was postponed. The band began recording their sixth album, which resulted in their spending a week recording at Atlantic Studios in New York. Robin, still feeling poorly, missed the New York sessions, but the rest of the band put away instrumental tracks and demos.

====&quot;Odessa&quot;, &quot;Cucumber Castle&quot; and break-up====

By 1969, Robin began to feel that Stigwood had been favouring Barry as the frontman.

The Bee Gees&#x27; performances in early 1969 on the &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; and &quot;The Tom Jones Show&quot;, singing &quot;I Started a Joke&quot; and &quot;First of May&quot; as a medley, were the final appearances of the group with Robin.

Their next album, which was to have been a concept album called &quot;Masterpeace&quot;, evolved into the double-album &quot;Odessa&quot;. Most rock critics felt this was the best Bee Gees album of the 1960s with its progressive rock feel on the title track, the country-flavoured &quot;Marley Purt Drive&quot; and &quot;Give Your Best&quot;, and ballads such as &quot;Melody Fair&quot; and &quot;First of May&quot; (the last of which became the only single from the album and a UK # 6 hit). Feeling the flipside, &quot;Lamplight&quot;, should have been the A-side, Robin quit the group in mid-1969 and launched a solo career.

The first of many Bee Gees compilations, &quot;Best of Bee Gees&quot;, was released featuring the non-LP single &quot;Words&quot; plus the Australian hit &quot;Spicks and Specks&quot;. The single &quot;Tomorrow Tomorrow&quot; was also released and was a moderate hit in the UK, where it reached No. 23, but it was only No. 54 in the US. The compilation reached the top 10 in both the UK and the US.

While Robin pursued his solo career, Barry, Maurice and Petersen continued as the Bee Gees on their next album, &quot;Cucumber Castle&quot;. The band made their debut performance without Robin at Talk of the Town. They had recruited their sister, Lesley, to participate in at least one performance at this time as a replacement for Robin. To accompany the album, they also filmed a TV special with Frankie Howerd and cameos from several other contemporary pop and rock stars, which aired on the BBC in December 1970. Petersen played drums on the tracks recorded for the album but was fired from the group after filming began (he went on to form the Humpy Bong with Jonathan Kelly). His parts were edited out of the final cut of the film and Pentangle drummer Terry Cox was recruited to complete the recording of songs for the album. A proposed feature film starring the group, &quot;Lord Kitchener&#x27;s Little Drummer Boys&quot;, was not made.

After the album was released in early 1970, it seemed that the Bee Gees were finished. The leadoff single, &quot;Don&#x27;t Forget to Remember&quot;, was a big hit in the UK, reaching No. 2, but only reached No. 73 in the US. The next two singles, &quot;I.O.I.O.&quot; and &quot;If I Only Had My Mind on Something Else&quot;, barely scraped the charts. On 1 December 1969, Barry and Maurice parted ways professionally.

Maurice started to record his first solo album, &quot;The Loner&quot;, which was not released. Meanwhile, he released the single &quot;Railroad&quot; and starred in the West End musical &quot;Sing a Rude Song&quot;. In February 1970, Barry recorded a solo album which never saw official release either, although &quot;I&#x27;ll Kiss Your Memory&quot; was released as a single backed by &quot;This Time&quot; without much interest. Meanwhile, Robin saw chart success in Europe and Australia with his UK No. 2 hit &quot;Saved by the Bell&quot; from the album &quot;Robin&#x27;s Reign&quot;.

===1970–1974: Reformation===

In mid 1970, according to Barry, &quot;Robin rang me in Spain where I was on holiday [saying] &#x27;let&#x27;s do it again&#x27;&quot;. By 21 August 1970, after they had reunited, Barry announced that the Bee Gees &quot;are there and they will never, ever part again&quot;. Maurice said, &quot;We just discussed it and re-formed. We want to apologise publicly to Robin for the things that have been said.&quot; Earlier, in June 1970, Robin and Maurice recorded a dozen songs before Barry joined and included two songs that were on their reunion album. Around the same time, Barry and Robin were about to publish the book &quot;On the Other Hand&quot;. They also recruited Geoff Bridgford as the group&#x27;s official drummer. Bridgford had previously worked with the Groove and Tin Tin and played drums on Maurice&#x27;s unreleased first solo album.

In 1970, &quot;2 Years On&quot; was released in October in the US and November in the UK. The lead single &quot;Lonely Days&quot; reached No. 3 in the United States, promoted by appearances on &quot;The Johnny Cash Show,&quot; &quot;Johnny Carson&#x27;s Tonight Show&quot;, &quot;The Andy Williams Show&quot;, &quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot; and &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;.

Their ninth album, &quot;Trafalgar&quot;, was released in late 1971. The single &quot;How Can You Mend a Broken Heart&quot; was their first to hit No. 1 on the US charts, while &quot;Israel&quot; reached No. 22 in the Netherlands. &quot;How Can You Mend a Broken Heart&quot; also brought the Bee Gees their first Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals. Later that year, the group&#x27;s songs were included in the soundtrack for the film &quot;Melody&quot;.

In 1972, they hit No. 16 in the US with the non-album single &quot;My World&quot;, backed by Maurice&#x27;s composition &quot;On Time&quot;. Another 1972 single, &quot;Run to Me&quot; from the LP &quot;To Whom It May Concern&quot;, returned them to the UK top 10 for the first time in three years. Bridgford left the group partway through recording, and the band chose not to hire a new member to replace him. The resulting three-piece lineup of Barry, Robin and Maurice would remain unbroken for the remainder of the band&#x27;s active years. On 24 November 1972, the band headlined the &quot;Woodstock of the West&quot; Festival at the Los Angeles Coliseum (which was a West Coast answer to Woodstock in New York), which also featured Sly and the Family Stone, Stevie Wonder and the Eagles. Also in 1972, the group sang &quot;Hey Jude&quot; with Wilson Pickett.

By 1973, however, the Bee Gees were in a rut. The album &quot;Life in a Tin Can&quot;, released on Robert Stigwood&#x27;s newly formed RSO Records, and its lead-off single, &quot;Saw a New Morning&quot;, sold poorly with the single peaking at No. 94. This was followed by an unreleased album (known as &quot;A Kick in the Head Is Worth Eight in the Pants&quot;). They also released an album only available in South America, &quot;Kitty Can&quot;. Another compilation album, &quot;Best of Bee Gees, Volume 2&quot;, was released in 1973, although it did not repeat the success of Volume 1. On 6 April 1973 episode of &quot;The Midnight Special&quot; they performed &quot;Money (That&#x27;s What I Want)&quot; with Jerry Lee Lewis. Also in 1973, they were invited by Chuck Berry to perform two songs with him onstage at &quot;The Midnight Special&quot;: &quot;Johnny B. Goode&quot; and &quot;Reelin&#x27; and Rockin&#x27;&quot;.

After a tour of the United States in early 1974 and a Canadian tour later in the year, the group ended up playing small clubs. As Barry joked, &quot;We ended up in, have you ever heard of Batley&#x27;s the variety club in (West Yorkshire) England?&quot;.

On the advice of Ahmet Ertegun, head of their US label Atlantic Records, Stigwood arranged for the group to record with soul music producer Arif Mardin. The resulting LP, &quot;Mr. Natural&quot;, included fewer ballads and foreshadowed the R&amp;B direction of the rest of their career. When it, too, failed to attract much interest, Mardin encouraged them to work within the soul music style. The brothers attempted to assemble a live stage band that could replicate their studio sound. Lead guitarist Alan Kendall had come on board in 1971 but did not have much to do until &quot;Mr. Natural&quot;. For that album, they added drummer Dennis Bryon, and they later added ex-Strawbs keyboard player Blue Weaver, completing the Bee Gees band that lasted through the late 1970s. Maurice, who had previously performed on piano, guitar, harpsichord, electric piano, organ, mellotron and bass guitar, as well as mandolin and Moog synthesiser, by then confined himself to bass onstage.

===1975–1979: Turning to disco===
====&quot;Main Course&quot; and &quot;Children of the World&quot;====

At Eric Clapton&#x27;s suggestion, the brothers moved to Miami, Florida, early in 1975 to record at Criteria Studios. After starting off with ballads, they eventually heeded the urging of Mardin and Stigwood, and crafted more dance-oriented disco songs, including their second US No. 1, &quot;Jive Talkin&#x27;&quot;, along with US No. 7 &quot;Nights on Broadway&quot;. The band liked the resulting new sound. This time the public agreed by sending the LP &quot;Main Course&quot; up the charts. This album included the first Bee Gees songs wherein Barry used falsetto, something that became a trademark of the band. This was also the first Bee Gees album to have two US top-10 singles since 1968&#x27;s &quot;Idea&quot;. &quot;Main Course&quot; also became their first charting R&amp;B album.

On the Bee Gees&#x27; appearance on &quot;The Midnight Special&quot; in 1975, to promote &quot;Main Course&quot;, they sang &quot;To Love Somebody&quot; with Helen Reddy. Around the same time, the Bee Gees recorded three Beatles covers—&quot;Golden Slumbers/Carry That Weight&quot;, &quot;She Came in Through the Bathroom Window&quot; with Barry providing lead vocals, and &quot;Sun King&quot; with Maurice providing lead vocals, for the unsuccessful musical/documentary &quot;All This and World War II&quot;.

The next album, &quot;Children of the World&quot;, released in September 1976, was filled with Barry&#x27;s new-found falsetto and Weaver&#x27;s synthesizer disco licks. The first single from the album was &quot;You Should Be Dancing&quot;, which features percussion work by musician Stephen Stills. The song pushed the Bee Gees to a level of stardom they had not previously achieved in the US, though their new R&amp;B/disco sound was not as popular with some diehard fans. The pop ballad &quot;Love So Right&quot; reached No. 3 in the US, and &quot;Boogie Child&quot; reached US No. 12 in January 1977. The album peaked at No. 8 in the US.

====&quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; and &quot;Spirits Having Flown&quot;====
Following a successful live album, &quot;Here at Last... Bee Gees... Live&quot;, the Bee Gees agreed with Stigwood to participate in the creation of the &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; soundtrack. It was a turning point in their career. The cultural impact of both the film and the soundtrack was significant throughout the world, and epitomized the disco phenomenon on both sides of the Atlantic.

The band&#x27;s involvement in the film did not begin until post-production. As John Travolta asserted, &quot;The Bee Gees weren&#x27;t even involved in the movie in the beginning ... I was dancing to Stevie Wonder and Boz Scaggs.&quot; Producer Robert Stigwood commissioned the Bee Gees to create the songs for the film. The brothers wrote the songs &quot;virtually in a single weekend&quot; at Château d&#x27;Hérouville studio in France. Barry Gibb remembered the reaction when Stigwood and music supervisor Bill Oakes arrived and listened to the demos:

Bill Oakes, who supervised the soundtrack, asserts that &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; did not begin the disco craze but rather prolonged it: &quot;Disco had run its course. These days, &quot;Fever&quot; is credited with kicking off the whole disco thing—it really didn&#x27;t. Truth is, it breathed new life into a genre that was actually dying.&quot;

Three Bee Gees singles—&quot;How Deep Is Your Love&quot; (US No. 1, UK No. 3), &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot; (US No. 1, UK No. 4) and &quot;Night Fever&quot; (US No. 1, UK No. 1)—charted high in many countries around the world, launching the most popular period of the disco era. They also penned the song &quot;If I Can&#x27;t Have You&quot;, which became a US No. 1 hit for Yvonne Elliman, while the Bee Gees&#x27; own version was the B-side of &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;. Such was the popularity of &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; that two different versions of the song &quot;More Than a Woman&quot; received airplay, one by the Bee Gees, which was relegated to an album track, and another by Tavares, which was the hit.

During a nine-month period beginning in the Christmas season of 1977, seven songs written by the brothers held the No. 1 position on the US charts for 27 of 37 consecutive weeks: three of their own releases, two for brother Andy Gibb, the Yvonne Elliman single, and &quot;Grease&quot;, performed by Frankie Valli.

Fuelled by the film&#x27;s success, the soundtrack broke multiple industry records, becoming the highest-selling album in recording history to that point. With more than 40 million copies sold, &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; is among music&#x27;s top five best selling soundtrack albums. , it is calculated as the fourth highest-selling album worldwide.

In March 1978, the Bee Gees held the top two positions on the US charts with &quot;Night Fever&quot; and &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;, the first time this had happened since the Beatles. On the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart for 25 March 1978, five songs written by the Gibbs were in the US top 10 at the same time: &quot;Night Fever&quot;, &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;, &quot;If I Can&#x27;t Have You&quot;, &quot;Emotion&quot; and &quot;Love Is Thicker Than Water&quot;. Such chart dominance had not been seen since April 1964, when the Beatles had all five of the top five American singles. Barry Gibb became the only songwriter to have four consecutive number-one hits in the US, breaking the John Lennon and Paul McCartney 1964 record. These songs were &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;, &quot;Love Is Thicker Than Water&quot;, &quot;Night Fever&quot; and &quot;If I Can&#x27;t Have You&quot;.

The Bee Gees won five Grammy Awards for &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; over two years: Album of the Year, Producer of the Year (with Albhy Galuten and Karl Richardson), two awards for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals (one in 1978 for &quot;How Deep Is Your Love&quot; and one in 1979 for &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;), and Best Vocal Arrangement for Two or More Voices for &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;.

During this era, Barry and Robin also wrote &quot;Emotion&quot; for an old friend, Australian vocalist Samantha Sang, who made it a top 10 hit, with the Bee Gees singing backing vocals. Barry also wrote the title song to the film version of the Broadway musical &quot;Grease&quot; for Frankie Valli to perform, which went to No. 1.

The Bee Gees also co-starred with Peter Frampton in Robert Stigwood&#x27;s film &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; (1978), loosely inspired by the classic 1967 album by the Beatles. The movie had been heavily promoted prior to release and was expected to enjoy great commercial success. However, it was savaged by film critics as a disjointed mess and ignored by the public. The soundtrack charted top five in the U.S., but only top 38 in Britain. The single &quot;Oh! Darling&quot;, credited to Robin Gibb, reached No. 15 in the US.

The Bee Gees&#x27; follow-up to &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; was the &quot;Spirits Having Flown&quot; album. It yielded three more hits: &quot;Too Much Heaven&quot; (US No. 1, UK No. 3), &quot;Tragedy&quot; (US No. 1, UK No. 1), and &quot;Love You Inside Out&quot; (US No. 1, UK No. 13). This gave the act six consecutive No. 1 singles in the US within a year and a half, equalling the Beatles and surpassed only by Whitney Houston.

In January 1979, the Bee Gees performed &quot;Too Much Heaven&quot; as their contribution to the Music for UNICEF Concert at the United Nations General Assembly. During the summer of 1979, the Bee Gees embarked on their largest concert tour covering the US and Canada. The Spirits Having Flown tour capitalised on Bee Gees fever that was sweeping the nation, with sold-out concerts in 38 cities. The Bee Gees produced a video for the title track &quot;Too Much Heaven&quot;, directed by Miami-based filmmaker Martin Pitts and produced by Charles Allen. With this video, Pitts and Allen began a long association with the brothers.

The Bee Gees even had a country hit in 1979 with &quot;Rest Your Love on Me&quot;, the flip side of their pop hit &quot;Too Much Heaven&quot;, which made the top 40 on the country charts. It was also a 1981 hit for Conway Twitty, topping the country music charts.

The Bee Gees&#x27; success rose and fell with the disco bubble. By the end of 1979, disco was rapidly declining in popularity, and the backlash against disco put the Bee Gees&#x27; American career in a tailspin. Encouraged by Steve Dahl&#x27;s Disco Demolition Night, radio stations around the US began promoting &quot;Bee Gee-Free Weekends&quot;. Following their remarkable run from 1975 to 1979, the act had only one more top 10 single in the US, and that did not come until the single &quot;One&quot; reached number 7 in 1989.

Barry Gibb considered the success of the &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; soundtrack both a blessing and a curse:

===1980–1986: Outside projects, band turmoil, solo efforts and decline===
Robin co-produced Jimmy Ruffin&#x27;s &quot;Sunrise&quot; released in May 1980, but the songs were started in 1979; the album contains songs written by the Gibb brothers, including the single &quot;Hold On To My Love&quot;.

In March 1980, Barry Gibb worked with Barbra Streisand on her album &quot;Guilty&quot;. He co-produced, and wrote or co-wrote all nine of the album&#x27;s tracks (four of them written with Robin, and the title track with both Robin and Maurice). Barry also appeared on the album&#x27;s cover with Streisand and duetted with her on two tracks. The album reached No. 1 in both the US and the UK, as did the single &quot;Woman in Love&quot; (written by Barry and Robin), becoming Streisand&#x27;s most successful single and album to date. Both of the Streisand/Gibb duets, &quot;Guilty&quot; and &quot;What Kind of Fool&quot;, also reached the US Top 10.

In 1981, the Bee Gees released the album &quot;Living Eyes&quot;, their last full-length album release on RSO. This album was the first CD ever played in public, when it was played to viewers of the BBC show &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World&quot;. With the disco backlash still running strong, the album failed to make the UK or US Top 40—breaking their streak of Top 40 hits, which started in 1975 with &quot;Jive Talkin&#x27;&quot;. Two singles from the album fared little better—&quot;He&#x27;s a Liar&quot;, which reached No. 30 in the US, and &quot;Living Eyes&quot;, which reached No. 45.

In 1982, Dionne Warwick enjoyed a UK No. 2 and US Adult Contemporary No. 1 hit with her comeback single, &quot;Heartbreaker&quot;, taken from her album of the same name, written largely by the Bee Gees and co-produced by Barry Gibb. The album reached No. 3 in the UK and the Top 30 in the US, where it was certified Gold.

A year later, Dolly Parton and Kenny Rogers recorded the Bee Gees-penned track &quot;Islands in the Stream&quot;, which became a US and Australian No. 1 hit and entered the Top 10 in the UK. Rogers&#x27; 1983 album, &quot;Eyes That See in the Dark&quot;, was written entirely by the Bee Gees and co-produced by Barry. The album was a Top 10 hit in the US and was certified Double Platinum.

The Bee Gees had greater success with the soundtrack to &quot;Staying Alive&quot; in 1983, the sequel to &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot;. The soundtrack was certified platinum in the US, and included their Top 30 hit &quot;The Woman in You&quot;.

Also in 1983, the band was sued by Chicago songwriter Ronald Selle, who claimed the brothers stole melodic material from one of his songs, &quot;Let It End&quot;, and used it in &quot;How Deep Is Your Love&quot;. At first, the Bee Gees lost the case; one juror said that a factor in the jury&#x27;s decision was the Gibbs&#x27; failure to introduce expert testimony rebutting the plaintiff&#x27;s expert testimony that it was &quot;impossible&quot; for the two songs to have been written independently. However, the verdict was overturned a few months later.

In August 1983, Barry signed a solo deal with MCA Records and spent much of late 1983 and 1984 writing songs for this first solo effort, &quot;Now Voyager&quot;. Robin released three solo albums in the 1980s, &quot;How Old Are You?&quot;, &quot;Secret Agent&quot; and &quot;Walls Have Eyes&quot;. Maurice released his second single to date, &quot;Hold Her in Your Hand&quot;, the first one having been released in 1970.

In 1985, Diana Ross released the album &quot;Eaten Alive&quot;, written by the Bee Gees, with the title track co-written with Michael Jackson (who also performed on the track). The album was again co-produced by Barry Gibb, and the single &quot;Chain Reaction&quot; gave Ross a UK and Australian No. 1 hit.

===1987–1999: Comeback, return to popularity and Andy&#x27;s death===
The Bee Gees released the album &quot;E.S.P.&quot; in 1987, which sold over 2 million copies. It was their first album in six years, and their first for Warner Bros. Records. The single &quot;You Win Again&quot; went to No. 1 in numerous countries, including the UK, and made the Bee Gees the first group to score a UK No. 1 hit in each of three decades: the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. The single was a disappointment in the US, charting at No. 75, and the Bee Gees voiced their frustration over American radio stations not playing their new European hit single, an omission which the group felt led to poor sales of their current album in the US. The song won the Bee Gees the 1987 British Academy&#x27;s Ivor Novello Award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically, and in February 1988 the band received a Brit Award nomination for Best British Group.

The Bee Gees later got together with Eric Clapton to create a group called &#x27;the Bunburys&#x27; to raise money for English charities. The group recorded three songs for &quot;The Bunbury Tails&quot;: &quot;We&#x27;re the Bunburys&quot; (which eventually became the opening theme to the 1992 animated series &quot;The Bunbury Tails&quot;), &quot;Bunbury Afternoon&quot;, and &quot;Fight (No Matter How Long)&quot;. The last song reached No. 8 on the rock music chart and appeared on &quot;The 1988 Summer Olympics Album&quot;.

The Bee Gees&#x27; next album, &quot;One&quot; (1989), featured &quot;Wish You Were Here&quot;, a song dedicated to their younger brother Andy, who had died in 1988 of myocarditis resulting from a viral infection. The album also contained their first US Top 10 hit (No. 7) in a decade, &quot;One&quot; (an Adult Contemporary No. 1). After the album&#x27;s release, the band embarked on its first world tour in 10 years.

In the UK, Polydor issued a single-disc hits collection from &quot;Tales&quot; called &quot;The Very Best of the Bee Gees&quot;, which contained their biggest UK hits. The album became one of their best-selling albums in that country, and was eventually certified Triple Platinum.

Following their next album, &quot;High Civilization&quot; (1991), which contained the UK top five hit &quot;Secret Love&quot;, the Bee Gees went on a European tour. After the tour, Barry Gibb began to battle a serious back problem, which required surgery. In addition, he had arthritis which, at one point, was so severe that it was doubtful that he would be able to play guitar for much longer. Also, in the early 1990s, Maurice Gibb finally sought treatment for his alcoholism, which he had battled for many years with the help of Alcoholics Anonymous.

In 1993, the group returned to the Polydor label and released the album &quot;Size Isn&#x27;t Everything&quot;, which contained the UK top five hit &quot;For Whom the Bell Tolls&quot;. Success still eluded them in the US, however, as the first single released, &quot;Paying the Price of Love&quot;, only managed to reach No. 74 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, while the parent album stalled at No. 153.

In 1997, they released the album &quot;Still Waters&quot;, which has reached No. 2 in the UK (their highest album chart position there since 1979) and No. 11 in the US. The album&#x27;s first single, &quot;Alone&quot;, gave them another UK Top 5 hit and a top 30 hit in the US. &quot;Still Waters&quot; was the band&#x27;s most successful US release of their post-RSO era.

At the 1997 BRIT Awards held in Earls Court, London on 24 February, the Bee Gees received the award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. On 14 November 1997, the Bee Gees performed a live concert in Las Vegas called &quot;One Night Only&quot;. The show included a performance of &quot;Our Love (Don&#x27;t Throw It All Away)&quot; synchronised with a vocal by their deceased brother Andy and a guest appearance by Celine Dion singing &quot;Immortality&quot;. The &quot;One Night Only&quot; name grew out of the band&#x27;s declaration that, due to Barry&#x27;s health issues, the Las Vegas show was to be the final live performance of their career. After the immensely positive audience response to the Vegas concert, Barry decided to continue despite the pain, and the concert expanded into their last full-blown world tour of &quot;One Night Only&quot; concerts. The tour included playing to 56,000 people at London&#x27;s Wembley Stadium on 5 September 1998 and concluded in the newly built Olympic Stadium in Sydney, Australia on 27 March 1999 to 72,000 people. During the &quot;One Night Only&quot; tour, the Bee Gees also finally gave live performances of &quot;Grease;&quot; though Barry previously wrote the song for the 1978 film of the same name, it was performed mainly by Frankie Valli.

In 1998, the group&#x27;s soundtrack for &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; was incorporated into a stage production produced first in the West End and then on Broadway. They wrote three new songs for the adaptation. Also in 1998, the brothers released &quot;Ellan Vannin&quot; for Manx charities, recorded the previous year. Known as the unofficial national anthem of the Isle of Man, the brothers performed the song during their world tour to reflect their pride in the place of their birth.

The Bee Gees closed the century with what turned out to be their last full-sized concert, known as &quot;BG2K&quot;, on 31 December 1999.

===2000–2008: &quot;This Is Where I Came In&quot;, Maurice&#x27;s death, and split===
In 2001, the group released what turned out to be their final album of new material, &quot;This Is Where I Came In&quot;. The album was another success, reaching the Top 10 in the UK (being certified Gold), and the Top 20 in the US. The title track was also a UK Top 20 hit single. They celebrated their 35th anniversary, and the album, by performing on the television series &quot;Live by Request&quot; on the American cable television network A&amp;E.

The last concert of the Bee Gees as a trio was at the &quot;Love and Hope Ball&quot; in 2002. Maurice Gibb died unexpectedly on 12 January 2003, at age 53, from a heart attack while awaiting emergency surgery to repair a strangulated intestine. Initially, his surviving brothers announced that they intended to carry on the name &quot;Bee Gees&quot; in his memory, but as time passed they decided to retire the group&#x27;s name, leaving it to represent the three brothers together.

The same week that Maurice died, Robin&#x27;s solo album &quot;Magnet&quot; was released. On 23 February 2003, the Bee Gees received the Grammy Legend Award, they also became the first recipients of that award in the 21st century. Barry and Robin, along with Maurice&#x27;s son Adam, accepted the award in a tearful ceremony. On 2 May 2004, Barry and Robin Gibb received the CBE award at Buckingham Palace; their nephew Adam accepted his father Maurice&#x27;s posthumous award.

In late 2004, Robin embarked on a solo tour of Germany, Russia, and Asia. During January 2005, Barry, Robin, and several legendary rock artists recorded &quot;Grief Never Grows Old&quot;, the official tsunami relief record for the Disasters Emergency Committee. Later that year, Barry reunited with Barbra Streisand for her top-selling album &quot;Guilty Pleasures&quot;, released as &quot;Guilty Too&quot; in the UK as a sequel album to the previous &quot;Guilty&quot;. Also in 2004, Barry recorded his song &quot;I Cannot Give You My Love&quot; with Cliff Richard, which became a UK top 20 hit single; Maurice&#x27;s keyboard work from a 2001 demo version was included in this 2003 version.

In February 2006, Barry and Robin reunited on stage for a Miami charity concert to benefit the Diabetes Research Institute. It was their first public performance together since Maurice&#x27;s death. The pair also played at the 30th annual Prince&#x27;s Trust Concert in the UK on 20 May 2006.

===2009–2012: Return to performing and Robin&#x27;s death===
On 14 March 2009, Barry teamed with Olivia Newton-John to present the one-hour finale performance at a star-studded 12-hour live concert at Sydney&#x27;s Sydney Cricket Ground, part of Sound Relief, a fundraiser to aid victims of the February 2009 Victorian Bushfires that devastated large tracts of heavily wooded and populated south-eastern Australia, where the Gibb family once lived. The concert was televised live nationally across Australia on the Max TV cable network. On 10 July 2009, Barry and Robin were named as Freemen of the Borough of Douglas (Isle of Man); the award was also bestowed posthumously to Maurice.

In late 2009, Barry and Robin announced plans to record and perform together once again as the Bee Gees. Barry and Robin performed on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Strictly Come Dancing&quot; on 31 October 2009 and appeared on ABC-TV&#x27;s &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; on 17 November 2009. On 15 March 2010, Barry and Robin inducted the Swedish group ABBA into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. On 26 May 2010, the two made a surprise appearance on the ninth-season finale of &quot;American Idol&quot;.

On 20 November 2011, it was announced that Robin Gibb, at 61 years old, had been diagnosed with liver cancer, a condition he had become aware of several months earlier. He had become noticeably thinner in previous months and had to cancel several appearances due to severe abdominal pain. Robin joined British military trio the Soldiers for the Coming Home charity concert on 13 February 2012 at the London Palladium, in support of injured servicemen. It was his first public appearance for almost five months and, as it turned out, his final one. On 14 April 2012, it was reported that Robin had contracted pneumonia in a Chelsea hospital and was in a coma. Although he came out of his coma on 20 April 2012, his condition deteriorated rapidly and he died on 20 May 2012 of liver and kidney failure.

===2013–present: Looking back at a lifetime of music===
In September and October 2013, Barry performed his first solo tour &quot;in honour of his brothers and a lifetime of music&quot;. In addition to the Rhino collection, &quot;The Studio Albums: 1967–1968&quot;, Warner Bros. released a box set in 2014 called &quot;The Warner Bros Years: 1987–1991&quot; that included the studio albums &quot;E.S.P.&quot;, &quot;One&quot; and &quot;High Civilization&quot; as well as extended mixes and B-sides. It also included the band&#x27;s entire 1989 concert in Melbourne, Australia, available only on video as &quot;All for One&quot; prior to this release. The documentary &quot;The Joy of the Bee Gees&quot; was aired on BBC Four on 19 December 2014.

On 23 March 2015, 13STAR Records released a box set &quot;1974–1979&quot; which included the studio albums &quot;Mr. Natural&quot;, &quot;Main Course&quot;, &quot;Children of the World&quot; and &quot;Spirits Having Flown&quot;. A fifth disc called &quot;The Miami Years&quot; includes all the tracks from &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; as well as B-sides. No unreleased tracks from the era were included.

After a hiatus from performing, Barry Gibb returned to solo and guest singing performances. He occasionally appears with his son, Steve Gibb. In 2016, he released &quot;In the Now&quot;, his first solo effort since 1984&#x27;s &quot;Now Voyager&quot;. It was the first release of new Bee Gees-related music since the posthumous release of Robin Gibb&#x27;s &quot;50 St. Catherine&#x27;s Drive&quot;. Also in 2016, Capitol Records signed a new distribution deal with Barry and the estates of his brothers for the Bee Gees catalogue, bringing their music back to Universal.

In late 2020, a documentary titled &quot;The Bee Gees: How Can You Mend a Broken Heart&quot; was released on HBO Max; it was received with positive reviews and won an Emmy award. A few months later, an as-yet-untitled biopic about the Bee Gees was announced to be in development at Paramount, with Kenneth Branagh directing and Barry Gibb serving as an executive producer.

Barry Gibb released his third solo studio album, &quot;Greenfields&quot;, on 8 January 2021. It consisted of re-imagined Bee Gees songs from throughout their career, newly recorded in a primarily acoustic style with vocal contributions from a variety of country musicians including Dolly Parton, Keith Urban and Miranda Lambert. The album debuted at No. 1 in both the UK and Australia – the latter of which set a record for the oldest artist to top the ARIA charts – while also peaking at No. 15 on the US Billboard 200 (and No. 2 on the US Billboard Top Album Sales chart) and being met with favourable reviews.

==Influences==
The Bee Gees were influenced by the Beatles, the Everly Brothers, the Mills Brothers, Elvis Presley, the Rolling Stones, Roy Orbison, the Beach Boys and Stevie Wonder. On the 2014 documentary &quot;The Joy of the Bee Gees&quot;, Barry said that the Bee Gees were also influenced by the Hollies and Otis Redding. Maurice noted that Neil Sedaka was an early influence, and later the group was &quot;very influenced&quot; by Linda Creed songs for the Stylistics.

==Legacy==
In his 1980 &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine interview, John Lennon praised the Bee Gees, &quot;Try to tell the kids in the seventies who were screaming to the Bee Gees that their music was just the Beatles redone. There is nothing wrong with the Bee Gees. They do a damn good job. There was nothing else going on then.&quot;

In a 2007 interview with Duane Hitchings, who co-wrote Rod Stewart&#x27;s 1978 disco song &quot;Da Ya Think I&#x27;m Sexy?&quot;, he noted that the song was

Kevin Parker of Tame Impala has said that listening to the Bee Gees after taking mushrooms inspired him to change the sound of the music he was making on his album &quot;Currents&quot;.

The English indie rock band the Cribs was also influenced by the Bee Gees. Cribs member Ryan Jarman said: &quot;It must have had quite a big influence on us – pop melodies is something we always revert to. I always want to get back to pop melodies and I&#x27;m sure that&#x27;s due to that Bee Gees phase we went through.&quot;

Following Robin&#x27;s death on 20 May 2012, Beyoncé remarked: &quot;The Bee Gees were an early inspiration for me, Kelly Rowland and Michelle. We loved their songwriting and beautiful harmonies. Recording their classic song, &#x27;Emotion&#x27; was a special time for Destiny&#x27;s Child. Sadly we lost Robin Gibb this week. My heart goes out to his brother Barry and the rest of his family.&quot;

Singer Jordin Sparks remarked that her favourite Bee Gees songs are &quot;Too Much Heaven&quot;, &quot;Emotion&quot; (although performed by Samantha Sang with Barry on the background vocals using his falsetto), and &quot;Stayin&#x27; Alive&quot;.

Carrie Underwood said, about discovering the Bee Gees during her childhood, &quot;My parents listened to the Bee Gees quite a bit when I was little, so I was definitely exposed to them at an early age. They just had a sound that was all their own, obviously, never duplicated.&quot;

===Songwriting===
At one point, in 1978, the Gibb brothers were responsible for writing and/or performing nine of the songs in the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. In all, the Gibbs placed 13 singles onto the Hot 100 in 1978, with 12 making the Top 40. The Gibb brothers are fellows of the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors (BASCA). At least 2,500 artists have recorded their songs.

Singer-songwriter Gavin DeGraw spoke about the Bee Gees&#x27; influence with their own music as well as their songwriting:

In 2009, as part of the Q150 celebrations, the Bee Gees were announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for their role as &quot;Influential Artists&quot;. 

==Accolades and achievements==
In 1978, following the success of &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot;, and the single &quot;Night Fever&quot; in particular, Reubin Askew, the governor of the US state of Florida, named the Bee Gees honorary citizens of the state, since they resided in Miami at the time. In 1979, the Bee Gees got their star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. They were the subjects of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; in 1991 when they were surprised by Michael Aspel while being interviewed by disc jockey Steve Wright (DJ) on his Radio 1 programme at BBC Broadcasting House.

The Bee Gees were inducted in 1994 into the Songwriters Hall of Fame, as well as Florida&#x27;s Artists Hall of Fame in 1995 and the ARIA Hall of Fame in 1997. Also in 1997, the group were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; the presenter of the award to &quot;Britain&#x27;s First Family of Harmony&quot; was Brian Wilson, historical leader of the Beach Boys, another &quot;family act&quot; featuring three harmonising brothers. In 2001, they were inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame. After Maurice&#x27;s death, the Bee Gees were also inducted into the Dance Music Hall of Fame in 2001, They were made Ivor Novello fellows and inducted into London&#x27;s Walk of Fame in 2006 and the Musically Speaking Hall Of Fame in 2008. On 15 May 2007, the Bee Gees were named BMI Icons at the 55th annual BMI Pop Awards. Collectively, Barry, Maurice and Robin Gibb have earned 109 BMI Pop, Country and Latin Awards.

In October 1999, the Isle of Man Post Office unveiled a set of six stamps honouring the Bee Gees.

In the 2002 New Year&#x27;s Honours, announced on 31 December 2001, all three brothers were appointed as Commanders of the Order of the British Empire (CBE). By the time of the investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 27 May 2004 Maurice had died, and he was represented at the ceremony by his son Adam. On 10 July 2009, the Isle of Man&#x27;s capital bestowed the Freedom of the Borough of Douglas honour on Barry and Robin, as well as posthumously on Maurice. On 20 November 2009, the Douglas Borough Council released a limited edition commemorative DVD to mark their naming as Freemen of the Borough.
On 14 February 2013, Barry Gibb unveiled a statue of the Bee Gees as well as unveiling &quot;Bee Gees Way&quot; (a walkway filled with photos and videos of the Bee Gees) in honour of the Bee Gees in Redcliffe, Queensland, Australia. On 27 June 2018, Barry Gibb, the last surviving member of the Bee Gees, was knighted by Prince Charles after being named on the Queen&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Honours List. The statue of the Bee Gees in Douglas, Isle of Man, was installed in 2021.

In 2022, Barry Gibb was made an Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia which is Australia&#x27;s highest national honour.

In 2023, Barry Gibb became a Kennedy Center Honoree for contributions to American culture and for being a &quot;pop music pioneer&quot;, as well as being inducted along with his brothers into the Australian Songwriters Association Hall of Fame.

The Bee Gees have sold over 250 million records worldwide, making them one of the best-selling artists of all time. The group are to date the most successful family and sibling band of all time, the most successful musical trio of all time, and the most successful musical act with ties to Australia.

===Awards and nominations===

===Queensland Music Awards===
The Queensland Music Awards (previously known as Q Song Awards) are annual awards celebrating Queensland&#x27;s brightest emerging artists and established legends. They commenced in 2006.
|-
| 2009
| Bee Gees
| Grant McLennan Lifetime Achievement Award 
|}

==Members==
Principal members

* Barry Gibb – vocals, rhythm guitar (1958–2003, 2006, 2009–2012)
* Robin Gibb – vocals, occasional keyboards (1958–1969, 1970–2003, 2006, 2009–2012; his death)
* Maurice Gibb – bass, guitars, keyboards, vocals (1958–2003; his death)
* Colin Petersen – drums (1967–1969; died 2024)
* Vince Melouney – guitars (1967–1968); vocals, harmonica (1968)
* Geoff Bridgford – drums (1971–1972; touring 1970–1971)

Touring musicians
* Lesley Gibb – vocals (1969)
* Alan Kendall – lead guitar (1971–1981, 1989–2003)
* Chris Karan – drums (1972)
* Dennis Bryon – drums (1973–1981; died 2024)
* Geoff Westley – keyboards, piano (1973–1976)
* Blue Weaver – keyboards, synthesizers (1975–1981)
* Joe Lala – percussion (1976, 1979; died 2014)
* Joey Murcia – rhythm guitar (1976, 1979)
* Harold Cowart – bass (1979)
* Tim Cansfield – rhythm and lead guitar (1989, 1997–2001)
* Vic Martin – keyboards, synthesizers (1989)
* Gary Moberly – keyboards, synthesizers (1989)
* George Perry – bass (1989–1993)
* Chester Thompson – drums (1989)
* Mike Murphy – drums (1989; died 2006)
* Trevor Murrell – drums (1991–1992)
* Rudi Dobson – keyboards (1991–1992)
* Scott F. Crago – drums
* Matt Bonelli – bass (1993–2001; died 2024)
* Steve Rucker – drums (1993–2001)
* Ben Stivers – keyboards (1996–1999)
* Stephen Gibb – rhythm guitar (1997)
Guest musicians (studio and touring)
* Phil Collins – drums
* Lenny Castro – percussion
* Glenn Frey – guitar (died 2016)
* Timothy B. Schmit – bass guitar
* Joe Walsh – lead guitar
* Don Felder – lead guitar (1981)
* Jeff Porcaro – drums (died 1992)
* Mike Porcaro – bass guitar (died 2015)
* Steve Porcaro – keyboards
* Steve Lukather – guitar
* David Hungate – bass guitar
* David Paich – keyboards
* Greg Phillinganes – keyboards
* Bobby Kimball – keyboards
* Leland Sklar – bass guitar
* Reb Beach – lead guitar
* Gregg Bissonette – drums
* Ricky Lawson – drums (died 2013)
* Scott F. Crago – drums
* Steve Gadd – drums
* Steve Ferrone – drums
* Steve Jordan – drums
* Nathan East – bass guitar
* Steuart Smith – lead guitar
* Vinnie Colaiuta – drums
===Timeline===
====Timeline of touring members====
==Discography==

Soundtracks &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; (1977) and &quot;Staying Alive&quot; (1983) are not official Bee Gees albums, but contain some previously unreleased tracks. Apart from live and compilation, all their official albums are included on this list. &quot;A Kick in the Head Is Worth Eight in the Pants&quot; has not been included on the list because it appeared only on numerous bootlegs and was not officially released.

=== Studio albums ===
* &quot;The Bee Gees Sing and Play 14 Barry Gibb Songs&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Spicks and Specks&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Bee Gees&#x27; 1st&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Horizontal&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Idea&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Odessa&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Cucumber Castle&quot; (1970)
* &quot;2 Years On&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Trafalgar&quot; (1971)
* &quot;To Whom It May Concern&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Life in a Tin Can&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Mr. Natural&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Main Course&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Children of the World&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Spirits Having Flown&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Living Eyes&quot; (1981)
* &quot;E.S.P.&quot; (1987)
* &quot;One&quot; (1989)
* &quot;High Civilization&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Size Isn&#x27;t Everything&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Still Waters&quot; (1997)
* &quot;This Is Where I Came In&quot; (2001)

==Concert tours==
* The Bee Gees&#x27; concerts in 1967 and 1968 (1967–1968)
* 2 Years On Tour (1971)
* Trafalgar Tour (1972)
* Mr. Natural Tour (1974)
* Main Course Tour (1975)
* Children of the World Tour (1976)
* Spirits Having Flown Tour (1979)
* One for All World Tour (1989)
* High Civilization World Tour (1991)
* One Night Only World Tour (1997–1999)
* This Is Where I Came In (2001)

==Filmography==


==References==
==Further reading==
* Stanley, Bob. &quot;Bee Gees: Children of the World&quot;. Nine Eight Books, 2023.

==External links==
*
*
* Bee Gees at &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;
* Bee Gees&#x27; Vocal Group Hall of Fame webpage
* Bee Gees at bmi.com
* Robin Gibb sadly passes away after losing his battle with cancer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="4" end="12" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q296872" start="62" end="67" title="Barry Gibb" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188482" start="69" end="74" title="Robin Gibb" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296876" start="80" end="92" title="Maurice Gibb" label="Maurice Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="223" end="228" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q124296467" start="304" end="319" title="Close and open harmony" label="tight harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="340" end="347" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="418" end="425" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="426" end="434" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="756" end="841" title="Honorific nicknames in popular music" label="The Disco Kings, Britain&amp;#x27;s First Family of Harmony, and The Kings of Dance Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="856" end="867" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="915" end="935" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="1000" end="1007" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="1008" end="1021" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610982" start="1028" end="1044" title="The Rattlesnakes (1950s band)" label="the Rattlesnakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026184" start="1071" end="1080" title="Redcliffe, Queensland" label="Redcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064985" start="1089" end="1107" title="City of Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184880" start="1145" end="1157" title="Cribb Island, Queensland" label="Cribb Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934278" start="1288" end="1303" title="Robert Stigwood" label="Robert Stigwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q928132" start="1369" end="1412" title="Saturday Night Fever (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Saturday Night Fever&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1606" end="1619" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="1668" end="1685" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="1770" end="1808" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling music artists of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="1912" end="1938" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="2005" end="2018" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2020" end="2031" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="2033" end="2048" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="2050" end="2062" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="2067" end="2081" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="2148" end="2177" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="2230" end="2258" title="Billboard charts" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q218837" start="2295" end="2307" title="the Supremes" label="the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q390321" start="2572" end="2586" title="Colin Petersen" label="Colin Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035630" start="2625" end="2639" title="Vince Melouney" label="Vince Melouney"/>
<link wikidata="Q109801691" start="2645" end="2660" title="Geoff Bridgford" label="Geoff Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="2804" end="2815" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012781" start="2875" end="2884" title="Hugh Gibb" label="Hugh Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="2902" end="2920" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton-cum-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="2966" end="2973" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610982" start="2995" end="3011" title="The Rattlesnakes (1950s band)" label="the Rattlesnakes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3143" end="3157" title="washtub bass#tea chest bass" label="tea-chest bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="3254" end="3262" title="Lip sync" label="lip-sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q176537" start="3828" end="3832" title="Andy Gibb" label="Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026184" start="3893" end="3914" title="Redcliffe, Queensland" label="Redcliffe, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="3935" end="3943" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141352" start="4004" end="4012" title="Dirt track racing" label="Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141820" start="4875" end="4883" title="Col Joye" label="Col Joye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445732" start="4943" end="4959" title="Festival Records" label="Festival Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515797" start="4971" end="4985" title="Leedon Records" label="Leedon Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q317254" start="5197" end="5211" title="Chubby Checker" label="Chubby Checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914843" start="5315" end="5323" title="Maroubra, New South Wales" label="Maroubra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701275" start="5513" end="5542" title="50 St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Drive" label="50 St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465153" start="5612" end="5626" title="Wine and Women" label="Wine and Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051796" start="5674" end="5720" title="The Bee Gees Sing and Play 14 Barry Gibb Songs" label="The Bee Gees Sing and Play 14 Barry Gibb Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58372259" start="5962" end="5972" title="Nat Kipner" label="Nat Kipner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="6039" end="6044" title="Record label" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577381" start="6046" end="6058" title="Spin Records (Australian label)" label="Spin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010310" start="6316" end="6327" title="Ossie Byrne" label="Ossie Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496549" start="6500" end="6510" title="Hurstville, New South Wales" label="Hurstville"/>
<link wikidata="Q718940" start="6882" end="6899" title="Spicks and Specks (song)" label="Spicks and Specks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353991" start="7144" end="7156" title="Steve Kipner" label="Steve Kipner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574586" start="7385" end="7391" title="Go-Set" label="Go-Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="7759" end="7772" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="7786" end="7797" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934278" start="7873" end="7888" title="Robert Stigwood" label="Robert Stigwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="8019" end="8034" title="Polydor Records" label="Polydor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q585643" start="8078" end="8090" title="Atco Records" label="Atco Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q390321" start="8487" end="8501" title="Colin Petersen" label="Colin Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035630" start="8506" end="8520" title="Vince Melouney" label="Vince Melouney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354353" start="8528" end="8557" title="New York Mining Disaster 1941" label="New York Mining Disaster 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="8619" end="8622" title="Revolutions per minute" label="rpm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246718" start="8840" end="8854" title="Rotation (music)" label="heavy rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322142" start="8999" end="9015" title="To Love Somebody (song)" label="To Love Somebody"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="9066" end="9078" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880328" start="9222" end="9229" title="Holiday (Bee Gees song)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q768601" start="9300" end="9312" title="Bee Gees&amp;#x27; 1st" label="Bee Gees 1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203366" start="9519" end="9536" title="Playhouse Theatre" label="Playhouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218603" start="9538" end="9559" title="Northumberland Avenue" label="Northumberland Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="9912" end="9927" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866506" start="10055" end="10083" title="Liverpool Cathedral" label="Liverpool Anglican Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q172152" start="10330" end="10342" title="Silent Night" label="Silent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q686012" start="10356" end="10370" title="The First Noel" label="The First Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q999111" start="10387" end="10408" title="Mary&amp;#x27;s Boy Child" label="Mary&amp;#x27;s Boy Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585437" start="10454" end="10482" title="Hark! The Herald Angels Sing" label="Hark! The Herald Angels Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763411" start="10737" end="10749" title="The Settlers (band)" label="the Settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q927532" start="10775" end="10788" title="Kenny Everett" label="Kenny Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="10954" end="10972" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q924970" start="11110" end="11120" title="Horizontal (album)" label="Horizontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q656437" start="11225" end="11238" title="Massachusetts (Bee Gees song)" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q548923" start="11293" end="11298" title="World (Bee Gees song)" label="World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753441" start="11443" end="11465" title="And the Sun Will Shine" label="And the Sun Will Shine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301320" start="11482" end="11502" title="Really and Sincerely" label="Really and Sincerely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="11708" end="11718" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q240285" start="11831" end="11841" title="Wonderwall (film)" label="Wonderwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211149" start="11871" end="11881" title="Joe Massot" label="Joe Massot"/>
<link wikidata="Q881121" start="12025" end="12043" title="Laeiszhalle" label="Hamburg Musikhalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="12086" end="12098" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q300620" start="12120" end="12142" title="A Whiter Shade of Pale" label="A Whiter Shade of Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q549544" start="12287" end="12298" title="Beatlemania" label="Beatlemania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="12439" end="12451" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="12487" end="12498" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="12585" end="12605" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="12676" end="12688" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q359416" start="12690" end="12705" title="George Hamilton (actor)" label="George Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160243" start="12710" end="12723" title="Fran Jeffries" label="Fran Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="12769" end="12786" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112939" start="12856" end="12861" title="Words (Bee Gees song)" label="Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102097" start="12926" end="12931" title="Jumbo (Bee Gees song)" label="Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764393" start="12956" end="12980" title="The Singer Sang His Song" label="The Singer Sang His Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="13186" end="13197" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453069" start="13271" end="13307" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Gotta Get a Message to You" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Gotta Get a Message to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979034" start="13359" end="13375" title="I Started a Joke" label="I Started a Joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q511439" start="13445" end="13449" title="Idea (album)" label="Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q511439" start="13770" end="13782" title="Idea (album)" label="Such a Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501052" start="14210" end="14226" title="Atlantic Studios" label="Atlantic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="14580" end="14595" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785962" start="14612" end="14630" title="This Is Tom Jones" label="The Tom Jones Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q737584" start="14895" end="14901" title="Odessa (Bee Gees album)" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077697" start="15016" end="15027" title="Odessa (City on the Black Sea)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771801" start="15057" end="15074" title="Marley Purt Drive" label="Marley Purt Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q737584" start="15091" end="15105" title="Odessa (Bee Gees album)" label="Give Your Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813449" start="15139" end="15150" title="Melody Fair" label="Melody Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q277379" start="15167" end="15179" title="First of May (Bee Gees song)" label="First of May"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482451" start="15290" end="15299" title="Lamplight" label="Lamplight"/>
<link wikidata="Q794069" start="15445" end="15461" title="Best of Bee Gees" label="Best of Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112939" start="15516" end="15521" title="Words (Bee Gees song)" label="Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q718940" start="15558" end="15575" title="Spicks and Specks (song)" label="Spicks and Specks"/>
<link wikidata="Q517166" start="15600" end="15617" title="Tomorrow Tomorrow (Bee Gees song)" label="Tomorrow Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q899498" start="15916" end="15931" title="Cucumber Castle" label="Cucumber Castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15994" end="16010" title="Hippodrome, London#The Talk of the Town" label="Talk of the Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699170" start="16180" end="16190" title="Cucumber Castle (film)" label="TV special"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="16196" end="16210" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941848" start="16447" end="16457" title="Humpy Bong" label="Humpy Bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147297" start="16463" end="16477" title="Jonathan Kelly" label="Jonathan Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427551" start="16539" end="16548" title="Pentangle (band)" label="Pentangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q583935" start="16557" end="16566" title="Terry Cox" label="Terry Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405380" start="16681" end="16722" title="Lord Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Little Drummer Boys" label="Lord Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Little Drummer Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q718845" start="16858" end="16887" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Forget to Remember" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Forget to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412502" start="16999" end="17007" title="I.O.I.O." label="I.O.I.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q1095929" start="17024" end="17063" title="If Only I Had My Mind on Something Else" label="If I Only Had My Mind on Something Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748147" start="17219" end="17228" title="The Loner (Maurice Gibb album)" label="The Loner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284043" start="17300" end="17308" title="Railroad (song)" label="Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965869" start="17483" end="17509" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Kiss Your Memory" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Kiss Your Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428144" start="17683" end="17700" title="Saved by the Bell (song)" label="Saved by the Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249598" start="17728" end="17746" title="Robin&amp;#x27;s Reign" label="Robin&amp;#x27;s Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q109801691" start="18457" end="18472" title="Geoff Bridgford" label="Geoff Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738338" start="18548" end="18558" title="The Groove (band)" label="the Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807810" start="18563" end="18570" title="Tin Tin (band)" label="Tin Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q260948" start="18651" end="18661" title="2 Years On" label="2 Years On"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671598" start="18748" end="18759" title="Lonely Days" label="Lonely Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412260" start="18835" end="18855" title="The Johnny Cash Show" label="The Johnny Cash Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="18869" end="18882" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="18890" end="18902" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713728" start="18916" end="18938" title="The Andy Williams Show" label="The Andy Williams Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730121" start="18952" end="18972" title="The Dick Cavett Show" label="The Dick Cavett Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="18989" end="19009" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088216" start="19043" end="19052" title="Trafalgar (album)" label="Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452763" start="19104" end="19135" title="How Can You Mend a Broken Heart" label="How Can You Mend a Broken Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086750" start="19201" end="19207" title="Israel (Bee Gees song)" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="19331" end="19343" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q747902" start="19359" end="19409" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728631" start="19502" end="19508" title="Melody (1971 film)" label="Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946647" start="19584" end="19592" title="My World (Bee Gees song)" label="My World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091170" start="19643" end="19650" title="On Time (song)" label="On Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379590" start="19685" end="19694" title="Run to Me (Bee Gees song)" label="Run to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187740" start="19719" end="19741" title="To Whom It May Concern (Bee Gees album)" label="To Whom It May Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="20155" end="20175" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="20210" end="20219" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133807" start="20254" end="20278" title="Sly and the Family Stone" label="Sly and the Family Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="20280" end="20293" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="20302" end="20308" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="20345" end="20353" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q312270" start="20365" end="20379" title="Wilson Pickett" label="Wilson Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q965202" start="20444" end="20461" title="Life in a Tin Can" label="Life in a Tin Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q778792" start="20517" end="20528" title="RSO Records" label="RSO Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428506" start="20561" end="20578" title="Saw a New Morning" label="Saw a New Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657554" start="20690" end="20736" title="A Kick in the Head Is Worth Eight in the Pants" label="A Kick in the Head Is Worth Eight in the Pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112767" start="20812" end="20821" title="Kitty Can (album)" label="Kitty Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442793" start="20862" end="20888" title="Best of Bee Gees, Volume 2" label="Best of Bee Gees, Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q794069" start="20960" end="20968" title="Best of Bee Gees" label="Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751326" start="21003" end="21023" title="The Midnight Special (TV series)" label="The Midnight Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804373" start="21051" end="21082" title="Money (That&amp;#x27;s What I Want)" label="Money (That&amp;#x27;s What I Want)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="21094" end="21109" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="21146" end="21157" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q931481" start="21239" end="21254" title="Johnny B. Goode" label="Johnny B. Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590820" start="21271" end="21300" title="Reelin&amp;#x27; and Rockin&amp;#x27;" label="Reelin&amp;#x27; and Rockin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869320" start="21497" end="21527" title="Batley Variety Club" label="Batley&amp;#x27;s the variety club"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="21532" end="21546" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q352760" start="21582" end="21595" title="Ahmet Ertegun" label="Ahmet Ertegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="21620" end="21636" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="21685" end="21695" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q660545" start="21705" end="21716" title="Arif Mardin" label="Arif Mardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088209" start="21742" end="21753" title="Mr. Natural (Bee Gees album)" label="Mr. Natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="21805" end="21812" title="rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299511" start="22068" end="22080" title="Alan Kendall" label="Alan Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q926799" start="22239" end="22246" title="Strawbs" label="Strawbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="22433" end="22442" title="mellotron" label="mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="22471" end="22479" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="22484" end="22500" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="22653" end="22665" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="22707" end="22721" title="Miami" label="Miami, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q955172" start="22750" end="22766" title="Criteria Studios" label="Criteria Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="22891" end="22896" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q721559" start="22943" end="22960" title="Jive Talkin&amp;#x27;" label="Jive Talkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q721562" start="22994" end="23012" title="Nights on Broadway" label="Nights on Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q544400" start="23112" end="23123" title="Main Course" label="Main Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="23209" end="23217" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q233362" start="23602" end="23613" title="Helen Reddy" label="Helen Reddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210406" start="23686" end="23701" title="Golden Slumbers" label="Golden Slumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045409" start="23702" end="23719" title="Carry That Weight" label="Carry That Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q210306" start="23733" end="23772" title="She Came In Through the Bathroom Window" label="She Came in Through the Bathroom Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q210397" start="23823" end="23831" title="Sun King (song)" label="Sun King"/>
<link wikidata="Q654160" start="23921" end="23946" title="All This and World War II" label="All This and World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q860614" start="23977" end="23998" title="Children of the World" label="Children of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563606" start="24167" end="24188" title="You Should Be Dancing" label="You Should Be Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="24239" end="24253" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q10320076" start="24451" end="24464" title="Love So Right" label="Love So Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942848" start="24506" end="24518" title="Boogie Child" label="Boogie Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q897517" start="24717" end="24749" title="Here at Last... Bee Gees... Live" label="Here at Last... Bee Gees... Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q928132" start="24829" end="24872" title="Saturday Night Fever (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Saturday Night Fever&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="25027" end="25032" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="25065" end="25073" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="25156" end="25169" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="25277" end="25290" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q896109" start="25295" end="25305" title="Boz Scaggs" label="Boz Scaggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968265" start="25472" end="25504" title="Château d&amp;#x27;Hérouville" label="Château d&amp;#x27;Hérouville studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654" start="25695" end="25715" title="Saturday Night Fever" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573223" start="26018" end="26039" title="How Deep Is Your Love (Bee Gees song)" label="How Deep Is Your Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352181" start="26074" end="26092" title="Stayin&amp;#x27; Alive" label="Stayin&amp;#x27; Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659767" start="26130" end="26141" title="Night Fever" label="Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302117" start="26302" end="26326" title="If I Can&amp;#x27;t Have You (Bee Gees song)" label="If I Can&amp;#x27;t Have You"/>
<link wikidata="Q257182" start="26366" end="26380" title="Yvonne Elliman" label="Yvonne Elliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888803" start="26575" end="26592" title="More Than a Woman (Bee Gees song)" label="More Than a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780451" start="26692" end="26699" title="Tavares (group)" label="Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848992" start="26791" end="26802" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 number ones of 1978" label="seven songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q176537" start="26945" end="26954" title="Andy Gibb" label="Andy Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q257182" start="26960" end="26974" title="Yvonne Elliman" label="Yvonne Elliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q728791" start="26993" end="26999" title="Grease (song)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q465632" start="27020" end="27033" title="Frankie Valli" label="Frankie Valli"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="27352" end="27380" title="List of best-selling albums" label="fourth highest-selling album"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="27592" end="27621" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="28102" end="28113" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="28118" end="28132" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="28324" end="28337" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="28391" end="28408" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q15692068" start="28410" end="28430" title="Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical" label="Producer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q747902" start="28488" end="28538" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593902" start="28647" end="28692" title="Grammy Award for Best Vocal Arrangement for Two or More Voices" label="Best Vocal Arrangement for Two or More Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337036" start="28780" end="28787" title="Emotion (Samantha Sang song)" label="Emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408726" start="28833" end="28846" title="Samantha Sang" label="Samantha Sang"/>
<link wikidata="Q611626" start="28998" end="29004" title="Grease (musical)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q465632" start="29015" end="29028" title="Frankie Valli" label="Frankie Valli"/>
<link wikidata="Q337089" start="29097" end="29111" title="Peter Frampton" label="Peter Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532586" start="29149" end="29191" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (film)" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q210399" start="29548" end="29559" title="Oh! Darling" label="Oh! Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q971158" start="29697" end="29717" title="Spirits Having Flown" label="Spirits Having Flown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563251" start="29765" end="29780" title="Too Much Heaven" label="Too Much Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323852" start="29815" end="29822" title="Tragedy (Bee Gees song)" label="Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452979" start="29861" end="29880" title="Love You Inside Out" label="Love You Inside Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="30038" end="30053" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180080" start="30153" end="30177" title="Music for UNICEF Concert" label="Music for UNICEF Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="30185" end="30216" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578864" start="30329" end="30354" title="Spirits Having Flown Tour" label="Spirits Having Flown tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563251" start="30508" end="30523" title="Too Much Heaven" label="Too Much Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q609672" start="30742" end="30762" title="Rest Your Love on Me" label="Rest Your Love on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q82250" start="30902" end="30915" title="Conway Twitty" label="Conway Twitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="30929" end="30942" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612332" start="31178" end="31188" title="Steve Dahl" label="Steve Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867604" start="31196" end="31218" title="Disco Demolition Night" label="Disco Demolition Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q179694" start="31690" end="31702" title="Jimmy Ruffin" label="Jimmy Ruffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641037" start="31716" end="31723" title="Sunrise (Jimmy Ruffin album)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="31935" end="31951" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554096" start="31971" end="31977" title="Guilty (Barbra Streisand album)" label="Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297799" start="32315" end="32328" title="Woman in Love" label="Woman in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779660" start="32473" end="32479" title="Guilty (Barbra Streisand and Barry Gibb song)" label="Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991287" start="32496" end="32513" title="What Kind of Fool" label="What Kind of Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q683557" start="32597" end="32608" title="Living Eyes (Bee Gees album)" label="Living Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820221" start="32764" end="32785" title="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World" label="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q721559" start="32955" end="32972" title="Jive Talkin&amp;#x27;" label="Jive Talkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688554" start="33033" end="33049" title="He&amp;#x27;s a Liar" label="He&amp;#x27;s a Liar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659112" start="33099" end="33110" title="Living Eyes (song)" label="Living Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q234695" start="33150" end="33164" title="Dionne Warwick" label="Dionne Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273744" start="33191" end="33215" title="Adult Contemporary (chart)" label="Adult Contemporary No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692717" start="33252" end="33264" title="Heartbreaker (Dionne Warwick song)" label="Heartbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692711" start="33287" end="33309" title="Heartbreaker (Dionne Warwick album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="33478" end="33490" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="33495" end="33507" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163515" start="33549" end="33570" title="Islands in the Stream (song)" label="Islands in the Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q10278941" start="33686" end="33711" title="Eyes That See in the Dark" label="Eyes That See in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33897" end="33907" title="Staying Alive (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q155458" start="33917" end="33930" title="Staying Alive (1983 film)" label="Staying Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654" start="33966" end="33986" title="Saturday Night Fever" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775544" start="34079" end="34095" title="The Woman in You" label="The Woman in You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448609" start="34158" end="34170" title="Selle v. Gibb" label="Ronald Selle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218960" start="34807" end="34818" title="Now Voyager" label="Now Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918055" start="34879" end="34895" title="How Old Are You? (album)" label="How Old Are You?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443946" start="34909" end="34921" title="Secret Agent (Robin Gibb album)" label="Secret Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963222" start="34938" end="34953" title="Walls Have Eyes" label="Walls Have Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879118" start="35011" end="35032" title="Hold Her in Your Hand" label="Hold Her in Your Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="35094" end="35104" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278402" start="35130" end="35141" title="Eaten Alive (album)" label="Eaten Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="35211" end="35226" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059062" start="35330" end="35344" title="Chain Reaction (Diana Ross song)" label="Chain Reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q971427" start="35501" end="35507" title="E.S.P. (Bee Gees album)" label="E.S.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="35616" end="35636" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q481297" start="35655" end="35668" title="You Win Again (Bee Gees song)" label="You Win Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="36167" end="36185" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968216" start="36190" end="36223" title="Ivor Novello Award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically" label="Best Song Musically and Lyrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="36266" end="36276" title="Brit Award" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770228" start="36292" end="36310" title="Brit Award for British Group" label="Best British Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="36350" end="36362" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36394" end="36406" title="1988 Summer Olympics Album: One Moment in Time" label="the Bunburys"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36805" end="36835" title="1988 Summer Olympics Album: One Moment in Time" label="The 1988 Summer Olympics Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q513650" start="36881" end="36884" title="One (Bee Gees album)" label="One"/>
<link wikidata="Q176537" start="36982" end="36986" title="Andy Gibb" label="Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="37012" end="37023" title="myocarditis" label="myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q896455" start="37357" end="37386" title="The Very Best of the Bee Gees" label="The Very Best of the Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036306" start="37581" end="37598" title="High Civilization" label="High Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031792" start="37655" end="37666" title="Secret Love (Bee Gees song)" label="Secret Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="37823" end="37832" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18231" start="38080" end="38100" title="Alcoholics Anonymous" label="Alcoholics Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q643388" start="38181" end="38207" title="Size Isn&amp;#x27;t Everything" label="Size Isn&amp;#x27;t Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156747" start="38370" end="38394" title="Paying the Price of Love" label="Paying the Price of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="38438" end="38467" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187747" start="38552" end="38564" title="Still Waters (Bee Gees album)" label="Still Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734372" start="38719" end="38724" title="Alone (Bee Gees song)" label="Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117668" start="38894" end="38910" title="Brit Awards 1997" label="1997 BRIT Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130746" start="38919" end="38930" title="Earls Court Exhibition Centre" label="Earls Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="39088" end="39097" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q897590" start="39111" end="39125" title="One Night Only (Bee Gees album)" label="One Night Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="39303" end="39314" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564533" start="39329" end="39340" title="Immortality (Celine Dion song)" label="Immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="39814" end="39829" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q295886" start="39883" end="39898" title="Stadium Australia" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q728791" start="40057" end="40063" title="Grease (song)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="40123" end="40144" title="Grease (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q673893" start="40287" end="40303" title="Saturday Night Fever (musical)" label="stage production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364626" start="40446" end="40458" title="Ellan Vannin (poem)" label="Ellan Vannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="40469" end="40473" title="Isle of Man" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088452" start="40998" end="41021" title="This Is Where I Came In" label="This Is Where I Came In"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785985" start="41140" end="41155" title="This Is Where I Came In (song)" label="The title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950796" start="41583" end="41605" title="Bowel infarction" label="strangulated intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567133" start="41909" end="41915" title="Magnet (album)" label="Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542347" start="41983" end="42002" title="Grammy Legend Award" label="Grammy Legend Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="42221" end="42224" title="Order of the British Empire" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="42234" end="42251" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024116" start="42456" end="42468" title="One World Project" label="rock artists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42526" end="42540" title="Humanitarian response to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake#Fundraising events" label="tsunami relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281362" start="42556" end="42585" title="Disasters Emergency Committee" label="Disasters Emergency Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="42624" end="42640" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377974" start="42673" end="42689" title="Guilty Pleasures (Barbra Streisand album)" label="Guilty Pleasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377974" start="42715" end="42725" title="Guilty Pleasures (Barbra Streisand album)" label="Guilty Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554096" start="42782" end="42788" title="Guilty (Barbra Streisand album)" label="Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="42877" end="42890" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="43258" end="43277" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="43410" end="43428" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q856393" start="43528" end="43549" title="Sydney Cricket Ground" label="Sydney Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q390075" start="43559" end="43571" title="Sound Relief" label="Sound Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q838278" start="43622" end="43641" title="Victorian Bushfires" label="Victorian Bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794514" start="43828" end="43834" title="MAX (Australian TV channel)" label="Max TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="44138" end="44141" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070684" start="44155" end="44176" title="Strictly Come Dancing" label="Strictly Come Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="44218" end="44224" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674710" start="44238" end="44260" title="Dancing with the Stars (American TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="44349" end="44353" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="44363" end="44389" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="44478" end="44491" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="44596" end="44608" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561298" start="44824" end="44836" title="the Soldiers" label="the Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q676755" start="44900" end="44916" title="London Palladium" label="London Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="45108" end="45117" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="45123" end="45130" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10334198" start="45409" end="45424" title="Mythology Tour" label="first solo tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="45856" end="45865" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="46017" end="46025" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q208882" start="46587" end="46597" title="Steve Gibb" label="Steve Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963082" start="46626" end="46636" title="In the Now" label="In the Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701275" start="46820" end="46849" title="50 St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Drive" label="50 St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="46871" end="46886" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="47018" end="47027" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47071" end="47116" title="The Bee Gees: How Can You Mend a Broken Heart" label="The Bee Gees: How Can You Mend a Broken Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="47328" end="47343" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844182" start="47459" end="47470" title="Greenfields (album)" label="Greenfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="47686" end="47698" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q315547" start="47700" end="47711" title="Keith Urban" label="Keith Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q231233" start="47716" end="47731" title="Miranda Lambert" label="Miranda Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="47857" end="47861" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="ARIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="47910" end="47923" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="48065" end="48076" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q690138" start="48078" end="48097" title="the Everly Brothers" label="the Everly Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206839" start="48099" end="48117" title="the Mills Brothers" label="the Mills Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="48119" end="48132" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="48134" end="48152" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="48154" end="48165" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="48167" end="48181" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="48186" end="48199" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="48315" end="48326" title="the Hollies" label="the Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="48331" end="48343" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q312743" start="48364" end="48375" title="Neil Sedaka" label="Neil Sedaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q452483" start="48455" end="48466" title="Linda Creed" label="Linda Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307426" start="48477" end="48491" title="the Stylistics" label="the Stylistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="48523" end="48530" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="48557" end="48568" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="48883" end="48894" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526096" start="48924" end="48950" title="Da Ya Think I&amp;#x27;m Sexy?" label="Da Ya Think I&amp;#x27;m Sexy?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397201" start="48986" end="48998" title="Kevin Parker (musician)" label="Kevin Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9619" start="49002" end="49013" title="Tame Impala" label="Tame Impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="49067" end="49076" title="Psilocybin mushroom" label="mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q19824616" start="49156" end="49164" title="Currents (Tame Impala album)" label="Currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="49185" end="49195" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146764" start="49201" end="49210" title="the Cribs" label="the Cribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129789" start="49261" end="49272" title="Ryan Jarman" label="Ryan Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="49547" end="49554" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q184249" start="49618" end="49631" title="Kelly Rowland" label="Kelly Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q229153" start="49636" end="49644" title="Michelle Williams (singer)" label="Michelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q215300" start="49910" end="49923" title="Jordin Sparks" label="Jordin Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q215546" start="50151" end="50167" title="Carrie Underwood" label="Carrie Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969396" start="50723" end="50776" title="The Ivors Academy" label="British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q337722" start="50855" end="50867" title="Gavin DeGraw" label="Gavin DeGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166377" start="50985" end="50989" title="Q150" label="Q150"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325277" start="51046" end="51056" title="List of Queensland&amp;#x27;s Q150 Icons" label="Q150 Icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q887146" start="51277" end="51289" title="Reubin Askew" label="Reubin Askew"/>
<link wikidata="Q878313" start="51295" end="51303" title="List of governors of Florida" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="51468" end="51490" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="51524" end="51541" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020213" start="51584" end="51597" title="Michael Aspel" label="Michael Aspel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015589" start="51637" end="51654" title="Steve Wright (DJ)" label="Steve Wright (DJ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914560" start="51683" end="51705" title="Broadcasting House" label="BBC Broadcasting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="51752" end="51776" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="51915" end="51941" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375931" start="51979" end="52017" title="Honorific nicknames in popular music" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s First Family of Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="52028" end="52040" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="52063" end="52077" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426142" start="52185" end="52209" title="Vocal Group Hall of Fame" label="Vocal Group Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="52329" end="52341" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="52492" end="52501" title="Broadcast Music, Inc." label="BMI Icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012748" start="52744" end="52767" title="New Year Honours" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="52855" end="52882" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="52933" end="52950" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="53101" end="53134" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Borough of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108044162" start="53383" end="53405" title="Statue of Bee Gees (Redcliffe, Queensland)" label="statue of the Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026184" start="53539" end="53548" title="Redcliffe, Queensland" label="Redcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626024" start="53748" end="53770" title="Statue of Bee Gees (Douglas, Isle of Man)" label="statue of the Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="53878" end="53896" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="53978" end="54000" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honoree"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611395" start="54561" end="54584" title="Queensland Music Awards" label="Queensland Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="54651" end="54661" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54750" end="54754" title="Queensland Music Awards#2009 Q Song Awards" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q296872" start="54848" end="54858" title="Barry Gibb" label="Barry Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q188482" start="54914" end="54924" title="Robin Gibb" label="Robin Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q296876" start="55009" end="55021" title="Maurice Gibb" label="Maurice Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q390321" start="55082" end="55096" title="Colin Petersen" label="Colin Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035630" start="55130" end="55144" title="Vince Melouney" label="Vince Melouney"/>
<link wikidata="Q109801691" start="55195" end="55210" title="Geoff Bridgford" label="Geoff Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299511" start="55301" end="55313" title="Alan Kendall" label="Alan Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107069" start="55353" end="55364" title="Chris Karan" label="Chris Karan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258236" start="55382" end="55394" title="Dennis Bryon" label="Dennis Bryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q885939" start="55475" end="55486" title="Blue Weaver" label="Blue Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210838" start="55527" end="55535" title="Joe Lala" label="Joe Lala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734419" start="55801" end="55813" title="George &amp;quot;Chocolate&amp;quot; Perry" label="George Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070766" start="55835" end="55851" title="Chester Thompson" label="Chester Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665426" start="55869" end="55880" title="Mike Murphy (musician)" label="Mike Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436305" start="55984" end="55998" title="Scott F. Crago" label="Scott F. Crago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613816" start="56054" end="56066" title="Steve Rucker" label="Steve Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q28606352" start="56089" end="56100" title="Ben Stivers" label="Ben Stivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208882" start="56127" end="56139" title="Steve Gibb" label="Stephen Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="56202" end="56214" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q720049" start="56225" end="56237" title="Lenny Castro" label="Lenny Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q472051" start="56253" end="56263" title="Glenn Frey" label="Glenn Frey"/>
<link wikidata="Q944128" start="56287" end="56304" title="Timothy B. Schmit" label="Timothy B. Schmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="56321" end="56330" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q704399" start="56347" end="56357" title="Don Felder" label="Don Felder"/>
<link wikidata="Q350353" start="56381" end="56393" title="Jeff Porcaro" label="Jeff Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q921542" start="56416" end="56428" title="Mike Porcaro" label="Mike Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q554164" start="56457" end="56470" title="Steve Porcaro" label="Steve Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q318483" start="56485" end="56499" title="Steve Lukather" label="Steve Lukather"/>
<link wikidata="Q960298" start="56511" end="56524" title="David Hungate" label="David Hungate"/>
<link wikidata="Q466980" start="56541" end="56552" title="David Paich" label="David Paich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369920" start="56567" end="56584" title="Greg Phillinganes" label="Greg Phillinganes"/>
<link wikidata="Q435650" start="56599" end="56612" title="Bobby Kimball" label="Bobby Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q304851" start="56627" end="56639" title="Leland Sklar" label="Leland Sklar"/>
<link wikidata="Q437713" start="56656" end="56665" title="Reb Beach" label="Reb Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381281" start="56682" end="56698" title="Gregg Bissonette" label="Gregg Bissonette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956874" start="56709" end="56721" title="Ricky Lawson" label="Ricky Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436305" start="56744" end="56758" title="Scott F. Crago" label="Scott F. Crago"/>
<link wikidata="Q454031" start="56769" end="56779" title="Steve Gadd" label="Steve Gadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q708218" start="56790" end="56803" title="Steve Ferrone" label="Steve Ferrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353921" start="56814" end="56826" title="Steve Jordan (drummer)" label="Steve Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q764843" start="56837" end="56848" title="Nathan East" label="Nathan East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498822" start="56865" end="56878" title="Steuart Smith" label="Steuart Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q27747" start="56895" end="56910" title="Vinnie Colaiuta" label="Vinnie Colaiuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q928132" start="57005" end="57025" title="Saturday Night Fever (soundtrack)" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57049" end="57062" title="Staying Alive (soundtrack)" label="Staying Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657554" start="57249" end="57295" title="A Kick in the Head Is Worth Eight in the Pants" label="A Kick in the Head Is Worth Eight in the Pants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051796" start="57446" end="57492" title="The Bee Gees Sing and Play 14 Barry Gibb Songs" label="The Bee Gees Sing and Play 14 Barry Gibb Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q746808" start="57514" end="57531" title="Spicks and Specks (album)" label="Spicks and Specks"/>
<link wikidata="Q768601" start="57553" end="57571" title="Bee Gees&amp;#x27; 1st" label="Bee Gees&amp;#x27; 1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q924970" start="57593" end="57603" title="Horizontal (album)" label="Horizontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q511439" start="57625" end="57629" title="Idea (album)" label="Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q737584" start="57651" end="57657" title="Odessa (Bee Gees album)" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q899498" start="57679" end="57694" title="Cucumber Castle" label="Cucumber Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q260948" start="57716" end="57726" title="2 Years On" label="2 Years On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088216" start="57748" end="57757" title="Trafalgar (album)" label="Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187740" start="57779" end="57801" title="To Whom It May Concern (Bee Gees album)" label="To Whom It May Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q965202" start="57823" end="57840" title="Life in a Tin Can" label="Life in a Tin Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088209" start="57862" end="57873" title="Mr. Natural (Bee Gees album)" label="Mr. Natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q544400" start="57895" end="57906" title="Main Course" label="Main Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q860614" start="57928" end="57949" title="Children of the World" label="Children of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q971158" start="57971" end="57991" title="Spirits Having Flown" label="Spirits Having Flown"/>
<link wikidata="Q683557" start="58013" end="58024" title="Living Eyes (Bee Gees album)" label="Living Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q971427" start="58046" end="58052" title="E.S.P. (Bee Gees album)" label="E.S.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q513650" start="58074" end="58077" title="One (Bee Gees album)" label="One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036306" start="58099" end="58116" title="High Civilization" label="High Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q643388" start="58138" end="58164" title="Size Isn&amp;#x27;t Everything" label="Size Isn&amp;#x27;t Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187747" start="58186" end="58198" title="Still Waters (Bee Gees album)" label="Still Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088452" start="58220" end="58243" title="This Is Where I Came In" label="This Is Where I Came In"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716262" start="58278" end="58322" title="The Bee Gees&amp;#x27; concerts in 1967 and 1968" label="The Bee Gees&amp;#x27; concerts in 1967 and 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578864" start="58474" end="58499" title="Spirits Having Flown Tour" label="Spirits Having Flown Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964006" start="58509" end="58531" title="One for All World Tour" label="One for All World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="58833" end="58846" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149246" wikidata="Q462305" url="?curid=149246" title="James B. Weaver">
<text>James Baird Weaver (June 12, 1833 – February 6, 1912) was an American politician in Iowa who was a member of the United States House of Representatives and two-time candidate for President of the United States. He belonged to several different political parties over the course of his political career. He joined the Republicans, opposed slavery, and served as an officer in the Union army during the civil war, but after 1876 he switched to the Greenbacks, then the Populists, and finally the Democrats. He trained as a lawyer. Late in his career he served as mayor of Colfax, Iowa. He wrote &quot;A Call to Action: An Interpretation of the Great Uprising, Its Source and Causes&quot; published in 1892 when he was a Populist Party candidate for the U.S. presidency, he later wrote a history of Jasper County, Iowa.

Born in Ohio, he moved to Iowa as a boy when his family claimed a homestead on the frontier. He became politically active as a young man and was an advocate for farmers and laborers. He joined and quit several political parties in the furtherance of the progressive causes in which he believed. After serving in the Union Army in the American Civil War, Weaver returned to Iowa and worked for the election of Republican candidates.

After several unsuccessful attempts at Republican nominations to various offices, and growing dissatisfied with the conservative wing of the party, in 1877, Weaver switched to the Greenback Party, which supported increasing the money supply and regulating big business. As a Greenbacker with Democratic support, Weaver won election to the House in 1878. The Greenbackers nominated Weaver for president in 1880, but he received only 3.3percent of the popular vote. After several more attempts at elected office, he was again elected to the House in 1884 and 1886. In Congress, he worked for expansion of the money supply and for the opening of Indian Territory to white settlement.

As the Greenback Party fell apart, a new anti-big business third party, the People&#x27;s Party (&quot;Populists&quot;), arose. Weaver helped to organize the party and was their nominee for president in 1892. This time he was more successful and gained 8.5percent of the popular vote and won five states, but still fell far short of victory. The Populists merged with the Democrats by the end of the 19th century, and Weaver went with them, promoting the candidacy of William Jennings Bryan for president in 1896, 1900, and 1908. After serving as mayor of his home town, Colfax, Iowa, Weaver retired from his pursuit of elective office. He died in Iowa in 1912. Most of Weaver&#x27;s political goals remained unfulfilled at his death, but many came to pass in the following decades.

==Early years==
James Baird Weaver was born in Dayton, Ohio, on June 12, 1833, the fifth of thirteen children of Abram Weaver and Susan Imlay Weaver. Weaver&#x27;s father was a farmer, also born in Ohio, and a descendant of Revolutionary War veterans. He married Weaver&#x27;s mother, who was from New Jersey, in 1824. Shortly after Weaver&#x27;s birth, in 1835, the family moved to a farm nine miles north of Cassopolis, Michigan. In 1842, the family moved again to the Iowa Territory to await the opening of former Sac and Fox land to white settlement the following year. They claimed a homestead along the Chequest Creek in Davis County. Abram Weaver built a house and farmed his new land until 1848, when the family moved to Bloomfield, the county seat.

Abram Weaver, a Democrat involved in local politics, was elected clerk of the district court in 1848; he often vied for election to other offices, usually unsuccessfully. James Weaver&#x27;s brother-in-law, Hosea Horn, a Whig, was appointed postmaster the following year, and through him James Weaver secured his first job, delivering mail to neighboring Jefferson County. In 1851 Weaver quit the mail route to read law with Samuel G. McAchran, a local lawyer. Two years later, Weaver interrupted his legal career to accompany another brother-in-law, Dr. Calvin Phelps, on a cattle drive overland from Bloomfield to Sacramento, California. Weaver initially intended to stay and prospect for gold, but instead booked passage on a ship for Panama. He crossed the isthmus, boarded another ship to New York, and returned home to Iowa.

Upon his return, Weaver worked briefly as a store clerk before resuming the study of law. He enrolled in the Cincinnati Law School in 1855, where he studied under Bellamy Storer. While in Cincinnati, Weaver began to question his support for the institution of slavery, a change biographers attribute to Storer&#x27;s influence. After graduating in 1856 Weaver returned to Bloomfield and was admitted to the Iowa bar. By 1857, he had broken with the Democratic Party of his father to join the growing coalition that opposed the expansion of slavery, which became the Republican Party.

Weaver traveled around southern Iowa in 1858, giving speeches on behalf of his new party&#x27;s candidates. That summer, he married Clarrisa (Clara) Vinson, a schoolteacher from nearby Keosauqua, Iowa, whom he had courted since he returned from Cincinnati. The marriage lasted until Weaver&#x27;s death in 1912 and the couple had eight children. After the wedding, Weaver started a law firm with Hosea Horn and continued his involvement in Republican politics. He gave several speeches on behalf of Samuel J. Kirkwood for governor in 1859 in a campaign that focused heavily on the slavery debate; although the Republicans lost Weaver&#x27;s Davis County, Kirkwood narrowly won the election. The next year, Weaver served as a delegate to the state convention and, although not a national delegate, traveled with the Iowa delegation to the 1860 Republican National Convention, where Abraham Lincoln was nominated. Lincoln carried Iowa and won the election, but Southern states responded to the Republican victory by seceding from the Union. By April 1861, the American Civil War had begun.

==Civil War==
After the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, Lincoln called for 75,000 men to join the Union Army. Weaver enlisted in what became CompanyG of the 2nd Iowa Volunteer Infantry Regiment, and was elected the company&#x27;s first lieutenant. The 2nd Iowa, commanded by Colonel Samuel Ryan Curtis, a former Congressman, was ordered to Missouri in June 1861 to secure railroad lines in that border state. Weaver&#x27;s unit spent that summer in northern Missouri and did not see action. Meanwhile Clara gave birth to the couple&#x27;s second child and first son, named James Bellamy Weaver after his father and Bellamy Storer.

Weaver&#x27;s first chance at action came in February 1862, when the 2nd Iowa joined Brigadier General Ulysses S. Grant&#x27;s army outside the Confederate Fort Donelson in Tennessee. Weaver&#x27;s company was in the thick of the fight, which he described as a &quot;holocaust to the demon of battles&quot;, and he took a minor wound in the arm. The rebels surrendered the next day, the most important Union victory of the war to date. The 2nd Iowa next joined other units in the area at Pittsburg Landing, Tennessee, to mass for a major assault deeper into the South. Confederate forces met them there, in the Battle of Shiloh. Weaver&#x27;s regiment was in the center of the Union lines, in the area later known as the &quot;hornets&#x27; nest&quot;, and retreated amid fierce fighting. The next day, the Union forces turned the tide and forced the rebels off the field in what Weaver called a &quot;perfect rout&quot;. The carnage at Shiloh (some 20,000 killed and wounded on both sides) was on a scale never before seen in American warfare, and both sides learned that the war would end neither quickly nor easily.

After Shiloh, Weaver and the 2nd Iowa slowly advanced to Corinth, Mississippi, where he was promoted to major. Rebel forces attacked the Union armies there in the Second Battle of Corinth, where Weaver&#x27;s courage in that Union victory convinced his superiors to promote him to colonel after the regiment&#x27;s commanding officer was killed. After Corinth, Weaver&#x27;s unit took up garrison duty in northern Mississippi. In the summer of 1863 they were redeployed to the Tennessee–Alabama border, again on occupation duty around Pulaski, Tennessee. They rejoined the action at the Battle of Resaca, a part of the Atlanta Campaign, then continued with Major General William Tecumseh Sherman&#x27;s march through Georgia to the sea in 1864. Weaver&#x27;s enlistment ended in May 1864, and he returned to his family in Iowa. On October 12, 1864, he would be selected to lead a local militia in Davis County after it was reported that Confederate partisans were actively raiding the area. He remained in command of the militia until November 7 when the partisans surrendered. After the war ended Weaver received a promotion to brevet brigadier general, backdated to March 13, 1865.

==Republican politics==
Soon after returning from the war Weaver became editor of a pro-Republican Bloomfield newspaper, the &quot;Weekly Union Guard&quot;. At the 1865 Iowa Republican State Convention, he placed second for the nomination for lieutenant governor. The following year, Weaver was elected district attorney for the second judicial district, covering six counties in southern Iowa. In 1867, President Andrew Johnson appointed him assessor of internal revenue in the first Congressional district, which extended across southeastern Iowa. The job came with a $1500 salary, plus a percentage of taxes collected over $100,000. Weaver held that lucrative position until 1872, when Congress abolished it. He also became involved in the Methodist Episcopal Church, serving as a delegate to a church convention in Baltimore in 1876. Membership in the Methodist church coincided with Weaver&#x27;s interest in the growing movement for prohibition of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. His income and prestige grew along with his family, which included seven children by 1877. Weaver&#x27;s success allowed him to build a large new home for his family, which still stands.

Weaver&#x27;s work for the party led many to support his nomination to represent Iowa&#x27;s 6th congressional district in the federal House of Representatives in 1874. Many party insiders, however, were wary of Weaver&#x27;s association with the Prohibition movement and preferred to remain uncommitted on the divisive issue. At the convention, Weaver led on the first ballot, but ultimately lost the nomination by one vote to Ezekiel S. Sampson, a local judge. Weaver&#x27;s allies attributed his loss to &quot;the meanest kind of wire pulling&quot;, but Weaver shrugged off the defeat and aimed instead at the gubernatorial nomination in 1875. He launched a vigorous effort, courted delegates around the state, and explicitly endorsed Prohibition and greater state control of railroad rates. Weaver attracted many delegates&#x27; support, but alienated those who were friendly to the railroads and wished to avoid the liquor issue. Opposition was scattered among several lesser-known candidates, mostly members of Senator William B. Allison&#x27;s conservative wing of the party. They united at the convention when a delegate unexpectedly nominated former governor Kirkwood. The nomination carried easily and, after Allison&#x27;s associates persuaded him to accept it, Kirkwood was nominated, and went on to win the election. In a further defeat, the delegates refused to endorse Prohibition in the party platform. Weaver had small consolation in a nomination to the state Senate, but he lost to his Democratic opponent in the election that fall.

==Switch to the Greenback Party==
After his defeats in 1875, Weaver grew disenchanted with the Republican party, not only because it had spurned him, but also because of the policy choices of the dominant Allison faction. In May 1876, he traveled to Indianapolis to attend the national convention of the newly formed Greenback Party. The new party had arisen, mostly in the West, as a response to the economic depression that followed the Panic of 1873. During the Civil War, Congress had authorized &quot;greenbacks&quot;, a new form of fiat money that was redeemable not in gold but in government bonds. The greenbacks had helped to finance the war when the government&#x27;s gold supply did not keep pace with the expanding costs of maintaining the armies. When the crisis had passed, many in both parties, especially in the East, wanted to place the nation&#x27;s currency on a gold standard as soon as possible. The Specie Payment Resumption Act, passed in 1875, ordered that greenbacks be gradually withdrawn and replaced with gold-backed currency beginning in 1879. At the same time, the depression had made it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had contracted when currency was less valuable. Beyond their support for a larger money supply, Greenbackers also favored an eight-hour work day, safety regulations in factories, an end to child labor, and the end of wage slavery. As historian Herbert Clancy put it, they &quot;anticipated by almost fifty years the progressive legislation of the first quarter of the twentieth century&quot;.

In the 1876 presidential campaign, the Republicans nominated Rutherford B. Hayes and the Democrats chose Samuel J. Tilden. Both candidates opposed the issuance of more greenbacks (candidates who favored the gold-backed currency were called &quot;hard money&quot; supporters, while the Greenbackers&#x27; policy of encouraging inflation was known as &quot;soft money&quot;.) Weaver was impressed with the Greenbackers and their candidate, Peter Cooper, but while he advocated some soft-money policies, he declined the Greenback nomination for Congress and remained a Republican; he campaigned for Hayes in the election that year. In 1877, Weaver attended the Republican state convention and saw the state party adopt a soft-money platform that also favored Prohibition. The gubernatorial nominee, however, was John H. Gear, an opponent of Prohibition who had worked to defeat Weaver in his quest for the governorship two years earlier. After initially supporting Gear, Weaver joined the Greenback party in August. He gave speeches on behalf of his new party, debated former allies across the state, and establishing himself as a prominent advocate for the Greenback cause.
==Congress==
In May 1878, Weaver accepted the Greenback nomination for the House of Representatives in the 6th district. Although Weaver&#x27;s political career up to then had been as a staunch Republican, Democrats in the 6th district thought that endorsing him was likely the only way to defeat Sampson, the incumbent Republican. Since the start of the Civil War, Democrats had been in the minority across Iowa; electoral fusion with Greenbackers represented their best chance to get their candidates into office. Hard-money Democrats objected to the idea, but some were reassured when Henry Hoffman Trimble assured them that if elected Weaver would align with House Democrats on all issues other than the money question. Democrats declined to endorse any candidate at the 6th district convention, but soft-money leaders in the party circulated their own slate of candidates that included Democrats and Greenbackers. The Greenback–Democrat ticket prevailed, and Weaver was elected with 16,366 votes to Sampson&#x27;s 14,307.

Weaver entered the 46th Congress in March 1879, one of thirteen Greenbackers elected in 1878. Although the House was closely divided, neither major party included the Greenbackers in their caucus, leaving them few committee assignments and little input on legislation. Weaver gave his first speech in April 1879, criticizing the use of the army to police Southern polling stations, while also decrying the violence against black Southerners that made such protection necessary; he then described the Greenback platform, which he said would put an end to the sectional and economic strife. The next month, he spoke in favor of a bill calling for an increase in the money supply by allowing the unlimited coinage of silver, but the bill was easily defeated. Weaver&#x27;s oratorical skill drew praise, but he had no luck in advancing Greenback policy ideas.

In 1880, Weaver prepared a resolution stating that the government, not banks, should issue currency and determine its volume, and that the federal debt should be repaid in whatever currency the government chose, not just gold as the law then required. The proposed resolution would never be allowed to emerge from committees dominated by Democrats and Republicans, so Weaver planned to introduce it directly to the whole House for debate, as members were permitted to do every Monday. Rather than debate a proposition that would expose the monetary divide in the Democratic Party, Speaker Samuel J. Randall refused to recognize Weaver when he rose to propose the resolution. Weaver returned to the floor each succeeding Monday, with the same result, and the press took notice of Randall&#x27;s obstruction. Eventually, Republican James A. Garfield of Ohio interceded with Randall to recognize Weaver, which he reluctantly did on April 5, 1880. The Republicans, mostly united behind hard money, largely voted against the measure, while many Democrats joined the Greenbackers voting in favor. Despite support by the soft-money Democrats, the resolution was defeated 84–117 with many members abstaining. Although he lost the vote, Weaver had promoted the monetary issue in the national consciousness. 

==Presidential election of 1880==

By 1879, the Greenback coalition had divided, with the faction most prominent in the South and West, led by Marcus M. &quot;Brick&quot; Pomeroy, splitting from the main party. Pomeroy&#x27;s faction, called the &quot;Union Greenback Labor Party&quot;, was more radical and emphasized its independence, and suggested that Eastern Greenbackers were likely to &quot;sell out the party at any time to the Democrats&quot;. Weaver remained with the rump Greenback party, often called the &quot;National Greenback Party&quot;, and the national reputation he had earned in Congress made him one of the party&#x27;s leading presidential hopefuls.

The Union Greenbackers held their convention first and nominated Stephen D. Dillaye of New Jersey for president and Barzillai J. Chambers of Texas for vice president, but also sent a delegation to the National Greenback convention in Chicago that June, with an eye toward reuniting the party. The two factions agreed to reunify, and also to admit a delegation from the Socialist Labor Party. Thus united, the convention turned to nominations. Weaver led on the first ballot, and on the second he secured a majority. Chambers won the convention&#x27;s vote for vice president.

In a departure from the political traditions of the day, Weaver himself campaigned, making speeches across the South in July and August. As the Greenbackers had the only ticket that included a Southerner, Weaver and Chambers hoped to make inroads in the South. As the campaign progressed, however, Weaver&#x27;s message of racial inclusion drew violent protests in the South, as the Greenbackers faced the same obstacles the Republicans did in the face of increasing black disenfranchisement. In the autumn Weaver campaigned in the North, but the Greenbackers&#x27; lack of support was compounded by Weaver&#x27;s refusal to run a fusion ticket in states where Democratic and Greenbacker strength might have combined to outvote the Republicans.

Weaver received 305,997 votes and no electoral votes, compared to 4,446,158 for the winner, Republican James A. Garfield, and 4,444,260 for Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock. The party was strongest in the West and South, but in no state did Weaver receive more than 12percent of the vote (his best state was Texas, with 11.7percent); his nationwide total was just 3percent. That figure represented an improvement over the Greenback vote of 1876, but to Weaver, who expected twice as many votes as he received, it was a disappointment.

==Office-seeker and party promoter==
After the election Weaver returned to the lame-duck session of Congress and proposed an unsuccessful constitutional amendment that would have provided for the direct election of Senators. After his term expired in March, he resumed his speaking tour, promoting the Greenback Party across the nation. He and Edward H. Gillette, another Iowa Greenback Congressman, bought the &quot;Iowa Tribune&quot; in 1882 to help spread the Greenback message. That same year, Weaver ran for his old 6th district seat in the House against the incumbent Republican, Marsena E. Cutts. This time the Democrats and Greenbackers ran separate candidates, and Weaver finished a distant second. Cutts died before taking office, and the Republicans offered to let Weaver run unopposed in the special election if he rejoined their party; he declined, and John C. Cook, a Democrat, won the seat.

In 1883, Weaver was the Greenback nominee for governor of Iowa. Again, the Democrats ran a separate candidate and the incumbent Republican, Buren R. Sherman, was re-elected with a plurality. Weaver was a delegate to the 1884 Greenback National Convention in Indianapolis and supported the eventual nominee, Benjamin Butler of Massachusetts. Back in Iowa, Weaver again ran for the House, this time with the Democrats&#x27; support. Greenback fortunes declined nationally, as Butler received just over half as many votes for president as Weaver had four years earlier. Weaver&#x27;s House race bucked the trend: he defeated Republican Frank T. Campbell by just 67 votes.

==Return to Congress==
Unlike in his previous congressional term, when Weaver entered the 49th United States Congress, he was the only Greenback member. The new president, Democrat Grover Cleveland, was friendly to Weaver, and asked his advice on Iowa patronage. As it had been for years, Weaver&#x27;s chief concern was with the nation&#x27;s money and finance, and the relationship between labor and capital.

In 1885, Weaver proposed the creation of a Department of Labor, which he suggested would find a solution to disputes between labor and management. Labor tensions increased the following year as the Knights of Labor went on strike against Jay Gould&#x27;s rail empire, and a strike against the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company ended in the bloody Haymarket riot. Weaver believed the nation&#x27;s hard-money policies were responsible for labor unrest, calling it &quot;purely a question of money, and nothing else&quot; and declaring, &quot;If this Congress will not protect labor, it must protect itself&quot;. He saw the triumph of one plank of the Greenback platform when Congress established the Interstate Commerce Commission to regulate the railroads. Weaver thought the bill should have given the government more power, including the ability to set rates directly, but he voted for the final bill.
Weaver also took up the issue of white settlement in Indian Territory. For several years, white settlers had been claiming homesteads in the Unassigned Lands in what is now Oklahoma. After the Civil War. the Five Civilized Tribes had been forced to cede their unused western lands to the federal government. The settlers, known as Boomers, believed that federal ownership made the lands open to settlement under the Homestead Acts. The federal government disagreed, as did the Cherokee Nation, which leased its neighboring Cherokee Outlet to Kansas cattle ranchers, and many Easterners, who believed the Boomers to be the tools of railroad interests. Weaver saw the issue as one between the landless poor homesteaders and wealthy cattlemen, and took the side of the former. He introduced a bill in December 1885 to organize Indian Territory and the neighboring Neutral Strip into a new Oklahoma Territory. The bill died in committee, but Weaver reintroduced it in February 1886 and gave a speech calling for the Indian reservations to be broken up into homesteads for individual Natives and the remaining land to be open to white settlement.

The Committee on Territories again rejected Weaver&#x27;s bill, but approved a compromise measure that opened the Unassigned Lands, Cherokee Outlet, and Neutral Strip to settlement. Congress debated the bill over several months, while the tribes announced their resistance to their lands becoming a territory; according to an 1884 Supreme Court decision, &quot;Elk v. Wilkins&quot;, Native Americans were not citizens, and thus would have no voting rights in the new territory. When Weaver returned to Iowa to campaign for re-election, the bill was still in limbo. Running again on a Democratic–Greenback fusion ticket, Weaver was re-elected to the House in 1886 with a 618-vote majority.

In the lame-duck session of 1887, Congress passed the Dawes Act, which allowed the president to terminate tribal governments, and broke up Indian reservations into homesteads for individual natives. Although the Five Civilized Tribes were exempt from the Act, the spirit of the law encouraged Weaver and the Boomers to continue their own efforts to open western Indian Territory to white settlement. Weaver reintroduced his Oklahoma bill in the new Congress the following year, but again it stalled in committee. He returned to Iowa for another re-election campaign in September 1888, but the Greenback party had fallen apart, replaced by a new left-wing third party, the Union Labor Party. In Iowa&#x27;s 6th district, the new party agreed to fuse with Democrats to nominate Weaver, but this time the Republicans were stronger. Their candidate, John F. Lacey, was elected with an 828-vote margin. The Union Laborites and their presidential candidate, Alson Streeter, fared poorly nationally as well, and the new party soon dissolved. Weaver returned to Congress for the lame-duck session and once more pushed to organize the Oklahoma Territory. This time he prevailed, as the House voted 147–102 to open the Unassigned Lands to homesteaders. The Senate followed suit and President Cleveland, who was about to leave office, signed the bill into law.

==Farmers&#x27; Alliance and a new party==
The new president, Republican Benjamin Harrison, set April 22, 1889, as the date when the rush for the Unassigned Lands would begin. Weaver arrived at a railroad station in the territory in March with an eye toward relocating there. The would-be homesteaders welcomed him with great acclaim. Although settlers were not allowed to stake claims before noon on April 22, many scouted out the land ahead of time, and even marked off informal claims; Weaver was among them. After the rush, settlers who had waited challenged the claims of the &quot;Sooners&quot; who had entered early. Weaver&#x27;s identification with the group harmed his popularity in the territory. His claim was ultimately denied, and he returned to Iowa in 1890.

Weaver and his wife moved their household in 1890 from Bloomfield to Colfax, near Des Moines, as the former Congressman took up more active management of the &quot;Iowa Tribune&quot;. The Greenback and Union Labor parties were defunct, but he still proselytized for their ideals. In August 1890, Weaver addressed a convention in Des Moines where former Greenbackers and Laborites gathered, although he declined their nomination for Congress. The economic conditions that had created the Greenback party had not gone away; many farmers and laborers believed their situation had gotten worse since the Long Depression began in 1873. Many farmers had joined the Farmers&#x27; Alliance, which sought to promote soft-money ideas on a non-partisan basis; rather than create a third party, they endorsed major party candidates who supported their ideas and hired speakers to educate the public. Alliance-backed candidates did well in the 1890 elections, especially in the South, where Democrats endorsed by the Alliance won 44 seats.

Alliance members gathered that December in Ocala, Florida, and formulated a platform, later called the Ocala Demands, that called for looser money, government control of the railroads, a graduated income tax, and the direct election of senators. Weaver endorsed the message in the &quot;Tribune&quot; and corresponded with the group&#x27;s leader, Leonidas L. Polk. Weaver attended the group&#x27;s convention in Cincinnati in May 1891, where he and Polk argued against forming a third party. Another delegate, Ignatius L. Donnelly, argued forcefully for a break from the two major parties, and his argument carried the day, although Weaver and Polk kept many of Donnelly&#x27;s more radical proposals out of the convention&#x27;s statement of principles.

==Presidential election of 1892==

The following year, Weaver accepted the decision to form a new party (called the People&#x27;s Party or Populist Party) and published a book, &quot;A Call to Action&quot;, detailing the party&#x27;s principles and castigating the &quot;few haughty millionaires who are gathering up the riches of the new world&quot;. He attended their convention in Omaha, Nebraska, in July 1892. After Polk&#x27;s sudden death in June, Weaver was considered the front-runner for the nomination. He was nominated on the first ballot, easily besting his closest rival, Senator James H. Kyle of South Dakota. Weaver accepted the nomination and promised to &quot;visit every state in the Union and carry the banner of the people into the enemy&#x27;s camp&quot;. The vice presidential nomination went to James G. Field, a Confederate veteran and former Attorney General of Virginia.

The platform adopted in Omaha was ambitious for its time, calling for a graduated income tax, public ownership of the railroads, telegraph, and telephone systems, government-issued currency, and the unlimited coinage of silver (the idea that the United States would buy as much silver as miners could sell the government and strike it into coins) at a favorable 16-to-1 ratio with gold. The Republicans nominated Harrison for re-election, and the Democrats put forward ex-President Cleveland; as in 1880, Weaver was confident of a good showing for the new party against their opponents. Harrison had shown some favor to the free silver cause, but his party largely supported the hard-money gold standard; Cleveland was solidly for gold, but his running mate, Adlai Stevenson of Illinois, was a silverite. Against these, the Populist Party stood alone as undisputed partisans of soft money, which Weaver hoped would lead to success in rural areas. Further, as labor disturbances broke out in Homestead, Pennsylvania, and elsewhere, Weaver hoped urban laborers would rally to the Populist cause.

Weaver embarked on a speaking tour across the northern plains and Pacific coast states. In late August he turned South, hoping to break the Democrats&#x27; grip on those states. As in 1880, the issue of race hurt Weaver among white Southern voters, as he sought to attract black voters by urging cooperation between white and black farmers and calling for an end to lynchings. Weaver drew good crowds in the South, but he and his wife were also subjected to abuse from hecklers. Southern Democrats depicted Weaver as a threat to the conservative Democrats in power there; with the increasing disenfranchisement of black voters, this was to prove fatal to the Populists&#x27; hopes in the South.

On election day, Cleveland triumphed, carrying the entire South and many Northern states. Weaver&#x27;s performance was better than that of any third-party candidate since the Civil War, as he won over a million votes8.5percent of the total cast nationwide. In four states, he won a plurality, giving the Populists the electoral votes of Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, and Nevada along with two more votes from North Dakota and Oregon: twenty-two in total. Weaver believed the performance &quot;a surprising success&quot;, and thought it portended good results in future elections. &quot;Unaided by money,&quot; he said afterward, &quot;our grand young party has made an enviable record and achieved a surprising success at the polls.&quot;

==Populist elder statesman==
Weaver believed that the Populists&#x27; embrace of free silver would be the main issue to attract new members to the party. After the election he attended a meeting of the American Bimetallic League, a pro-silver group, and gave speeches advocating an inflationist monetary policy. Meanwhile the Panic of 1893 caused bank failures, factory closures, and general economic upheaval. As the federal gold reserves dwindled, President Cleveland convinced Congress to repeal the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which ensured the government would purchase less silver for coining and which further disconcerted free silver supporters. While depletion of gold reserves slowed after the repeal, the country&#x27;s economy still floundered.
The next year, 1894, saw pay cuts and labor disturbances, including a massive strike by the workers at the Pullman Company. A group of unemployed workers, known as Coxey&#x27;s Army, marched on Washington that spring. Weaver met with them in Iowa and expressed sympathy with the movement, so long as they refrained from lawbreaking. He then returned to the campaign trail, stumping for Populist candidates in the 1894 midterm elections. The election proved disastrous for the Democrats, but most of the gains went to the Republicans rather than to the Populists, who gained a few seats in the South but lost ground in the West. During the election, Weaver became friendly with William Jennings Bryan, a Democratic Congressman from Nebraska and a charismatic supporter of free silver. Bryan had lost his bid for the Senate in the election, but his reputation as an exciting speaker made him a presidential possibility in 1896.

Weaver privately supported Bryan&#x27;s quest for the Democratic nomination in 1896, which their convention awarded him on the fifth ballot. When the Populist convention gathered the next month in Chicago, they divided between endorsing the silverite Democrat and preserving their new party&#x27;s independence. Weaver backed the former course, holding the issues the party stood for to be of more importance than the party itself. A majority of delegates agreed, but without the enthusiasm that had marked their convention of four years earlier. At the same time, Weaver joined with anti-fusionists to keep the Populist platform from deviating from the party&#x27;s ideological principles. Against the fusion candidate stood Republican William McKinley of Ohio, a hard-money conservative. Bryan succeeded in uniting the South and West, Weaver&#x27;s longtime dream, but with the more populous North solidly behind McKinley, Bryan lost the election.

Despite the loss, Weaver still believed the Populist cause would triumph. He agreed to be nominated one last time for his old 6th district House seat on a Democratic-Populist fusion ticket. As he had ten years earlier, Republican John Lacey defeated Weaver. In 1900 Weaver attended a convention of fusionist Populists in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, the party having split on the issue of cooperation with the Democrats. The fusionists backed Bryan, the Democratic nominee, but he lost again to McKinley, this time by a greater margin. The following year, Weaver was elected to office for the last time as the mayor of his hometown, Colfax, Iowa, after defeating Republican P. H. Cragen and served in that position until 1903.

==Later years and death==
The Republican Party&#x27;s popularity after the victory in the Spanish–American War led Weaver, for the first time, to doubt that populist values would eventually prevail. With the demise of the Populist Party, Weaver became a Democrat and was a delegate to the 1904 Democratic National Convention. He was displeased at the party&#x27;s nominee, Alton B. Parker, whom he thought &quot;plutocratic&quot;, but Weaver supported his unsuccessful campaign nevertheless. He gave serious consideration to running for the House again that year; however, he decided against it. In 1908, he supported Bryan&#x27;s third campaign as the Democratic nominee for president, but it, too, was unsuccessful.

That same year, Weaver and his wife, Clara, celebrated their fiftieth wedding anniversary, surrounded by six of their children. The Iowa legislature honored him in 1909 and hung a portrait of him in the Iowa State Historical Building. He wrote a history of Jasper County, Iowa, where he lived, which was published in 1912. Weaver planned to campaign on behalf of Democratic candidates that year but did not have the chance. On February 6, he died of heart failure at his daughter&#x27;s house in Des Moines after being sick for ten days. After a funeral at the First Methodist Church in Des Moines, Weaver was buried in that city&#x27;s Woodland Cemetery. The last letter he wrote was an endorsement of Speaker of the House Champ Clark for the Democratic presidential nomination; however, Clark went on to lose the nomination to Woodrow Wilson.

== Legacy ==
Many of Iowa&#x27;s leading statesmen, including Weaver&#x27;s former adversaries, praised him at his funeral and in the years thereafter. Fusion with the Democrats had brought Populist policy into the mainstream, and several of the policies for which Weaver fought became law after his death, including the direct election of Senators, a graduated income tax, and a monetary policy not based on the gold standard; others, such as public ownership of the railroads and telephone companies, were never enacted. In a 2008 biography, Robert B. Mitchell wrote that &quot;Weaver&#x27;s legacy cannot be assessed using conventional measures&quot;, as much of what he fought for did not come to pass until after his death. Even so, Mitchell credits Weaver for beginning the political effort that led to those changes: &quot;Weaver&#x27;s most important legacy in national politics is not what he advocated, or how subsequent reforms worked, but his effect on America&#x27;s continuing political conversation.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

Books
*
*
*
*

Articles
*
*
==Further reading==
*


==External links==

 Retrieved on February 13, 2008



|-



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q462305" start="0" end="18" title="James B. Weaver" label="James Baird Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="113" end="151" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q19294" start="165" end="209" title="List of United States presidential candidates" label="candidate for President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934234" start="570" end="582" title="Colfax, Iowa" label="Colfax, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q485736" start="796" end="815" title="Jasper County, Iowa" label="Jasper County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="826" end="830" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="844" end="848" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1134" end="1144" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1152" end="1170" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1227" end="1237" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q475261" start="1431" end="1446" title="Greenback Party" label="Greenback Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q842206" start="1479" end="1491" title="money supply" label="money supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906718" start="1507" end="1519" title="big business" label="big business"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1543" end="1553" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q699120" start="1632" end="1660" title="1880 United States presidential election" label="Weaver for president in 1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="1894" end="1910" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="2009" end="2028" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q72472" start="2133" end="2140" title="1892 United States presidential election" label="in 1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="2401" end="2423" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="2438" end="2445" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="in 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q699227" start="2447" end="2451" title="1900 United States presidential election" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q72835" start="2457" end="2461" title="1908 United States presidential election" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934234" start="2504" end="2516" title="Colfax, Iowa" label="Colfax, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="2764" end="2776" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2941" end="2958" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373038" start="3127" end="3147" title="Cassopolis, Michigan" label="Cassopolis, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q769617" start="3188" end="3202" title="Iowa Territory" label="Iowa Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474201" start="3234" end="3245" title="Sac and Fox Nation" label="Sac and Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="3296" end="3315" title="Homestead Acts" label="claimed a homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q113748" start="3344" end="3356" title="Davis County, Iowa" label="Davis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914630" start="3446" end="3456" title="Bloomfield, Iowa" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3492" end="3500" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="3697" end="3701" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q183135" start="3831" end="3847" title="Jefferson County, Iowa" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="3887" end="3895" title="read law" label="read law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="4092" end="4114" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="4154" end="4171" title="California Gold Rush" label="prospect for gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="4214" end="4220" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895273" start="4417" end="4438" title="University of Cincinnati College of Law" label="Cincinnati Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q815796" start="4471" end="4485" title="Bellamy Storer (1796–1875)" label="Bellamy Storer"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="4568" end="4575" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="4720" end="4723" title="Bar (law)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4874" end="4890" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q693467" start="5078" end="5093" title="Keosauqua, Iowa" label="Keosauqua, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q708401" start="5392" end="5410" title="Samuel J. Kirkwood" label="Samuel J. Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555041" start="5731" end="5766" title="1860 Republican National Convention" label="1860 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5774" end="5789" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="5907" end="5915" title="Secession in the United States" label="seceding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5951" end="5969" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="6006" end="6017" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="6018" end="6039" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="attack on Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="6083" end="6093" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633735" start="6142" end="6178" title="2nd Iowa Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="2nd Iowa Volunteer Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="6200" end="6214" title="Company (military unit)" label="company&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="6215" end="6231" title="first lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="6260" end="6267" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q197539" start="6268" end="6286" title="Samuel Ryan Curtis" label="Samuel Ryan Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="6380" end="6392" title="border states (American Civil War)" label="border state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="6702" end="6719" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="6720" end="6736" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q601359" start="6773" end="6786" title="Battle of Fort Donelson" label="Fort Donelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12331916" start="7105" end="7133" title="Pittsburg Landing, Tennessee" label="Pittsburg Landing, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="7228" end="7244" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Battle of Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992093" start="7794" end="7814" title="Corinth, Mississippi" label="Corinth, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="7841" end="7846" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q233360" start="7900" end="7924" title="Second Battle of Corinth" label="Second Battle of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410885" start="8272" end="8290" title="Pulaski, Tennessee" label="Pulaski, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615826" start="8324" end="8340" title="Battle of Resaca" label="Battle of Resaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q756118" start="8356" end="8372" title="Atlanta Campaign" label="Atlanta Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="8394" end="8407" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="8408" end="8432" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="8440" end="8461" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="march through Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113748" start="8634" end="8646" title="Davis County, Iowa" label="Davis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="8866" end="8872" title="Brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853520" start="9165" end="9184" title="Lieutenant Governor of Iowa" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="9336" end="9350" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="9665" end="9691" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="9741" end="9750" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="9861" end="9923" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129201" start="10059" end="10075" title="James B. Weaver House" label="a large new home"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064210" start="10194" end="10232" title="Iowa&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="Iowa&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="10248" end="10272" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="10360" end="10371" title="Prohibition" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347318" start="10541" end="10559" title="Ezekiel S. Sampson" label="Ezekiel S. Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552354" start="11138" end="11156" title="William B. Allison" label="William B. Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q24966258" start="11938" end="11961" title="1876 Greenback National Convention" label="the national convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q475261" start="11982" end="11997" title="Greenback Party" label="Greenback Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417847" start="12062" end="12085" title="Long Depression" label="the economic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="12104" end="12117" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="12130" end="12139" title="Civil war" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603663" start="12171" end="12181" title="Greenback (money)" label="greenbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="12203" end="12213" title="fiat money" label="fiat money"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="12547" end="12560" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574951" start="12586" end="12615" title="Specie Payment Resumption Act" label="Specie Payment Resumption Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q130386731" start="12953" end="12972" title="eight-hour work day" label="eight-hour work day"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="13017" end="13028" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q650487" start="13045" end="13057" title="wage slavery" label="wage slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="13283" end="13302" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q281566" start="13327" end="13343" title="Samuel J. Tilden" label="Samuel J. Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q935291" start="13660" end="13672" title="Peter Cooper" label="Peter Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q884377" start="14031" end="14043" title="John H. Gear" label="John H. Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822632" start="14808" end="14824" title="electoral fusion" label="electoral fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111152208" start="14982" end="15003" title="Henry Hoffman Trimble" label="Henry Hoffman Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638409" start="15441" end="15454" title="46th United States Congress" label="46th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="15824" end="15862" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="the violence against black Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500299" start="16115" end="16142" title="Free silver" label="unlimited coinage of silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="16860" end="16867" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q942678" start="16868" end="16885" title="Samuel J. Randall" label="Samuel J. Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="17109" end="17126" title="James A. Garfield" label="James A. Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758297" start="17722" end="17757" title="Marcus M. Pomeroy" label="Marcus M. &amp;quot;Brick&amp;quot; Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564276" start="18318" end="18336" title="Stephen D. Dillaye" label="Stephen D. Dillaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888859" start="18369" end="18390" title="Barzillai J. Chambers" label="Barzillai J. Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155777" start="18454" end="18483" title="1880 Greenback National Convention" label="National Greenback convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982544" start="18622" end="18643" title="Socialist Labor Party" label="Socialist Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="19725" end="19747" title="Winfield Scott Hancock" label="Winfield Scott Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481662" start="20190" end="20207" title="lame-duck session" label="lame-duck session"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="20249" end="20273" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="20307" end="20334" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="direct election of Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292423" start="20455" end="20473" title="Edward H. Gillette" label="Edward H. Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765336" start="20697" end="20713" title="Marsena E. Cutts" label="Marsena E. Cutts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699484" start="20977" end="20989" title="John C. Cook" label="John C. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010577" start="21158" end="21174" title="Buren R. Sherman" label="Buren R. Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343494" start="21238" end="21272" title="1884 Greenback National Convention" label="1884 Greenback National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q817488" start="21325" end="21340" title="Benjamin Butler (politician)" label="Benjamin Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489859" start="21651" end="21668" title="Frank T. Campbell" label="Frank T. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638849" start="21778" end="21805" title="49th United States Congress" label="49th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="21869" end="21885" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="22143" end="22162" title="United States Department of Labor" label="Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416650" start="22298" end="22314" title="Knights of Labor" label="Knights of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q709595" start="22338" end="22347" title="Jay Gould" label="Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q263800" start="22393" end="22429" title="McCormick Harvesting Machine Company" label="McCormick Harvesting Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q214148" start="22450" end="22464" title="Haymarket riot" label="Haymarket riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="22803" end="22833" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="23061" end="23077" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882316" start="23149" end="23165" title="Unassigned Lands" label="Unassigned Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="23181" end="23189" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="23216" end="23237" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302787" start="23247" end="23261" title="Reconstruction Treaties" label="forced to cede"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943518" start="23339" end="23346" title="Boomers (Oklahoma settlers)" label="Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="23424" end="23438" title="Homestead Acts" label="Homestead Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="23485" end="23500" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309072" start="23531" end="23546" title="Cherokee Outlet" label="Cherokee Outlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414375" start="23869" end="23882" title="Oklahoma Panhandle" label="Neutral Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="23894" end="23912" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889983" start="24155" end="24179" title="United States House Committee on Territories" label="Committee on Territories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24512" end="24526" title="Elk v. Wilkins" label="Elk v. Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="24895" end="24904" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639974" start="25282" end="25298" title="50th United States Congress" label="the new Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579199" start="25496" end="25507" title="Third party (United States)" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467186" start="25513" end="25530" title="Labor Party (United States, 19th century)" label="Union Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394924" start="25687" end="25700" title="John F. Lacey" label="John F. Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735825" start="25793" end="25807" title="Alson Streeter" label="Alson Streeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="26265" end="26282" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q631498" start="26325" end="26354" title="Land Rush of 1889" label="rush for the Unassigned Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490791" start="26779" end="26786" title="Sooners" label="Sooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934234" start="27036" end="27042" title="Colfax, Iowa" label="Colfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435751" start="27626" end="27648" title="Farmers&amp;#x27; Alliance" label="Farmers&amp;#x27; Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q918195" start="28038" end="28052" title="Ocala, Florida" label="Ocala, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075646" start="28098" end="28111" title="Ocala Demands" label="Ocala Demands"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="28182" end="28202" title="graduated income tax" label="graduated income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526552" start="28343" end="28359" title="Leonidas L. Polk" label="Leonidas L. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q918937" start="28506" end="28526" title="Ignatius L. Donnelly" label="Ignatius L. Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="28868" end="28887" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29116" end="29132" title="1892 Populist National Convention" label="their convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="29136" end="29151" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q437176" start="29346" end="29359" title="James H. Kyle" label="James H. Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134351" start="29571" end="29585" title="James G. Field" label="James G. Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818656" start="29620" end="29648" title="Attorney General of Virginia" label="Attorney General of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089437" start="29655" end="29680" title="Omaha Platform" label="platform adopted in Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="29723" end="29743" title="Progressive tax" label="graduated income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q310839" start="30410" end="30425" title="Adlai Stevenson I" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985730" start="30610" end="30665" title="Homestead Strike" label="labor disturbances broke out in Homestead, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="31112" end="31120" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q607648" start="31275" end="31316" title="Redeemers" label="the conservative Democrats in power there"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="31780" end="31788" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="31790" end="31795" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="31797" end="31803" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="31809" end="31815" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="31847" end="31859" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="31864" end="31870" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="32504" end="32517" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481968" start="32681" end="32708" title="Sherman Silver Purchase Act" label="Sherman Silver Purchase Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348639" start="33006" end="33020" title="Pullman Strike" label="massive strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179946" start="33100" end="33117" title="Coxey&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Coxey&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450166" start="33349" end="33371" title="United States House of Representatives elections, 1894" label="1894 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="33613" end="33635" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="33939" end="33946" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="in 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557043" start="33954" end="33970" title="1896 Democratic National Convention" label="their convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34009" end="34032" title="1896 Populist National Convention" label="the Populist convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="34600" end="34616" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131335" start="35135" end="35160" title="Sioux Falls, South Dakota" label="Sioux Falls, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934234" start="35445" end="35457" title="Colfax, Iowa" label="Colfax, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="35630" end="35650" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558213" start="35829" end="35864" title="1904 Democratic National Convention" label="1904 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q443866" start="35913" end="35928" title="Alton B. Parker" label="Alton B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082836" start="36462" end="36492" title="Ola Babcock Miller Building" label="Iowa State Historical Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453981" start="36820" end="36842" title="First United Methodist Church (Des Moines, Iowa)" label="First Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30607928" start="36896" end="36913" title="Woodland Cemetery (Des Moines, Iowa)" label="Woodland Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q465651" start="36983" end="36994" title="Champ Clark" label="Champ Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="37088" end="37102" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149247" wikidata="Q3085258" url="?curid=149247" title="The American Naturalist">
<text>The American Naturalist is the monthly peer-reviewed scientific journal of the American Society of Naturalists, whose purpose is &quot;to advance and to diffuse knowledge of organic evolution and other broad biological principles so as to enhance the conceptual unification of the biological sciences.&quot; It was established in 1867 and is published by the University of Chicago Press. The journal covers research in ecology, evolutionary biology, population, and integrative biology. , the editor-in-chief is Daniel I. Bolnick. According to the &quot;Journal Citation Reports&quot;, the journal had a 2020 impact factor of 3.926.

==History==
The journal was founded by Alpheus Hyatt, Edward S. Morse, Alpheus S. Packard Jr., and Frederick W. Putnam at the Essex Institute in Salem, Massachusetts. The first issue appeared in print dated March 1867. In 1885 the four men founded the American Naturalist Society, where in 1887 the journal was designated an official organ of the society for publication.

In 1878 the journal was for sale and Edward Cope bought half the rights. He moved the journal to Philadelphia and arranged to edit it jointly with Professor Alpheus S. Packard Jr. Cope became editor-in-chief in 1887 and continued in that capacity until his death in 1897. 

In 1897, a group of professors from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard University, and Tufts University bought the rights from the Cope estate and kept the journal in publication until 1907 when J. McKeen Cattell acquired control. Cattell&#x27;s son Jacques became co-editor and publisher with his father in 1939. 

Although the ASN became increasingly involved in editing &quot;The American Naturalist&quot; through changes in 1941 and 1951, the journal remained with the Cattell family until 1968, when the University of Chicago Press took it over after Jacques Cattell&#x27;s death.&#x27;

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="39" end="52" title="Peer review" label="peer-reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="53" end="71" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745098" start="79" end="110" title="American Society of Naturalists" label="American Society of Naturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="359" end="386" title="University of Chicago Press" label="University of Chicago Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="419" end="426" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="428" end="448" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="478" end="485" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="493" end="508" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q45679730" start="512" end="529" title="Daniel I. Bolnick" label="Daniel I. Bolnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701229" start="554" end="578" title="Journal Citation Reports" label="Journal Citation Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330" start="609" end="622" title="impact factor" label="impact factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q728062" start="673" end="686" title="Alpheus Hyatt" label="Alpheus Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519303" start="688" end="703" title="Edward Sylvester Morse" label="Edward S. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839658" start="705" end="727" title="Alpheus Spring Packard Jr." label="Alpheus S. Packard Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3087081" start="733" end="752" title="Frederick Ward Putnam" label="Frederick W. Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399748" start="760" end="775" title="Essex Institute" label="Essex Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="779" end="799" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298933" start="1044" end="1055" title="Edward Drinker Cope" label="Edward Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1321" end="1358" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1360" end="1378" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49120" start="1384" end="1400" title="Tufts University" label="Tufts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q545047" start="1492" end="1509" title="James McKeen Cattell" label="J. McKeen Cattell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120486" start="1853" end="1868" title="Jacques Cattell" label="Jacques Cattell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149249" wikidata="Q1680779" url="?curid=149249" title="James Maxwell">
<text>James Maxwell may refer to:

== Arts and entertainment ==
*James Maxwell (actor) (1929–1995), American-British actor and theatre director
*Jim Maxwell (commentator) (born 1950), Australian sports commentator
*Jimmy Maxwell (bandleader) (born 1953), musician and bandleader
*Jimmy Maxwell (trumpeter) (1917–2002), American trumpeter

== Science and medicine ==
*James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879), Scottish physicist and proponent of Maxwell&#x27;s equations
*James Maxwell (colonial administrator) (1869–1932), British physician and colonial administrator
*James Laidlaw Maxwell Jr (1876–1951), English Presbyterian medical missionary to China, son of James Laidlaw Maxwell

== Sport ==
*James Maxwell (cricketer) (1883–1967), English cricket
*James Maxwell (footballer, born 1887) (1887–1917), Scottish footballer
*James Maxwell (footballer, born 1900) (1900–1964), Scottish footballer
*Bud Maxwell (James Morton Maxwell, 1913–1990), Scottish footballer
*James Maxwell (footballer, born 2001), Scottish footballer
*Jim Maxwell (American football) (born 1981), American football linebacker
*Jimmy Maxwell (footballer) (1889–1916), Irish footballer

== Other fields ==
*James Maxwell, 9th Baron Farnham (1813–1896), British nobleman
*James Maxwell (British Marines officer) (died 1792)
*James Maxwell (poet) (1720–1800), Scottish poet and essayist
*James Maxwell (scholar) (c.1581 – in or after 1635), Scottish author
*James Laidlaw Maxwell (1836–1921), missionary to Formosa
*James Shaw Maxwell (1855–1928), Scottish politician 
*James Francis Maxwell (1862–1941), politician in Queensland, Australia
*James D. Maxwell II (born 1975), Mississippi judge
*James Maxwell, 1st Earl of Dirletoun (died 1650), Scottish courtier
*James Maxwell (1838–1893), architect, one of the founders of Maxwell and Tuke</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1680779" start="0" end="13" title="James Maxwell" label="James Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15528164" start="59" end="80" title="James Maxwell (actor)" label="James Maxwell (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196694" start="139" end="164" title="Jim Maxwell (commentator)" label="Jim Maxwell (commentator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200733" start="209" end="235" title="Jimmy Maxwell (bandleader)" label="Jimmy Maxwell (bandleader)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354567" start="274" end="299" title="Jimmy Maxwell (trumpeter)" label="Jimmy Maxwell (trumpeter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="361" end="380" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560907" start="456" end="494" title="James Maxwell (colonial administrator)" label="James Maxwell (colonial administrator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137712" start="554" end="578" title="James Laidlaw Maxwell Jr" label="James Laidlaw Maxwell Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139122" start="685" end="710" title="James Maxwell (cricketer)" label="James Maxwell (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831091" start="741" end="778" title="James Maxwell (footballer, born 1887)" label="James Maxwell (footballer, born 1887)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139124" start="813" end="850" title="James Maxwell (footballer, born 1900)" label="James Maxwell (footballer, born 1900)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012473" start="885" end="896" title="Bud Maxwell" label="Bud Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104816905" start="953" end="990" title="James Maxwell (footballer, born 2001)" label="James Maxwell (footballer, born 2001)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196692" start="1013" end="1044" title="Jim Maxwell (American football)" label="Jim Maxwell (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q91261305" start="1088" end="1114" title="Jimmy Maxwell (footballer)" label="Jimmy Maxwell (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139118" start="1166" end="1198" title="James Maxwell, 9th Baron Farnham" label="James Maxwell, 9th Baron Farnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859403" start="1230" end="1269" title="James Maxwell (British Marines officer)" label="James Maxwell (British Marines officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18730729" start="1283" end="1303" title="James Maxwell (poet)" label="James Maxwell (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859760" start="1345" end="1368" title="James Maxwell (scholar)" label="James Maxwell (scholar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972327" start="1415" end="1436" title="James Laidlaw Maxwell" label="James Laidlaw Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143044" start="1473" end="1491" title="James Shaw Maxwell" label="James Shaw Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23616531" start="1527" end="1548" title="James Francis Maxwell" label="James Francis Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q47428143" start="1599" end="1618" title="James D. Maxwell II" label="James D. Maxwell II"/>
<link wikidata="Q75389701" start="1651" end="1687" title="James Maxwell, 1st Earl of Dirletoun" label="James Maxwell, 1st Earl of Dirletoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161373" start="1781" end="1797" title="Maxwell and Tuke" label="Maxwell and Tuke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149251" wikidata="Q2462807" url="?curid=149251" title="Tyne">
<text>Tyne may refer to:

==Geography==
*River Tyne, England
*Port of Tyne, the commercial docks in and around the River Tyne in Tyne and Wear, England
*River Tyne, Scotland
*River Tyne, a tributary of the South Esk River, Tasmania, Australia

==People==
*Edward Tyne (), New Zealand rugby footballer
*George Tyne, stage name of American actor and television director Martin Yarus (1917–2008)
*Tyne Daly (born 1946), American actress
*Tyne O&#x27;Connell (born 1960), British author

==Transportation==
*&quot;Tyne&quot; (1807 ship), initially a West Indiaman
*&quot;Tyne&quot;, a New Zealand Company ship that arrived in Wellington in 1841
*Rolls-Royce Tyne, a turboprop engine developed in the 1950s
*Tyne, a sea area in the British Shipping Forecast
*Tyne-class lifeboats have been operated by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution since 1982

==Other uses==
*, vessels of the British Royal Navy
*Reilly Tyne, Marvel Comics superhero Darkdevil

== See also ==
*Tyne Limestone, a geologic formation in Scotland
*Josselyn Van Tyne (1902–1957), American ornithologist and museum curator
*Tynecastle Stadium
*Tine (disambiguation)
*Tyne Valley (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2462807" start="0" end="4" title="Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="35" end="45" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231289" start="56" end="68" title="Port of Tyne" label="Port of Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q366284" start="147" end="167" title="River Tyne, Scotland" label="River Tyne, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="179" title="River Tyne (Tasmania)" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632022" start="200" end="215" title="South Esk River" label="South Esk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345674" start="250" end="261" title="Edward Tyne" label="Edward Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745068" start="296" end="307" title="George Tyne" label="George Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q255651" start="388" end="397" title="Tyne Daly" label="Tyne Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860487" start="429" end="448" title="Tyne O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Tyne O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29625322" start="498" end="526" title="Tyne (1807 ship)" label="&amp;quot;Tyne&amp;quot; (1807 ship)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="575" end="599" title="New Zealand Company ships#Tyne" label="New Zealand Company ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q426886" start="636" end="652" title="Rolls-Royce Tyne" label="Rolls-Royce Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004285" start="729" end="746" title="Shipping Forecast" label="Shipping Forecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11672343" start="748" end="767" title="Tyne-class lifeboat" label="Tyne-class lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223578" start="896" end="907" title="Reilly Tyne" label="Reilly Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513676" start="960" end="974" title="Tyne Limestone" label="Tyne Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17384394" start="1010" end="1027" title="Josselyn Van Tyne" label="Josselyn Van Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326446" start="1084" end="1102" title="Tynecastle Stadium" label="Tynecastle Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q340915" start="1104" end="1125" title="Tine (disambiguation)" label="Tine (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860499" start="1127" end="1155" title="Tyne Valley (disambiguation)" label="Tyne Valley (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149258" wikidata="Q7809924" url="?curid=149258" title="Titchwell Marsh">
<text>Titchwell Marsh is an English nature reserve owned and managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). Located on the north coast of the county of Norfolk, between the villages of Titchwell and Thornham, about east of the seaside resort of Hunstanton, its include reed beds, saltmarshes, a freshwater lagoon and sandy beach, with a small woodland area near the car park. This internationally important reserve is part of the North Norfolk Coast Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), and is also protected through Natura 2000, Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar listings.

The reserve is important for some scarce breeding birds, such as pied avocets on the islands, and western marsh harriers, Eurasian bitterns and bearded reedlings in the reeds. To encourage bitterns to breed, the reed beds have been improved to make them wetter, and the lagoon has been stocked with the common rudd. Typical wetland birds such as the water rail, reed warbler and sedge warbler also appear, and little egrets are common. The reserve has regularly attracted rarities, as its location is important for migrating birds. Ducks and geese winter at Titchwell in considerable numbers, and the reserve shelters the endangered European water vole.

Facilities include three bird hides, a seawatching platform, two nature trails, and a visitor centre. Because of concerns about climate change, a major project in 2010 and 2011 brought improvements to the banks around the freshwater lagoon and the conversion of the brackish lagoon to tidal saltmarsh, a more effective barrier to encroachment by the sea.

Titchwell Marsh is archaeologically significant, with artefacts dating back to the Upper Paleolithic, and has remains of military constructions from both world wars. These include brickwork from a First World War military hospital and 1940s artillery targets for armoured fighting vehicles and warplanes in the Second World War.

==History==
===Before 1972===

Titchwell has a long history of human occupation. Populations of both Modern and Neanderthal people were present in Norfolk before the last glaciation between 100,000 and 10,000 years ago, and returned as the ice retreated north. The archaeological record is poor until about 20,000 years ago, partly due to the prevailing conditions, but also because the coastline was much further north than at present, so that many sites are now under the sea. Early Mesolithic flint tools with characteristic blades up to long found on the present-day coast at Titchwell date from a time when it was from the sea. Other flint tools have been found dating from the Upper Paleolithic to the Neolithic. As the ice retreated during the Mesolithic, the sea level rose, filling what is now the North Sea, and bringing the Norfolk coastline much closer to its present line; the remains of submerged forests can still be detected at low tide. By 11,000 BC, the makers of the long blades had gone, and peat marshes had formed behind an offshore barrier island or spit. A layer of peat formed between 1920 and 1680 BC and another between 1020 and 830 BC, indicating marshy conditions; polished Neolithic axes found in those layers were blackened by exposure to the peat.

Two possible timber platforms were identified within the peat at Titchwell, and may be prehistoric. Similar Bronze Age structures are rare, and they may be significant in providing information about early timber construction methods. Medieval and later pottery has been found at Titchwell, and the peat and silts which overlay the sediments deposited by the retreating glaciers have signs of post-medieval ploughing.

The draining of Norfolk&#x27;s coastal marshes commenced in the late 17th and 18th centuries, and sea defences including the &quot;Old Lord&#x27;s Bank&quot; at Titchwell were shown in maps from 1786 and 1797. For the next 170 years or so, the reclaimed marsh was arable, producing crops and beef cattle. A huge influx of Pallas&#x27;s sandgrouse into Britain in 1853 led to several arrivals at Titchwell, including mated pairs. The last bird seen was on the saltmarsh, and the rest were on the dunes or in marram grass; many were shot.

Thornham Marsh, immediately west of Titchwell, was used between 1914 and 1918 by the Royal Flying Corps as a bombing range. Some brickwork on Titchwell Marsh is all that remains of a military hospital dating from that period. A First World War concrete building along the west bank was let as holiday accommodation until the British Army returned in 1942.

During the Second World War, military defences were constructed at Titchwell. The drainage of farmland behind the banks was stopped, reflooding the former marshland; zigzag ditches were dug, and pillboxes built into Old Lord&#x27;s Bank. Between 1942 and 1945, the marsh was used by the Royal Tank Regiment; an armoured fighting vehicle gunnery range was established and new banks were constructed for firing practice, with targets set at intervals. Some of the still extant islands were built to hold &quot;pop-up&quot; targets, operated by cables from winches in a building whose foundations lie below Island Hide. Remains of the triangular concrete track used by the tanks also survive. Military activities continued after the war, with the Royal Air Force returning to Thornham Marsh between 1950 and 1959. Bombing practice was supervised from a control tower, which was demolished in 1962, leaving only a concrete structure opposite the end of Titchwell&#x27;s west bank. The remains of two Second World War Covenanter tanks, probably used as targets, are sometimes exposed at low tide.

The wreck of the SS &quot;Vina&quot;, a cargo steamer built in 1894, can be seen at low tide. In 1944, she was anchored offshore for use as an RAF target when a gale dragged her to her present location and sank her. After the war, some of the wreck was salvaged as scrap. The remains of the &quot;Vina&quot; are accessible at low tide, but visiting them is potentially hazardous as the wreck is quickly cut off and submerged by the incoming tide. A warning sign on the wreck advises anyone reaching it to return to the beach immediately.

Behind the sea wall, the marshes were drained after the war, and reverted to farmland, but the bank was breached in the North Sea flood of 1953, returning the whole area to tidal saltmarsh dominated by sea aster. The construction of a new sea wall across the reserve created a shallow freshwater lagoon, with a reed bed on its northern side and a vegetation-free brackish marsh.

===RSPB era===

Between 1970 and 1972, a pair of Montagu&#x27;s harriers, Britain&#x27;s rarest breeding birds of prey, nested in the reed bed. The RSPB bought the reserve in 1973 for £53,000 (£,000 in 20). The Montagu&#x27;s harriers did not return, but marsh harriers did, and the RSPB commenced improving the habitat and facilities, including embanking the lagoons and building a car park and visitor centre. Avocets, then still very rare in the UK, first bred here in 1984. The visitor centre facilities were improved between 1987 and 1989 to cope with the numbers of visitors.

In 1991, the sea broke through the dunes at the eastern end of the beach near the former Tern Hide, and the dunes started to erode. The remains of the Second World War tanks first appeared around this time. In the following year the boardwalk at the beach end of the west bank was constructed to protect the dunes, and the seawatching platform was added at its northern end. of land to the east of the reserve was bought in 1993; much of this was formerly part of the firing range, and large amounts of barbed wire caused problems when the area was being converted to reed bed and wet grazing meadow. Over the winter, an old hide on the West Bank was demolished and replaced with the current Island Hide. Storms in February 1996 removed most of the dunes east of the boardwalk, and eroded those to the west. The Tern Hide, now cut off at high tide, was dismantled. Developments at the end of the 20th century included the 1997 extension of the visitor centre, which included building a cafe, and the erection of Fen Hide in 1999, together with a boardwalk path to the hide, and a dragonfly pond.

The reserve covers , and is of international importance for its breeding and wintering birds. It was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) in 1973, and in 1986 it was subsumed into the North Norfolk Coast SSSI. The larger area is now additionally protected through Natura 2000, Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar listings, and is part of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). This is the RSPB&#x27;s most visited reserve, with about 92,000 visitors annually.

==Access and facilities==

Titchwell Marsh is next to the A149 road and buses stop outside the reserve. The main track to the beach is a public right-of-way, and the only part of the reserve where dogs are permitted. The reserve is open all year, and access is free, although non-members are charged for using the car park. The main part of the reserve is accessed from the visitor centre using the 1 km (1,050 yd) West Bank footpath. After leaving the woodland around the visitor centre, there are two short paths running from the main path; the Fen Trail to a hide overlooking the reed bed, and the Meadow Trail boardwalk loop through wet marsh and past the dragonfly pond. The main footpath continues north past the reedbed to the freshwater lagoon and the Island Hide, then reaches a bank running across the reserve. The new Parrinder hides are placed along this wall. The footpath continues past a tidal lagoon, and over another bank to a saltmarsh, formerly ending at a raised wooden seawatching platform on the dunes by the beach.

The visitor centre and shop are open daily except Christmas Day and Boxing Day. Most of the reserve and its facilities are wheelchair accessible, but the last part of the path to the beach is rough, and accessed via a steep bank.

==Fauna and flora==
===Birds===

The key breeding species are reed bed specialists such as the marsh harrier, Eurasian bittern and bearded reedling, together with the avocet, the RSPB&#x27;s symbolic bird. Bitterns stopped breeding on the reserve in 1989 due to inadequate habitat and a lack of sufficient large food fish; although European eels, a favoured food, are present, the numbers are too low. These problems were addressed by managing water levels and excavating some of the reed bed to create open, reed-fringed pools, and stocking the lagoon with the common rudd; breeding recommenced in 2004. In 2011, there were 80 avocet nests, two pairs of Eurasian bitterns, and four pairs of marsh harriers, the latter successfully fledging seven young.

Other breeding birds include ringed plovers and Eurasian oystercatchers in the sand dunes, and water rails in the reed bed. Sedge, reed and Cetti&#x27;s warblers all nest in the wetland, and little egrets are now common on the reserve. In early summer, scarcer migrants like the little gull, black tern, Eurasian spoonbills and garganey may pass through on their way to breed elsewhere.

In the autumn, species arrive from the north, some, such as black-tailed godwits, curlew sandpipers and little stints just passing through, pausing for a few days to refuel, others staying for the winter. This is also a good time to see bearded reedlings. Offshore, great and Arctic skuas, northern gannets and black-legged kittiwakes may pass close by in favourable winds.

Large numbers of ducks winter on the reserve, including many Eurasian wigeons, Eurasian teals, mallards and gadwalls, and smaller counts of goldeneyes and northern pintails. Offshore, there may be large &quot;rafts&quot; of common scoters, and smaller numbers of common eiders, long-tailed ducks, velvet scoters and red-throated divers. Brent geese feed on sea lettuce and other green algae, and hundreds of European golden plovers may roost on the reserve at high tide. In the evenings, large flocks of pink-footed geese fly over Titchwell on their way to roost, and barn owls and hen harriers quarter the marshes. This is the season for flocks of lesser redpolls, sometimes accompanied by a rarer common redpoll, and snow buntings are to be found on the beach.

The reserve&#x27;s location means that migrants may be found, sometimes in huge numbers when the weather conditions are right, sometimes including vagrant rarities. Major rarities in recent years include a Pacific golden plover and a great knot in 2016, and a slender-billed gull and a penduline tit in 2014.

===Other animals and plants===

Water voles are an endangered species in the UK, with a huge decline in numbers, mainly due to predation by the introduced American mink. They are still common at Titchwell, which is one of a number of East Anglian sites now of national importance for this species. Both common and grey seals can be seen off the beach. Other vertebrates include European eels, common toads and three-spined sticklebacks.

In summer, the dragonfly pond can hold up to ten species of dragonflies and damselflies. The nationally scarce moth flame wainscot has bred at Titchwell since 1996; other Lepidoptera may include migrants such as the painted lady, the diamondback moth, and especially the silver Y, which can occur in huge numbers; 90,000 were recorded on the reserve in July 2010, feeding on sea lavender.

The saltmarsh contains glassworts and common cord grass in the most exposed regions, with a succession of plants following on as the marsh becomes more established: first sea aster, then mainly sea lavender, with sea purslane in the creeks and smaller areas of sea plantain and other common marsh plants. The drier areas contain maritime grasses such as sea couch grass and sea poa grass. The reedbeds are dominated by common reed with saltmarsh rush, brackish water crowfoot, sea clubrush and common bulrush also common in the various wetland habitats.

==Recreation==

As the RSPB&#x27;s busiest reserve, Titchwell Marsh has a significant economic impact on its locality. A 2002 survey reported that an estimated 137,700 visitors spent £1.8 million locally in 1998. The tiny village of Titchwell has two three-star hotels and a shop selling telescopes and binoculars, although it does not have a general store or a public house.

A 2005 survey at Titchwell and five other North Norfolk coastal sites found that 39 per cent of visitors gave birdwatching as the main purpose of their visit. The 7.7 million day visitors and 5.5 million who made overnight stays in the area in 1999 are estimated to have spent £122 million, and created the equivalent of 2,325 full-time jobs.

==Threats==
The soft rocks of the North Norfolk coast have been attacked by the sea for centuries; at Titchwell Marsh, the beach and sand dunes protecting the northern edge of the reserve have been eroded, and climate change has increased the likelihood of damage to the freshwater areas of the reserve. The predicted increasingly stormy weather could damage the dune system and expose the soft earth banks to wave damage, or the sea could just over-top the defences, as it did in the 1953 floods. Either way, the conservation value of the reserve would be adversely affected, especially through the potential loss of the bitterns. Rather than reinforce the outer bank, it was decided to undertake a managed realignment. Between 2010 and 2011, the banks on the east and west of the reserve were reinforced, and the sea wall to the north of the fresh marsh was rebuilt on the line of the old Parrinder bank. The old Parrinder Hide was replaced by a pair of modern hides, retaining the original name. Designed by HaysomWardMiller, these hides won an award from RIBA for their architectural style. The former brackish marsh north of the new wall has been modified by creating a breach in the east bank. This will allow tidal flooding and the eventual establishment of saltmarsh on what is now named Volunteer Marsh. The new saltmarsh will protect the rebuilt Parrinder wall, slowing erosion. Nevertheless, it is estimated that by 2060 the beach may have advanced halfway across the new tidal area. Other improvements were made to the reed beds and islands in the freshwater lagoon, and a new sluice was installed. New reedbeds were created east of Fen Hide, which can be accessed by trails opened in 2012. The first part of the trail is open all year, but the &quot;autumn trail&quot;, running up from the woodland in the southeastern corner of the reserve, is accessible only from August to October.

==References==
==Cited texts==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Eastern Daily Press&quot; article about the tank remains
* Hard choices at Titchwell RSPB. 2005 Birdguides article with aerial view, map, and video interview with Rob Coleman, the reserve&#x27;s manager
* RSPB video on the climate change project narrated by Chris Packham</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7809924" start="0" end="15" title="Titchwell Marsh" label="Titchwell Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="30" end="44" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="70" end="111" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="164" end="171" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750342" start="197" end="206" title="Titchwell" label="Titchwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754881" start="211" end="219" title="Thornham, Norfolk" label="Thornham"/>
<link wikidata="Q617188" start="257" end="267" title="Hunstanton" label="Hunstanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q620424" start="281" end="289" title="reed bed" label="reed bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="292" end="303" title="Salt marsh" label="saltmarshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="318" end="324" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="462" end="497" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051002" start="513" end="561" title="Norfolk Coast AONB" label="Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="600" end="611" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="613" end="636" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="647" end="653" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26147" start="730" end="741" title="pied avocet" label="pied avocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26431" start="763" end="784" title="western marsh harrier" label="western marsh harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q25709" start="787" end="803" title="Eurasian bittern" label="Eurasian bittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q192817" start="809" end="825" title="bearded reedling" label="bearded reedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q200594" start="968" end="979" title="common rudd" label="common rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q185099" start="1015" end="1025" title="water rail" label="water rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q159080" start="1027" end="1039" title="Eurasian reed warbler" label="reed warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q27236" start="1044" end="1057" title="sedge warbler" label="sedge warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131709" start="1075" end="1087" title="little egret" label="little egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="1180" end="1195" title="bird migration" label="migrating birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q27016" start="1298" end="1317" title="European water vole" label="European water vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244608" start="1345" end="1354" title="bird hide" label="bird hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442269" start="1359" end="1370" title="seawatching" label="seawatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411786" start="1406" end="1420" title="Visitor center" label="visitor centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1448" end="1462" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="1586" end="1594" title="brackish water" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1695" end="1711" title="archaeology" label="archaeologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="1759" end="1776" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1873" end="1888" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="1939" end="1964" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1987" end="2003" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="2107" end="2113" title="anatomically modern humans" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="2118" end="2129" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="2177" end="2187" title="glacial period" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686349" start="2271" end="2292" title="archaeological record" label="archaeological record"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="2491" end="2501" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="2502" end="2507" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045036" start="2534" end="2540" title="Blade (archaeology)" label="blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="2689" end="2706" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2714" end="2723" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2813" end="2822" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="3061" end="3075" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3395" end="3405" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3521" end="3529" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="3594" end="3598" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="3618" end="3626" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="3656" end="3663" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="3969" end="3975" title="arable land" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q128002" start="4027" end="4051" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s sandgrouse" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s sandgrouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130" start="4212" end="4224" title="Ammophila (Poaceae)" label="marram grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="4328" end="4346" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940739" start="4352" end="4365" title="bombing range" label="bombing range"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="4568" end="4580" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4611" end="4627" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095055" start="4795" end="4804" title="British hardened field defences of World War II" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="4887" end="4906" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="4911" end="4936" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="5344" end="5359" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138042" start="5613" end="5628" title="Covenanter tank" label="Covenanter tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q199028" start="5840" end="5846" title="target ship" label="target"/>
<link wikidata="Q504934" start="6352" end="6375" title="North Sea flood of 1953" label="North Sea flood of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q635916" start="6434" end="6443" title="Aster tripolium" label="sea aster"/>
<link wikidata="Q620424" start="6543" end="6551" title="reed bed" label="reed bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953717" start="6595" end="6609" title="brackish marsh" label="brackish marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26574" start="6661" end="6683" title="Montagu&amp;#x27;s harrier" label="Montagu&amp;#x27;s harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="6717" end="6730" title="bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26431" start="6867" end="6881" title="western marsh harrier" label="marsh harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="7320" end="7325" title="erosion" label="erode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442269" start="7518" end="7529" title="seawatching" label="seawatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="7698" end="7709" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="8409" end="8444" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="8578" end="8589" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="8591" end="8614" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="8625" end="8631" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051002" start="8661" end="8709" title="Norfolk Coast AONB" label="Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192432" start="8860" end="8869" title="A149 road" label="A149 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="8946" end="8958" title="Right of way (transit)" label="right-of-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="9909" end="9919" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="9964" end="9985" title="accessibility" label="wheelchair accessible"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387" start="10404" end="10416" title="European eel" label="European eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="10804" end="10812" title="fledge" label="fledging"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816" start="10856" end="10870" title="common ringed plover" label="ringed plovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25928" start="10875" end="10897" title="Eurasian oystercatcher" label="Eurasian oystercatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q185099" start="10922" end="10932" title="water rail" label="water rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q27236" start="10951" end="10956" title="Sedge warbler" label="Sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q159080" start="10958" end="10962" title="Eurasian reed warbler" label="reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q650114" start="10967" end="10987" title="Cetti&amp;#x27;s warbler" label="Cetti&amp;#x27;s warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131709" start="11018" end="11030" title="little egret" label="little egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="11088" end="11096" title="bird migration" label="migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q164467" start="11106" end="11117" title="little gull" label="little gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q27215" start="11119" end="11129" title="black tern" label="black tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q171360" start="11131" end="11149" title="Eurasian spoonbill" label="Eurasian spoonbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106902" start="11155" end="11163" title="garganey" label="garganey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18841" start="11275" end="11294" title="black-tailed godwit" label="black-tailed godwit"/>
<link wikidata="Q62345" start="11297" end="11313" title="curlew sandpiper" label="curlew sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q27232" start="11319" end="11331" title="little stint" label="little stint"/>
<link wikidata="Q207760" start="11481" end="11486" title="Great skua" label="great"/>
<link wikidata="Q203053" start="11491" end="11502" title="Arctic skua" label="Arctic skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="11505" end="11520" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26612" start="11526" end="11548" title="black-legged kittiwake" label="black-legged kittiwake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106837" start="11651" end="11666" title="Eurasian wigeon" label="Eurasian wigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25700" start="11669" end="11682" title="Eurasian teal" label="Eurasian teal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="11685" end="11692" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106966" start="11698" end="11705" title="gadwall" label="gadwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29865" start="11730" end="11740" title="common goldeneye" label="goldeneyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25450" start="11745" end="11761" title="northern pintail" label="northern pintail"/>
<link wikidata="Q27434" start="11814" end="11827" title="common scoter" label="common scoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696" start="11853" end="11865" title="common eider" label="common eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q26597" start="11868" end="11884" title="long-tailed duck" label="long-tailed duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q201300" start="11887" end="11900" title="velvet scoter" label="velvet scoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26691" start="11906" end="11925" title="red-throated loon" label="red-throated divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050" start="11927" end="11938" title="Brant goose" label="Brent geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q496415" start="11947" end="11958" title="Ulva" label="sea lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="11969" end="11980" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21148" start="11998" end="12020" title="European golden plover" label="European golden plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q209419" start="12094" end="12111" title="pink-footed goose" label="pink-footed geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25317" start="12158" end="12166" title="Western barn owl" label="barn owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="12172" end="12183" title="hen harrier" label="hen harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822501" start="12239" end="12253" title="lesser redpoll" label="lesser redpoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822501" start="12289" end="12303" title="common redpoll" label="common redpoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q26416" start="12309" end="12321" title="snow bunting" label="snow bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="12393" end="12401" title="bird migration" label="migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279329" start="12501" end="12508" title="vagrant species" label="vagrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18865" start="12560" end="12581" title="Pacific golden plover" label="Pacific golden plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q18876" start="12588" end="12598" title="great knot" label="great knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q391421" start="12614" end="12633" title="slender-billed gull" label="slender-billed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q692828" start="12640" end="12653" title="penduline tit" label="penduline tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27016" start="12696" end="12707" title="European water vole" label="Water voles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="12819" end="12832" title="American mink" label="American mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="12898" end="12909" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="12967" end="12973" title="harbour seal" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="12978" end="12987" title="grey seal" label="grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="13022" end="13032" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387" start="13042" end="13054" title="European eel" label="European eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q146375" start="13057" end="13068" title="common toad" label="common toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203572" start="13074" end="13098" title="three-spined stickleback" label="three-spined stickleback"/>
<link wikidata="Q25375" start="13162" end="13189" title="Odonata" label="dragonflies and damselflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q843377" start="13218" end="13232" title="Senta flammea" label="flame wainscot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="13273" end="13284" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q158603" start="13318" end="13330" title="Vanessa cardui" label="painted lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050343" start="13336" end="13352" title="diamondback moth" label="diamondback moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q839039" start="13373" end="13381" title="silver Y" label="silver Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497319" start="13477" end="13489" title="Limonium binervosum" label="sea lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q159525" start="13515" end="13525" title="Salicornia" label="glassworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q50346690" start="13530" end="13547" title="Spartina anglica" label="common cord grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q888227" start="13705" end="13717" title="Halimione portulacoides" label="sea purslane"/>
<link wikidata="Q21126" start="13753" end="13765" title="Plantago maritima" label="sea plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q68603329" start="13846" end="13861" title="Agropyron pungens" label="sea couch grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q28067" start="13866" end="13879" title="Puccinellia maritima" label="sea poa grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976487" start="13911" end="13922" title="Phragmites" label="common reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q159255" start="13928" end="13942" title="Juncus gerardii" label="saltmarsh rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064748" start="13944" end="13967" title="Ranunculus peltatus" label="brackish water crowfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q159163" start="13969" end="13981" title="Bolboschoenus maritimus" label="sea clubrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q147520" start="13986" end="14000" title="Typha latifolia" label="common bulrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750342" start="14280" end="14289" title="Titchwell" label="Titchwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="14335" end="14344" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="14350" end="14360" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="14409" end="14421" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="14534" end="14546" title="birdwatching" label="birdwatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="14978" end="14992" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113959" start="15282" end="15294" title="Conservation (ethic)" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="15827" end="15831" title="RIBA" label="RIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="15874" end="15882" title="brackish water" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q610559" start="16357" end="16363" title="sluice" label="sluice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107671" start="16999" end="17012" title="Chris Packham" label="Chris Packham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149261" wikidata="Q1542312" url="?curid=149261" title="Coastal erosion">
<text>Coastal erosion is the loss or displacement of land, or the long-term removal of sediment and rocks along the coastline due to the action of waves, currents, tides, wind-driven water, waterborne ice, or other impacts of storms. The landward retreat of the shoreline can be measured and described over a temporal scale of tides, seasons, and other short-term cyclic processes. Coastal erosion may be caused by hydraulic action, abrasion, impact and corrosion by wind and water, and other forces, natural or unnatural.

On non-rocky coasts, coastal erosion results in rock formations in areas where the coastline contains rock layers or fracture zones with varying resistance to erosion. Softer areas become eroded much faster than harder ones, which typically result in landforms such as tunnels, bridges, columns, and pillars. Over time the coast generally evens out. The softer areas fill up with sediment eroded from hard areas, and rock formations are eroded away. Also erosion commonly happens in areas where there are strong winds, loose sand, and soft rocks. The blowing of millions of sharp sand grains creates a sandblasting effect. This effect helps to erode, smooth and polish rocks. The definition of erosion is grinding and wearing away of rock surfaces through the mechanical action of other rock or sand particles.

According to the IPCC, sea level rise caused by climate change will increase coastal erosion worldwide, significantly changing the coasts and low-lying coastal areas.

==Coastal erosion==

===Hydraulic action===
Hydraulic action occurs when waves striking a cliff face compress air in cracks on the cliff face. This exerts pressure on the surrounding rock, and can progressively splinter and remove pieces. Over time, the cracks can grow, sometimes forming a cave. The splinters fall to the sea bed where they are subjected to further wave action.

===Attrition===
Attrition occurs when waves cause loose pieces of rock debris (scree) to collide with each other, grinding and chipping each other, progressively becoming smaller, smoother and rounder. Scree also collides with the base of the cliff face, chipping small pieces of rock from the cliff or have a corrasion (abrasion) effect, similar to sandpapering.

===Solution===
Solution is the process in which acids contained in sea water will dissolve some types of rock such as chalk or limestone.

===Abrasion===
Abrasion, also known as corrasion, occurs when waves break on cliff faces and slowly erode it. As the sea pounds cliff faces it also uses the scree from other wave actions to batter and break off pieces of rock from higher up the cliff face which can be used for this same wave action and attrition.

===Corrosion===
Corrosion or solution/chemical weathering occurs when the sea&#x27;s pH (anything below pH 7.0) corrodes rocks on a cliff face. Limestone cliff faces, which have a moderately high pH, are particularly affected in this way. Wave action also increases the rate of reaction by removing the reacted material.

==Factors that influence erosion rates==

===Primary factors===
The ability of waves to cause erosion of the cliff face depends on many factors.

The hardness (or inversely, the erodibility) of sea-facing rocks is controlled by the rock strength and the presence of fissures, fractures, and beds of non-cohesive materials such as silt and fine sand.

The rate at which cliff fall debris is removed from the foreshore depends on the power of the waves crossing the beach. This energy must reach a critical level to remove material from the debris lobe. Debris lobes can be very persistent and can take many years to completely disappear.

Beaches dissipate wave energy on the foreshore and provide a measure of protection to the adjoining land.

The stability of the foreshore, or its resistance to lowering. Once stable, the foreshore should widen and become more effective at dissipating the wave energy, so that fewer and less powerful waves reach beyond it. The provision of updrift material coming onto the foreshore beneath the cliff helps to ensure a stable beach.

The adjacent bathymetry, or configuration of the seafloor, controls the wave energy arriving at the coast, and can have an important influence on the rate of cliff erosion. Shoals and bars offer protection from wave erosion by causing storm waves to break and dissipate their energy before reaching the shore. Given the dynamic nature of the seafloor, changes in the location of shoals and bars may cause the locus of beach or cliff erosion to change position along the shore.

Coastal erosion has been greatly affected by the rising sea levels globally. There has been great measures of increased coastal erosion on the Eastern seaboard of the United States. Locations such as Florida have noticed increased coastal erosion. In reaction to these increases Florida and its individual counties have increased budgets to replenish the eroded sands that attract visitors to Florida and help support its multibillion-dollar tourism industries.

===Secondary factors===
* Weathering and transport slope processes
* Slope hydrology
* Vegetation
* Cliff foot erosion
* Cliff foot sediment accumulation
* Resistance of cliff foot sediment to attrition and transport
* Human Activities

===Tertiary factors===
* Resource extraction
* Coastal management

==Control methods==
There are three common forms of coastal erosion control methods. These three include: soft-erosion controls, hard-erosion controls, and relocation.

===Hard-erosion controls===
Hard-erosion control methods provide a more permanent solution than soft-erosion control methods. Seawalls and groynes serve as semi-permanent infrastructure. These structures are not immune from normal wear-and-tear and will have to be refurbished or rebuilt. It is estimated the average life span of a seawall is 50–100 years and the average for a groyne is 30–40 years. Because of their relative permanence, it is assumed that these structures can be a final solution to erosion. Seawalls can also deprive public access to the beach and drastically alter the natural state of the beach. Groynes also drastically alter the natural state of the beach. Some claim that groynes could reduce the interval between beach nourishment projects though they are not seen as a solution to beach nourishment. Other criticisms of seawalls are that they can be expensive, difficult to maintain, and can sometimes cause further damage to the beach if built improperly. As we learn more about hard erosion controls it can be said for certain that these structural solutions cause more problems than they solve. They interfere with the natural water currents and prevent sand from shifting along coasts, along with the high costs to install and maintain them, their tendency to cause erosion in adjacent beaches and dunes, and the unintended diversion of stormwater and into other properties.

Natural forms of hard-erosion control include planting or maintaining native vegetation, such as mangrove forests and coral reefs.

===Soft-erosion controls===
Soft erosion strategies refer to temporary options of slowing the effects of erosion. These options, including Sandbag and beach nourishment, are not intended to be long-term solutions or permanent solutions. Another method, beach scraping or beach bulldozing allows for the creation of an artificial dune in front of a building or as means of preserving a building foundation. However, there is a U.S. federal moratorium on beach bulldozing during turtle nesting season, 1 May – 15 November. One of the most common methods of soft erosion control is beach nourishment projects. These projects involve dredging sand and moving it to the beaches as a means of reestablishing the sand lost due to erosion. In some situations, beach nourishment is not a suitable measure to take for erosion control, such as in areas with sand sinks or frequent and large storms. 
Dynamic revetment, which uses loose cobble to mimic the function of a natural storm beach, may be a soft-erosion control alternative in high energy environments such as open coastlines.

Over the years beach nourishment has become a very controversial shore protection measure: It has the potential to negatively impact several of the natural resources. Some large issues with these beach nourishment projects are that they must follow a wide range of complex laws and regulations, as well as the high expenses it takes to complete these projects. Just because sand is added to a beach does not mean it will stay there. Some communities will bring in large volumes of sand repeatedly only for it to be washed away with the next big storm. Despite these factors, beach nourishment is still used often in many communities. Lately, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers emphasized the need to consider a whole new range of solutions to coastal erosion, not just structural solutions. Solutions that have potential include native vegetation, wetland protection and restoration, and relocation or removal of structures and debris.

===Living shorelines===
The solutions to coastal erosion that include vegetation are called &quot;living shorelines&quot;. Living shorelines use plants and other natural elements. Living shorelines are found to be more resilient against storms, improve water quality, increase biodiversity, and provide fishery habitats. Marshes and oyster reefs are examples of vegetation that can be used for living shorelines; they act as natural barriers to waves. Fifteen feet of marsh can absorb fifty percent of the energy of incoming waves.

===Relocation===

Relocation of infrastructure any housing farther away from the coast is also an option. The natural processes of both absolute and relative sea level rise and erosion are considered in rebuilding. Depending on factors such as the severity of the erosion, as well as the natural landscape of the property, relocation could simply mean moving inland by a short distance or relocation can be to completely remove improvements from an area. A coproduction approach combined with managed retreat has been proposed as a solution that keeps in mind environmental justice. Typically, there has been low public support for &quot;retreating&quot;. However, if a community does decide to relocate their buildings along the coast it is common that they will then turn the land into public open space or transfer it into land trusts in order to protect it. These relocation practices are very cost-efficient, can buffer storm surges, safeguard coastal homes and businesses, lower carbon and other pollutants, create nursery habitats for important fish species, restore open space and wildlife, and bring back the culture of these coastal communities.

==Tracking==

Storms can cause erosion hundreds of times faster than normal weather. Before-and-after comparisons can be made using data gathered by manual surveying, laser altimeter, or a GPS unit mounted on an ATV. Remote sensing data such as Landsat scenes can be used for large scale and multi year assessments of coastal erosion. Moreover, geostatistical models can be applied to quantify erosion effects and the natural temporal and spatial evolution of tracked coastal coastal profiles. The results can be used to determine the required temporal and spatial distances between the measured profiles for ecomic tracking.

==Examples==
A place where erosion of a cliffed coast has occurred is at Wamberal in the Central Coast region of New South Wales where houses built on top of the cliffs began to collapse into the sea. This is due to waves causing erosion of the primarily sedimentary material on which the buildings foundations sit.

Dunwich, the capital of the English medieval wool trade, disappeared over the period of a few centuries due to redistribution of sediment by waves. Human interference can also increase coastal erosion: Hallsands in Devon, England, was a coastal village washed away over the course of a year, 1917, directly due to earlier dredging of shingle in the bay in front of it.

The California coast, which has soft cliffs of sedimentary rock and is heavily populated, regularly has incidents of house damage as cliffs erodes. Devil&#x27;s Slide, Santa Barbara, the coast just north of Ensenada, and Malibu are regularly affected.

The Holderness coastline on the east coast of England, just north of the Humber Estuary, is one of the fastest eroding coastlines in Europe due to its soft clay cliffs and powerful waves. Groynes and other artificial measures to keep it under control has only accelerated the process further down the coast, because longshore drift starves the beaches of sand, leaving them more exposed. The white cliffs of Dover have also been affected.

The coastline of North Cove, Washington has been eroding at a rate of over 100 feet per year, earning the area the nickname &quot;Washaway Beach&quot;. Much of the original town has collapsed into the ocean. The area is said to be the fastest-eroding shore of the United States&#x27; West Coast. Measures were finally taken to slow the erosion, with substantial slowing of the process noted in 2018.

Fort Ricasoli, a historic 17th century fortress in Malta is being threatened by coastal erosion, as it was built on a fault in the headland which is prone to erosion. A small part of one of the bastion walls has already collapsed since the land under it has eroded, and there are cracks in other walls as well.

In El Campello, Spain, the erosion and failure of a Roman fish farm excavated from rock during the first century B.C. was exacerbated by the construction of a close sport harbour.

Hampton-on-Sea is suffering from this problem as well. Hampton-on-Sea is located in Kent, England. It was at one time very popular for its oyster fishing and was very reliant on the sea. Hampton-on-Sea has undergone the effects of coastal erosion since before the 1800s. Hampton-on-Sea&#x27;s coastal erosion worsened with the increase in global warming and climate change. Global warming is causing a rise in sea level, more intense and frequent storms, and an increase in ocean temperature and precipitation levels. Another reason Hampton-on-Sea had such a horrific case of coastal erosion is due to an increase in the frequency and the intensity of storms it experienced. These natural events had destroyed the Hampton Pier, Hernecliffe Gardens, a set of villas, several roads, and many other structures that once lay on Hampton-On-Sea. After this destruction, in 1899 they started building a sea wall to protect the rest of the remaining land and buildings. However, the sea wall did not offer much help: buildings continued to be affected by the erosion. Then a storm came and broke the sea wall, it then flooded the land behind it. These events cause many land investors to back out. Eventually, Hampton-on-Sea had to be abandoned because the erosion overtook so much of the land. By 1916 Hampton-on-Sea had been completely abandoned. By the 1920s only a couple of structures still stood. It was at that point that Hampton-on-Sea was said to have been finally drowned. Today only three landmarks have survived the tragedy that Hampton-on-Sea had faced. These landmarks include The Hampton Inn, The Hampton Pier, and a few roads. Although The Hampton Pier is not the same size as the original it is still available for people to fish from.

==See also==

* Beach erosion and accretion
** Beach evolution
** Beach morphodynamics
** Beach nourishment
** Raised beach
** Modern recession of beaches
**Paleoshoreline
* Integrated coastal zone management
** Coastal management, to prevent coastal erosion and creation of beach
** Coastal and oceanic landforms
** Coastal development hazards
** Coastal geography
** Coastal engineering
** Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation (CERF)
* Erosion
** Bioerosion
** Blowhole
** Natural arch
** Wave-cut platform
* Longshore drift
** Deposition (sediment)
** Coastal sediment supply
** Sand dune stabilization
** Submersion

==References==
===Works cited===

==External links==
* Sustainable coastal erosion management in Europe
* Environment Agency guide to coastal erosion
* Wave Erosion
* Examine an example of wave erosion 
* Erosion &amp; Flooding in the Parish of Easington 
* Some interesting teaching resources
* Examples of coastal landforms 
* US Economic Costs of Coastal Erosion &amp; Inundation NOAA Economics
* British Geological Survey coastal erosion and landslides case studies
* Shoreline retreat and beach nourishment are projected to increase in Southern California

===Images===
* Images of Coastal features</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="0" end="15" title="Coastal erosion" label="Coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="81" end="89" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="110" end="119" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="141" end="146" title="Wind wave" label="waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="148" end="156" title="Ocean current" label="currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="158" end="162" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="409" end="418" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188842" start="427" end="435" title="abrasion (geology)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="448" end="457" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="787" end="793" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="796" end="802" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="805" end="811" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="818" end="825" title="Column" label="pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1043" end="1047" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q917273" start="1120" end="1132" title="sandblasting" label="sandblasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580164" start="1257" end="1265" title="Erosion surface" label="surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="1353" end="1367" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1378" end="1392" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954360" start="1542" end="1558" title="Hydraulic action" label="Hydraulic action"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="1588" end="1593" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="1789" end="1793" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818734" start="1895" end="1904" title="Attrition (weathering)" label="Attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133195" start="1958" end="1963" title="scree" label="scree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258442" start="2189" end="2198" title="corrasion" label="corrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="2259" end="2267" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188842" start="2398" end="2406" title="Abrasion (geology)" label="Abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258442" start="2422" end="2431" title="corrasion" label="corrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="2715" end="2724" title="Corrosion" label="Corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="2784" end="2786" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2843" end="2852" title="Limestone" label="Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="3100" end="3105" title="water waves" label="waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="3115" end="3122" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="3130" end="3135" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="3171" end="3179" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580155" start="3199" end="3210" title="erodibility" label="erodibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="3253" end="3257" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856641" start="3287" end="3295" title="fissures" label="fissures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="3297" end="3306" title="fractures" label="fractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="3351" end="3355" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="3365" end="3369" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="3401" end="3407" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="3428" end="3437" title="foreshore" label="foreshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="3485" end="3490" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q810826" start="4106" end="4116" title="bathymetry" label="bathymetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359152" start="5633" end="5640" title="Seawall" label="Seawall"/>
<link wikidata="Q153084" start="5646" end="5653" title="groynes" label="groynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="7011" end="7019" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="7032" end="7037" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q91398" start="7185" end="7192" title="sandbags" label="Sandbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749926" start="7197" end="7214" title="beach nourishment" label="beach nourishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758056" start="7935" end="7952" title="Dynamic revetment" label="Dynamic revetment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150015" start="8013" end="8024" title="storm beach" label="storm beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="9748" end="9762" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479527" start="10150" end="10171" title="environmental justice" label="environmental justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="10914" end="10929" title="laser altimeter" label="laser altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="10964" end="10978" title="Remote sensing" label="Remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440020" start="11092" end="11106" title="Geostatistics" label="geostatistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502866" start="11414" end="11427" title="cliffed coast" label="cliffed coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966919" start="11447" end="11455" title="Wamberal, New South Wales" label="Wamberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188020" start="11691" end="11698" title="Dunwich" label="Dunwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11719" end="11726" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="11736" end="11740" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q647513" start="11893" end="11902" title="Hallsands" label="Hallsands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="11906" end="11911" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="12013" end="12021" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="12025" end="12032" title="slate" label="shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="12040" end="12043" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267223" start="12209" end="12227" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Slide (California)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="12229" end="12242" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q656189" start="12268" end="12276" title="Ensenada, Baja California" label="Ensenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="12282" end="12288" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q124881240" start="12318" end="12328" title="Coastal erosion in Yorkshire" label="Holderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="12387" end="12401" title="Humber Estuary" label="Humber Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153084" start="12502" end="12509" title="Groynes" label="Groynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938255" start="12630" end="12645" title="longshore drift" label="longshore drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="12706" end="12727" title="white cliffs of Dover" label="white cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789540" start="12771" end="12793" title="North Cove, Washington" label="North Cove, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431801" start="13155" end="13168" title="Fort Ricasoli" label="Fort Ricasoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="13206" end="13211" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q842224" start="13470" end="13481" title="El Campello" label="El Campello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646148" start="13648" end="13662" title="Hampton-on-Sea" label="Hampton-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15410" end="15437" title="Beach#Erosion and accretion" label="Beach erosion and accretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875777" start="15441" end="15456" title="Beach evolution" label="Beach evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875786" start="15460" end="15480" title="Beach morphodynamics" label="Beach morphodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749926" start="15484" end="15501" title="Beach nourishment" label="Beach nourishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155155" start="15505" end="15517" title="Raised beach" label="Raised beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875777" start="15521" end="15548" title="Modern recession of beaches" label="Modern recession of beaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q104822557" start="15551" end="15565" title="Paleoshoreline" label="Paleoshoreline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619791" start="15568" end="15602" title="Integrated coastal zone management" label="Integrated coastal zone management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="15606" end="15624" title="Coastal management" label="Coastal management"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15678" end="15707" title="Landforms#Coastal and oceanic landforms" label="Coastal and oceanic landforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072708" start="15711" end="15738" title="Coastal development hazards" label="Coastal development hazards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421309" start="15742" end="15759" title="Coastal geography" label="Coastal geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797362" start="15763" end="15782" title="Coastal engineering" label="Coastal engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138339" start="15786" end="15827" title="Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation" label="Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="15837" end="15844" title="Erosion" label="Erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120531" start="15848" end="15858" title="Bioerosion" label="Bioerosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q885499" start="15862" end="15870" title="Blowhole (geology)" label="Blowhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q954501" start="15874" end="15886" title="Natural arch" label="Natural arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q480902" start="15890" end="15907" title="Wave-cut platform" label="Wave-cut platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938255" start="15910" end="15925" title="Longshore drift" label="Longshore drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="15929" end="15950" title="Deposition (sediment)" label="Deposition (sediment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138366" start="15954" end="15977" title="Coastal sediment supply" label="Coastal sediment supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185006" start="15981" end="16004" title="Sand dune stabilization" label="Sand dune stabilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631685" start="16008" end="16018" title="Submersion (coastal management)" label="Submersion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149264" wikidata="Q1510781" url="?curid=149264" title="Stanegate">
<text>The Stanegate (meaning &quot;stone road&quot; in Northumbrian dialect) was an important Roman road and early frontier built in what is now northern England. It linked many forts including two that guarded important river crossings: Corstopitum (Corbridge) on the River Tyne in the east (situated on Dere Street) and Luguvalium (Carlisle) (on the River Eden) in the west. The Stanegate ran through the natural gap formed by the valleys of the River Tyne in Northumberland and the River Irthing in Cumbria. It predated the Hadrian&#x27;s Wall frontier by several decades; the Wall would later follow a similar route, albeit slightly to the north.

The Stanegate should not be confused with the two Roman roads called Stane Street in the south of England, namely Stane Street (Chichester) and Stane Street (Colchester). In both these cases the meaning is the same as for the northern version, indicating a stone or paved road.

The Stanegate differed from most other Roman roads in that it often followed the easiest gradients, and so tended to weave around, whereas typical Roman roads follow a straight path, even if this sometimes involves having punishing gradients to climb.

A large section of the Stanegate is still in use today as a modern minor road between Fourstones and Vindolanda in Northumberland.

==History==
The Stanegate is believed to have been built under the governorship of Agricola, from 77 to 85 AD, during the reigns of the emperors Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian. It is also thought that it was built as a strategic road when the northern frontier was on the line of the Forth and Clyde. An indication of this is that it was provided with forts at one-day marching intervals (14 Roman miles or modern ), sufficient for a strategic non-frontier road. The forts at Vindolanda (Chesterholm) and Nether Denton have been shown to date from about the same time as Corstopitum and Luguvalium, in the 70s and 80s AD.

When the Romans decided to withdraw from Scotland starting from around 87 AD, the line of the Stanegate gradually became the new frontier and it became necessary to provide forts at half-day marching intervals. These additional forts were Newbrough, Magnis (Carvoran), and Brampton Old Church. It has been suggested that a series of smaller forts were built in between the &#x27;half-day-march&#x27; forts. Haltwhistle Burn and Throp might be such forts, but there is insufficient evidence to confirm a series of such fortlets.

==Structure==

Where it left the base of Corstopitum, the Stanegate was wide with covered stone gutters and a foundation of cobbles with of gravel on top.

==Route==
The Stanegate began in the east at Corstopitum, where the important road, Dere Street headed towards Scotland. West of Corstopitum, the Stanegate crossed the Cor Burn, and then followed the north bank of the Tyne until it reached the North Tyne near the village of Wall. A Roman bridge must have taken the road across the North Tyne, from where it headed west past the present village of Fourstones to Newbrough, where the first fort is situated, from Corbridge, and from Vindolanda. It is a small fort occupying less than and is in the graveyard of Newbrough church, which stands alone to the west of the village.

From Newbrough, the Stanegate proceeds west, parallel to the South Tyne until it meets the next major fort, at Vindolanda (Chesterholm). From Vindolanda the Stanegate crosses the route of the present-day Military Road and passes just south of the minor fort of Haltwhistle Burn. From Haltwhistle Burn, the Stanegate continues west away from the course of the South Tyne and passes the major fort of Magnis (Carvoran), from Vindolanda and from Corstopitum. At this point, the road is joined by the Maiden Way coming from the fort of Epiacum (also known as Whitley Castle) near Alston to the south.

From Magnis, the road turns towards the southwest to follow the course of the River Irthing, passing the minor fort of Throp, and arriving at the major fort of Nether Denton, from Magnis and from Corstopitum. The fort occupies an area of about .

From Nether Denton, the road continues to follow the River Irthing and heads towards present-day Brampton. It passes the minor fort of Castle Hill Boothby and then, west of Brampton, reaches the next major fort, that of Brampton Old Church, from Nether Denton and from Corstopitum. The fort is so called because half of it is buried under Old St Martin&#x27;s church and its graveyard.

From Brampton Old Church, the road crosses the River Irthing and continues southwest through Irthington and passes through what is now the site of Carlisle Airport, just to the north of the main runway. The curving corner of an associated marching camp can be made out from the air on the south edge of the runway near its western end, and can be seen on Google Earth. The Stanegate then continued through a large cutting in the village of Crosby-on-Eden, where a small fort has been postulated, based on marching distances, but has not yet been found. The Stanegate then crossed the River Eden near the cricket ground in modern Carlisle and eventually reached the fort of Luguvalium (Carlisle) on the site of Carlisle Castle, from Brampton Old Church and from Corstopitum. LIDAR images show that the road carried on westwards for a further to the Roman fort at Kirkbride overlooking Moricambe Bay, an inlet of the Solway Firth, where a large camp of was found.

The Stanegate might have run eastwards from Corstopitum towards the fort and bridge at Pons Aelius, present-day Newcastle upon Tyne, possibly linking to Washing Wells Roman Fort in Whickham, but no evidence of a road here has yet been found to support this.

==List of forts on the Stanegate==
From east to west:
* Corstopitum (Corbridge) (major fort)
* Newbrough (minor fort)
* Vindolanda (Chesterholm) (major fort)
* Haltwhistle Burn (minor fort)
* Magnis (Carvoran) (major fort)
* Throp, just south of Gilsland (minor fort)
* Nether Denton (major fort)
* Castle Hill Boothby, between Brampton and Lanercost Priory (minor fort)
* Brampton Old Church (major fort)
* Luguvalium (Carlisle) (major fort)
* possibly Kirkbride

==Subsequent history==
Much of the Stanegate provided the foundation for the Carelgate (or Carlisle Road), a medieval road running from Corbridge market place and joining the Stanegate west of Corstopitum. The Carelgate eventually deteriorated to such an extent that it was unusable by coaches and wagons. In 1751–1752, a new Military Road was built by General George Wade in the wake of the Jacobite rising of 1745.

==See also==
* Hadrian&#x27;s Wall
* History of Northumberland
* Roman Britain
* Roman roads in Britain

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1510781" start="4" end="13" title="Stanegate" label="Stanegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378612" start="49" end="69" title="Northumbrian dialect" label="Northumbrian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="88" end="98" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="139" end="155" title="northern England" label="northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819299" start="232" end="243" title="Coria (Corbridge)" label="Corstopitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122953" start="245" end="254" title="Corbridge" label="Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="263" end="273" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q933249" start="299" end="310" title="Dere Street" label="Dere Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876046" start="316" end="326" title="Luguvalium" label="Luguvalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="328" end="336" title="Carlisle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q195364" start="346" end="356" title="River Eden, Cumbria" label="River Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q377880" start="479" end="492" title="River Irthing" label="River Irthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="521" end="540" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q205511" start="760" end="785" title="Stane Street (Chichester)" label="Stane Street (Chichester)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598684" start="790" end="815" title="Stane Street (Colchester)" label="Stane Street (Colchester)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475891" start="1264" end="1274" title="Fourstones" label="Fourstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="1279" end="1289" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="1293" end="1307" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="1393" end="1401" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="1455" end="1464" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="1466" end="1471" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="1477" end="1485" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="1594" end="1599" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19721" start="1604" end="1609" title="River Clyde" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="1786" end="1796" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657934" start="1815" end="1828" title="Nether Denton" label="Nether Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047184" start="2172" end="2181" title="Newbrough" label="Newbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843335" start="2183" end="2189" title="Magnis (Carvoran)" label="Magnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956254" start="2206" end="2225" title="Brampton Old Church" label="Brampton Old Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2340" end="2356" title="Haltwhistle Burn#Roman fort" label="Haltwhistle Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819299" start="2663" end="2674" title="Coria (Corbridge)" label="Corstopitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q933249" start="2702" end="2713" title="Dere Street" label="Dere Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801136" start="2893" end="2897" title="Wall, Northumberland" label="Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475891" start="3016" end="3026" title="Fourstones" label="Fourstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047184" start="3030" end="3039" title="Newbrough" label="Newbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="3355" end="3365" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253394" start="3448" end="3461" title="Military Road (Northumberland)" label="Military Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3505" end="3521" title="Haltwhistle Burn#Roman fort" label="Haltwhistle Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843335" start="3643" end="3649" title="Magnis (Carvoran)" label="Magnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19581111" start="3741" end="3751" title="Maiden Way" label="Maiden Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996561" start="3776" end="3783" title="Epiacum" label="Epiacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996561" start="3799" end="3813" title="Whitley Castle" label="Whitley Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560190" start="3820" end="3826" title="Alston, Cumbria" label="Alston"/>
<link wikidata="Q377880" start="3920" end="3933" title="River Irthing" label="River Irthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657934" start="4002" end="4015" title="Nether Denton" label="Nether Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491525" start="4186" end="4194" title="Brampton, Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Brampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956254" start="4309" end="4328" title="Brampton Old Church" label="Brampton Old Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532015" start="4569" end="4579" title="Irthington" label="Irthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536424" start="4623" end="4639" title="Carlisle Lake District Airport" label="Carlisle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="4831" end="4843" title="Google Earth" label="Google Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188023" start="4916" end="4930" title="Crosby-on-Eden" label="Crosby-on-Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q195364" start="5060" end="5070" title="River Eden, Cumbria" label="River Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876046" start="5149" end="5159" title="Luguvalium" label="Luguvalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="5186" end="5201" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="5250" end="5255" title="LIDAR" label="LIDAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415572" start="5338" end="5347" title="Kirkbride, Cumbria" label="Kirkbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912166" start="5360" end="5373" title="Moricambe Bay" label="Moricambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q195413" start="5391" end="5403" title="Solway Firth" label="Solway Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227963" start="5526" end="5537" title="Pons Aelius" label="Pons Aelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="5551" end="5570" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248636" start="5592" end="5616" title="Washing Wells Roman Fort" label="Washing Wells Roman Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573389" start="5620" end="5628" title="Whickham" label="Whickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819299" start="5754" end="5765" title="Coria (Corbridge)" label="Corstopitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047184" start="5793" end="5802" title="Newbrough" label="Newbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="5818" end="5828" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5858" end="5874" title="Haltwhistle Burn#Roman fort" label="Haltwhistle Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843335" start="5890" end="5896" title="Magnis (Carvoran)" label="Magnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268097" start="5944" end="5952" title="Gilsland" label="Gilsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657934" start="5968" end="5981" title="Nether Denton" label="Nether Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491525" start="6026" end="6034" title="Brampton, Carlisle" label="Brampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403001" start="6039" end="6055" title="Lanercost Priory" label="Lanercost Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956254" start="6071" end="6090" title="Brampton Old Church" label="Brampton Old Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876046" start="6106" end="6116" title="Luguvalium" label="Luguvalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415572" start="6152" end="6161" title="Kirkbride, Cumbria" label="Kirkbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253394" start="6489" end="6502" title="Military Road (Northumberland)" label="Military Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360330" start="6524" end="6535" title="George Wade" label="George Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="6555" end="6578" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Jacobite rising of 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="6596" end="6615" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865727" start="6618" end="6643" title="History of Northumberland" label="History of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="6646" end="6659" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="6662" end="6684" title="Roman roads in Britain" label="Roman roads in Britain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149269" wikidata="Q885539" url="?curid=149269" title="Blubber">
<text>Blubber is a thick layer of vascularized adipose tissue under the skin of all cetaceans, pinnipeds, penguins, and sirenians. It was present in many marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs.

==Description==
Lipid-rich, collagen fiber-laced blubber comprises the hypodermis and covers the whole body, except for parts of the appendages. It is strongly attached to the musculature and skeleton by highly organized, fan-shaped networks of tendons and ligaments, can comprise up to 50 per cent of the body mass of some marine mammals during some points in their lives, and can range from thick in dolphins and smaller whales, to more than thick in some bigger whales, such as right and bowhead whales. However, this is not indicative of larger whales&#x27; ability to retain heat better, as the thickness of a whale&#x27;s blubber does not significantly affect heat loss. More indicative of a whale&#x27;s ability to retain heat is the water and lipid concentration in blubber, as water reduces heat-retaining capacities, and lipid increases them.

==Function==
Blubber is the primary fat storage on some mammals, specifically those that live in water. It is particularly important for species that feed and breed in different parts of the ocean. During these periods, the animals metabolize fat. Blubber may save energy for marine mammals, such as dolphins, in that it adds buoyancy while swimming.

Blubber differs from other forms of adipose tissue in its extra thickness, which provides an efficient thermal insulator, making blubber essential for thermoregulation. Blubber is more vascularized—rich in blood vessels—than other adipose tissue.

Blubber has advantages over fur (as in sea otters) in that, though fur retains heat by holding pockets of air, the air expels under pressure (i.e., when the animal dives). Blubber, however, does not compress under pressure. It is effective enough that some whales can dwell in temperatures as low as . While diving in cold water, blood vessels covering the blubber constrict and decrease blood flow, thus increasing blubber&#x27;s efficiency as an insulator.

Blubber aids buoyancy and streamlines the body, because the organized, complex collagenous network supports the noncircular cross sections characteristic of cetaceans. The buoyancy of blubber could be problematic for bottom-feeding marine mammals such as sirenians and the extinct marine sloths, both of which do or probably did have limited amounts of it for that reason.

Research into the thermal conductivity of the common bottlenose dolphin&#x27;s blubber reveals its thickness and lipid content vary greatly amongst individuals and across life history categories. Blubber from emaciated dolphins is a poorer insulator than that from nonpregnant adults, which in turn have a higher heat conductivity than blubber from pregnant females and adolescents.

==Human influences==

===Uses===
&quot;Uqhuq&quot;, or &quot;uqsuq&quot;, (&quot;blubber&quot; in the Inuktitut language) is an important part of the traditional diets of the Inuit and of other northern peoples, because of its high energy value and availability. Whale blubber, which tastes like arrowroot biscuits, has similar properties. 

Whaling largely targeted the collection of blubber: whalers rendered it into oil in try pots, or later, in vats on factory ships. The oil could serve in the manufacture of soap, leather, and cosmetics. Whale oil was used in candles as wax, and in oil lamps as fuel. A single blue whale can yield a blubber harvest of up to 50 tons.

===Health===
Blubber from whales and seals contains omega-3 fatty acids and vitamin D. Without the vitamin D, for example, the Inuit and other natives of the Arctic would likely suffer from rickets. There is evidence blubber and other fats in the arctic diet also provide the calories needed to replace the lack of carbohydrates which are found in the diets of cultures in the rest of the world.

===Toxicity===
In the 21st century, blubber contains man-made polychlorinated biphenyl (PCBs), carcinogens that damage human nervous, immune, and reproductive systems. The source of PCB concentrations is unknown. Since toothed whales are high on the food chain, they likely consume large amounts of industrial pollutants (bioaccumulation); even baleen whales, by merit of the huge amount of food they consume, are bound to have toxic chemicals stored in their bodies. Additionally, there are high levels of mercury in the blubber of seals of the Canadian arctic.

==See also==
* Globster
* Greenlandic cuisine
* Muktuk (whale blubber and skin as consumed in the North American and East Siberian Arctic)
* Whale meat

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="0" end="7" title="Blubber" label="Blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="28" end="36" title="Blood vessel" label="vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="41" end="55" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="78" end="85" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="89" end="97" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="100" end="107" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431" start="114" end="121" title="sirenia" label="sirenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239603" start="148" end="162" title="marine reptile" label="marine reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q194515" start="173" end="185" title="Ichthyosauria" label="ichthyosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q269195" start="190" end="200" title="plesiosaur" label="plesiosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="220" end="225" title="Lipid" label="Lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="232" end="240" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164665" start="275" end="285" title="Subcutaneous tissue" label="hypodermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="449" end="455" title="tendon" label="tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39888" start="461" end="469" title="ligament" label="ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="528" end="541" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527843" start="685" end="690" title="Right whale" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="695" end="708" title="bowhead whale" label="bowhead whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1114" end="1120" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="1290" end="1300" title="metabolism" label="metabolize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="1384" end="1392" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1399" end="1407" title="Whale#Locomotion" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="1446" end="1460" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="1521" end="1530" title="Thermal insulation" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="1561" end="1577" title="thermoregulation" label="thermoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="1616" end="1628" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="1697" end="1706" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431" start="2373" end="2381" title="sirenian" label="sirenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q137429" start="2399" end="2412" title="Thalassocnus" label="marine sloths"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="2510" end="2530" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="2545" end="2563" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="2978" end="2987" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986874" start="3026" end="3043" title="Inuit diet" label="traditional diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="3051" end="3056" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069888" start="3172" end="3181" title="arrowroot" label="arrowroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="3218" end="3225" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751632" start="3278" end="3286" title="Rendering (food processing)" label="rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="3295" end="3298" title="whale oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848431" start="3302" end="3309" title="try pot" label="try pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q431858" start="3333" end="3345" title="factory ship" label="factory ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q821952" start="3465" end="3473" title="oil lamp" label="oil lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="3493" end="3503" title="blue whale" label="blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="3603" end="3622" title="omega-3 fatty acids" label="omega-3 fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="3627" end="3636" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q183392" start="3741" end="3748" title="rickets" label="rickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="4010" end="4034" title="polychlorinated biphenyl" label="polychlorinated biphenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="4198" end="4208" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304799" start="4270" end="4285" title="biomagnification" label="bioaccumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="4293" end="4305" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="4455" end="4462" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q764146" start="4494" end="4509" title="Northern Canada" label="Canadian arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477711" start="4527" end="4535" title="Globster" label="Globster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992427" start="4538" end="4557" title="Greenlandic cuisine" label="Greenlandic cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q940033" start="4560" end="4566" title="Muktuk" label="Muktuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653150" start="4653" end="4663" title="Whale meat" label="Whale meat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149270" wikidata="Q57370" url="?curid=149270" title="Atlantic Wall">
<text>The Atlantic Wall () was an extensive system of coastal defences and fortifications built by Nazi Germany between 1942 and 1944 along the coast of continental Europe and Scandinavia as a defence against an anticipated Allied invasion of Nazi-occupied Europe from the United Kingdom, during World War II. The manning and operation of the Atlantic Wall was administratively overseen by the German Army, with some support from &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; ground forces. The &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; (German Navy) maintained a separate coastal defence network, organised into a number of sea defence zones.

Hitler ordered the construction of the fortifications in 1942 through his Führer Directive No. 40. More than half a million French workers were drafted to build it. The wall was frequently mentioned in Nazi propaganda, where its size and strength were usually exaggerated. The fortifications included colossal coastal guns, batteries, mortars, and artillery, and thousands of artillery pieces were stationed in its defences. Today, ruins of the wall exist in all of the nations where it was built, although many structures have fallen into the ocean or have been demolished over the years.

==Background==

World War II in Europe began on 1 September 1939, with Nazi Germany&#x27;s invasion of Poland. Two days later, the UK and France declared war on Germany. Poland&#x27;s geographical location, however, prevented the Allies from intervening directly. Four weeks into the attack, the Germans had successfully occupied Poland.
Less than a month after this victory, Adolf Hitler issued a directive stating that Germany must be ready for an offensive through France and the Low Countries. However, the &quot;Oberkommando der Wehrmacht&quot; (German high command; OKW) was convinced that preparations would take at least until the following year. After furious arguments, Hitler reluctantly agreed to wait. In May 1940, three massive German army groups overran France and the Low Countries in little more than six weeks.

==History==

===Creation===

Prior to the Atlantic Wall decision, following a number of commando raids, on 2 June 1941 Adolf Hitler asked for maps of the Channel Islands. These were provided the next day and by 13 June 1941 Hitler had made a decision. Ordering additional men to the Islands and having decided the defences were inadequate, lacking tanks and coastal artillery, the Organisation Todt (OT) was instructed to undertake the building of 200–250 strong points in each of the larger islands. The plan was finalised by the OT and submitted to Hitler. The original defence order was reinforced with a second dated 20 October 1941, following a Fuhrer conference on 18 October to discuss the engineers&#x27; assessment of requirements. The permanent fortification of the Channel Islands was to make them into an impregnable fortress to be completed within 14 months. &quot;Festungspionierkommandeur XIV&quot; was created to command the project of fortifying the Channel Islands.

It was six months later on 23 March 1942 that Hitler issued Führer Directive No. 40, which called for the creation of an &quot;Atlantic Wall&quot;. He ordered naval and submarine bases to be heavily defended. Fortifications remained concentrated around ports until late in 1943, when defences were increased in other areas. This decision required the army engineers and the OT to organise quickly. Massive supplies of cement, steel reinforcing and armour plate would be required and everything would need to be transported.

Nazi propaganda claimed that the wall stretched from the cape of Norway down to the Spanish border.

===Regelbau===

The &quot;Regelbau&quot; (standard build) system used books of plans for each of over 600 approved types of bunker and casemate, each having a specific purpose, having been updated as enemy constructions were overrun and examined, even testing some to destruction for effectiveness. They incorporated standard features, such as an entrance door at right angles, armoured air intake, steel doors, ventilation and telephones, internal walls lined with wood, and an emergency exit system. There were over 200 standardised armour parts.

The standardisation greatly simplified the manufacture of equipment, the supply of materials and the budgetary and financial control of the construction as well as the speed of planning for construction projects.

To offset shortages, captured equipment from the French and other occupied countries armies were incorporated in the defences, casemates designed for non-German artillery, anti tank and machine guns and the use of turrets from obsolete tanks in &quot;tobrukstand&quot; pill boxes (tobruk pits).

===Organisation Todt===
Organisation Todt (OT), formed in 1933, had designed the Siegfried Line during the prewar years along the Franco-German border. OT was the chief engineering group responsible for the design and construction of the wall&#x27;s major gun emplacements and fortifications.

The OT supplied supervisors and labour as well as organising supplies, machinery and transport to supplement the staff and equipment of construction companies. Many of them were German, however construction companies in occupied countries bid for contracts. Companies could apply for OT work or could be conscripted. Companies failing to complete their work on time, which was always possible as the OT controlled the material and manpower of each firm, could find themselves closed down, or more likely fined, or taken over or merged with another firm to make a more efficient larger unit. Successful firms however could make attractive profits.

The OT obtained quotes for necessary works and signed contracts with each construction company setting out the price and terms of the contract, such as bonus payments for efficiency, including the wage rates and bonus payments for OT workers (which depended on their nationality and skill). There could be several construction companies working on each site.

Labour comprised skilled volunteers, engineers, designers and supervisors, who were paid and treated well. Second came volunteer workers, often skilled technicians, such as carpenters, plumbers, electricians and metal workers. Again, these workers were paid, took holidays and were well treated. Next came unskilled forced labour, paid very little and treated quite harshly. Lastly came effective slave labour, paid little, badly fed and treated very harshly. The OT ran training courses to improve labour skills.

Massive numbers of workers were needed. The Vichy regime imposed a compulsory labour system, drafting some 600,000 French workers to construct these permanent fortifications along the Dutch, Belgian, and French coasts facing the English Channel. Efficiency of the OT decreased in late 1943 and 1944 as a result of manpower pressures, fuel shortages and the bombing of worksites, such as V-weapons sites, where some volunteer workers refused to work in such dangerous areas.

OT Cherbourg in January 1944 dealt with 34 companies with 15,000 workers and 79 sub contractors. Daily, weekly and monthly reports showing progress, work variations, material used, stocks of material, labour hours used per skill type, the weather, equipment inventory and quality, level of supervision, employee absences, staffing levels, deaths and problems experienced all had to be filed with the OT.

===British attacks===
Throughout most of 1942–43, the Atlantic Wall remained a relaxed front for the Axis troops manning it, with only two large-scale British attacks. Operation Chariot, launched near St Nazaire in March 1942, successfully destroyed German pumping machinery for, and severely damaged, the Normandy dry dock and installations. The second attack was the Dieppe Raid, launched near the French port of Dieppe in August 1942 to test the German defences and provide combat experience for Canadian troops. The Germans were defeated at St. Nazaire, but had little difficulty in repulsing the attack at Dieppe, where they inflicted heavy casualties. Although the Dieppe raid was a disaster for the Allies, it alarmed Hitler, who was sure an Allied invasion in the West would shortly follow. Following Dieppe, Hitler gave Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, the overall German Commander-in-Chief in the West, 15 further divisions to shore up the German positions.

===Reorganisation===

Early in 1944, with an Allied invasion of Nazi-occupied Europe becoming ever more likely, Field Marshal Erwin Rommel was assigned to improve the wall&#x27;s defences. Believing the existing coastal fortifications to be entirely inadequate, he immediately began strengthening them. Rommel&#x27;s main concern was Allied air power. He had seen it first-hand when fighting the British and Americans in North Africa, and it had left a profound impression on him. He feared that any German counterattack would be broken up by Allied aircraft long before it could make a difference. Under his direction, hundreds of reinforced concrete pillboxes were built on the beaches, or sometimes slightly inland, to house machine guns, antitank guns, and light and heavy artillery. Land mines and antitank obstacles were planted on the beaches, and underwater obstacles and naval mines were placed in waters just offshore. Little known was that touch sensitive mines were placed atop the beach obstacles. The intent was to destroy the Allied landing craft before they could unload on the beaches.

===D-Day===

By the time of the Allied invasion, the Germans had laid almost six million mines in Northern France. More gun emplacements and minefields extended inland along roads leading away from the beaches. In likely landing spots for gliders and parachutists, the Germans emplanted slanted poles with sharpened tops, which the troops called &quot;Rommelspargel&quot; (&quot;Rommel&#x27;s Asparagus&quot;). Low-lying river and estuarine areas were intentionally flooded. Rommel believed that Germany would inevitably be defeated unless the invasion could be stopped on the beach, declaring, &quot;It is absolutely necessary that we push the British and Americans back from the beaches. Afterwards it will be too late; the first 24 hours of the invasion will be decisive.&quot;

==Channel Islands==

The Channel Islands were heavily fortified, particularly the island of Alderney, which is closest to Britain. Hitler had decreed that one-twelfth of the steel and concrete used in the Atlantic Wall should go to the Channel Islands, because of the propaganda value of controlling British territory. The islands were some of the most densely fortified areas in Europe, with a host of Hohlgangsanlage tunnels, casemates, and coastal artillery positions.

However, the Channel Islands lacked strategic significance and the Allies bypassed them when they invaded Normandy. As a result, the German garrisons stationed on the islands did not surrender until 9 May 1945—one day after Victory in Europe Day. The garrison on Alderney did not surrender until 16 May. As most of the German garrisons surrendered peacefully, the Channel Islands are host to some of the best-preserved Atlantic Wall sites.

The commander in Guernsey produced books giving detailed pictures, plans and descriptions of the fortifications in the island, &quot;Festung Guernsey&quot;.

==Fortresses==

Many major ports and positions were incorporated into the Atlantic Wall, receiving heavy fortifications. Hitler ordered all positions to fight to the end, and some of them remained in German hands until Germany&#x27;s unconditional surrender. Several of the port fortresses were resupplied by submarines after being surrounded by Allied Forces. The defenders of these positions included foreign volunteers and Waffen-SS troops.

==Preservation==

===France===
Many French construction companies benefited financially from helping construct the Atlantic Wall; these companies were not penalised during the post war period.

Immediately after the war, there was little interest in preserving the wall due to the negative memories associated with the Nazi occupation. Some of the beach fortifications have toppled or are underwater, while those further inland still exist mainly due to their location.

One of the best preserved parts is the Todt Battery. In 2011, renewed efforts to preserve the wall were spearheaded by organisations in Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. The question has been raised over whether France should declare the wall a National Monument to ensure it is preserved; however no government so far has envisaged this.

===Elsewhere===

Although the defensive wall was never fully completed, many bunkers still exist near Ostend, Channel Islands, on Walcheren, near Scheveningen, The Hague, Katwijk, Noordwijk, Den Helder, and in Scandinavia (Denmark and Norway specifically).

==See also==
* British anti-invasion preparations of the Second World War
* Czechoslovak border fortifications
* Continental System, Napoleon&#x27;s blockade of the British Empire
* Siegfried line
* Maginot line
* Mareth line

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

===Printed===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Online===
* 

===Media===
* 
* The Atlantic Wall and its significance in Allied planning for the D-Day landings are featured in the novel &quot;Villa Normandie&quot; (Endeavour Press, 2015) by Kevin Doherty.
* The many constructions of the Wall still standing have been photographed by Jonathan Andrew and Stephan Vanfleteren.

==External links==

* The &quot;Atlantikwall&quot; at Omaha Beach</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="4" end="17" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="48" end="83" title="coastal defence and fortification" label="coastal defences and fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="93" end="105" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="170" end="181" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="187" end="194" title="defense (military)" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="218" end="233" title="Operation Overlord" label="Allied invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="237" end="257" title="Nazi-occupied Europe" label="Nazi-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="267" end="281" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="290" end="302" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="388" end="399" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="430" end="439" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="471" end="483" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075393" start="578" end="594" title="sea defence zone" label="sea defence zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="598" end="604" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511740" start="672" end="688" title="Führer Directive" label="Führer Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="722" end="728" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="800" end="815" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="922" end="931" title="Artillery battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="933" end="940" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="946" end="955" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1260" end="1272" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="1280" end="1298" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1320" end="1322" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="1327" end="1333" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1565" end="1577" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1672" end="1685" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="1706" end="1732" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1950" end="1957" title="Battle of France" label="overran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="2107" end="2115" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2138" end="2150" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="2173" end="2188" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="2377" end="2394" title="coastal artillery" label="coastal artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q155433" start="2400" end="2417" title="Organisation Todt" label="Organisation Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="2764" end="2787" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="permanent fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511740" start="3064" end="3080" title="Führer Directive" label="Führer Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="3213" end="3226" title="Fortification" label="Fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="3529" end="3544" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3594" end="3600" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637319" start="3613" end="3627" title="France–Spain border" label="Spanish border"/>
<link wikidata="Q323678" start="3656" end="3664" title="Regelbau" label="Regelbau"/>
<link wikidata="Q89521" start="3765" end="3773" title="casemate" label="casemate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4675" end="4686" title="Defensive fighting position#Tobruk" label="tobruk pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q155433" start="4714" end="4731" title="Organisation Todt" label="Organisation Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="4771" end="4785" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991225" start="4820" end="4840" title="Franco-German border" label="Franco-German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="6551" end="6563" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="6736" end="6751" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q650153" start="6894" end="6903" title="V-weapons" label="V-weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="7488" end="7492" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q572676" start="7555" end="7572" title="Operation Chariot" label="Operation Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q152027" start="7588" end="7598" title="St Nazaire" label="St Nazaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="7756" end="7767" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="7802" end="7808" title="Dieppe" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7886" end="7894" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="8230" end="8248" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="8269" end="8287" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="8469" end="8482" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="8483" end="8495" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="8778" end="8790" title="North African Campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="8989" end="9008" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q92069" start="9009" end="9018" title="Pillbox (military)" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="9099" end="9112" title="antitank guns" label="antitank guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="9145" end="9154" title="Land mine" label="Land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="9237" end="9247" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="9405" end="9418" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="9493" end="9508" title="Normandy landings" label="Allied invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="9700" end="9707" title="military glider" label="gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="9712" end="9724" title="paratroop" label="parachutists"/>
<link wikidata="Q474772" start="9813" end="9826" title="Rommelspargel" label="Rommelspargel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="9892" end="9901" title="estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="10268" end="10283" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="10284" end="10306" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="were heavily fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q179313" start="10335" end="10343" title="Alderney" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877648" start="10646" end="10669" title="Hohlgangsanlage tunnels, Jersey" label="Hohlgangsanlage tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q89521" start="10671" end="10680" title="casemates" label="casemates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869861" start="10686" end="10713" title="Battery Lothringen" label="coastal artillery positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="10940" end="10961" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="Victory in Europe Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="11534" end="11572" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s unconditional surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999868" start="11718" end="11736" title="Wehrmacht foreign volunteers and conscripts" label="foreign volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="11741" end="11750" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="12079" end="12094" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="Nazi occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q325344" start="12270" end="12282" title="Todt Battery" label="Todt Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="12380" end="12391" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="12617" end="12631" title="defensive wall" label="defensive wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="12689" end="12695" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="12697" end="12712" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q738237" start="12717" end="12726" title="Walcheren" label="Walcheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="12733" end="12745" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="12747" end="12756" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q208764" start="12758" end="12765" title="Katwijk" label="Katwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q455464" start="12767" end="12776" title="Noordwijk" label="Noordwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9911" start="12778" end="12788" title="Den Helder" label="Den Helder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="12797" end="12808" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="12810" end="12817" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="12822" end="12828" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356038" start="12860" end="12918" title="British anti-invasion preparations of the Second World War" label="British anti-invasion preparations of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174514" start="12921" end="12955" title="Czechoslovak border fortifications" label="Czechoslovak border fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q258081" start="12958" end="12976" title="Continental System" label="Continental System"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="12978" end="12986" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="13027" end="13041" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried line"/>
<link wikidata="Q162746" start="13044" end="13056" title="Maginot Line" label="Maginot line"/>
<link wikidata="Q702360" start="13059" end="13070" title="Mareth Line" label="Mareth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656009" start="13455" end="13474" title="Stephan Vanfleteren" label="Stephan Vanfleteren"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149274" wikidata="Q681964" url="?curid=149274" title="Slavonia">
<text>Slavonia (; ; Hungarian: Szlavónia) is, with Dalmatia, Croatia proper, and Istria, one of the four historical regions of Croatia. Located in the Pannonian Plain and taking up the east of the country, it roughly corresponds with five Croatian counties: Brod-Posavina, Osijek-Baranja, Požega-Slavonia, Virovitica-Podravina, and Vukovar-Syrmia, although the territory of the counties includes Baranya, and the definition of the western extent of Slavonia as a region varies. The counties cover or 22.2% of Croatia, inhabited by 806,192—18.8% of Croatia&#x27;s population. The largest city in the region is Osijek, followed by Slavonski Brod and Vinkovci.

Slavonia is located in the Pannonian Basin, largely bordered by the Danube, Drava, and Sava rivers. In the west, the region consists of the Sava and Drava valleys and the mountains surrounding the Požega Valley, and plains in the east. Slavonia enjoys a moderate continental climate with relatively low precipitation.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, which ruled the area of modern-day Slavonia until the 5th century, Ostrogoths and Lombards controlled the area before the arrival of Avars and Slavs, when the Principality of Lower Pannonia was established in the 7th century. It was later incorporated into the Kingdom of Croatia; after its decline, the kingdom was ruled through a personal union with Hungary.

It became part of the Lands of the Hungarian Crown in the 12th century. The Ottoman conquest of Slavonia took place between 1536 and 1552. In 1699, after the Great Turkish War of 1683–1699, the Treaty of Karlowitz transferred Kingdom of Slavonia to the Habsburgs. After the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, Slavonia became part of the Hungarian part of the realm, and a year later it became part of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia. In 1918, when Austria-Hungary dissolved, Slavonia became a part of the short-lived State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs which in turn became a part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, later renamed Yugoslavia. During the Croatian War of Independence of 1991–1995, Slavonia saw fierce fighting, including the 1991 Battle of Vukovar.

The economy of Slavonia is largely based on processing industry, trade, transport, and civil engineering. Agriculture is a significant component of its economy: Slavonia contains 45% of Croatia&#x27;s agricultural land and accounts for a significant proportion of Croatia&#x27;s livestock farming and production of permanent crops. The gross domestic product (GDP) of the five counties of Slavonia is worth 6,454 million euro or 8,005 euro per capita, 27.5% below national average. The GDP of the five counties represents 13.6% of Croatia&#x27;s GDP.

The cultural heritage of Slavonia represents a blend of historical influences, especially those from the end of the 17th century, when Slavonia started recovering from the Ottoman wars, and its traditional culture. Slavonia contributed to the culture of Croatia through art, writers, poets, sculptors, and art patronage. In traditional music, Slavonia comprises a distinct region of Croatia, and the traditional culture is preserved through folklore festivals, with prominence given to tamburica music and bećarac, a form of traditional song, recognized as an intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO. The cuisine of Slavonia reflects diverse influences—a blend of traditional and foreign elements. Slavonia is one of Croatia&#x27;s winemaking areas, with Erdut, Ilok and Kutjevo recognized as centres of wine production.

==History==
The name &quot;Slavonia&quot; originated in the Early Middle Ages. The area was named after the Slavs who settled there and called themselves *Slověne. The root *Slověn- appeared in various dialects of languages spoken by people inhabiting the area west of the Sutla river, as well as between the Sava and Drava rivers—South Slavs living in the area of the former Illyricum. The area bounded by those rivers was called *Slověnьje in the Proto-Slavic language. The word subsequently evolved to its various present forms in the Slavic languages, and other languages adopted the term.

===Prehistory and antiquity===

Remnants of several Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures were found in all regions of Croatia, but most of the sites are found in the river valleys of northern Croatia, including Slavonia. The most significant cultures whose presence was found include the Starčevo culture whose finds were discovered near Slavonski Brod and dated to 6100–5200 BC, the Vučedol culture, the Baden culture and the Kostolac culture. Most finds attributed to the Baden and Vučedol cultures are discovered in the area near the right bank of the Danube near Vukovar, Vinkovci and Osijek. The Baden culture sites in Slavonia are dated to 3600–3300 BC, and Vučedol culture finds are dated to 3000–2500 BC. The Iron Age left traces of the early Illyrian Hallstatt culture and the Celtic La Tène culture. Much later, the region was settled by Illyrians and other tribes, including the Pannonians, who controlled much of present-day Slavonia. Even though archaeological finds of Illyrian settlements are much sparser than in areas closer to the Adriatic Sea, significant discoveries, for instance in Kaptol near Požega have been made. The Pannonians first came into contact with the Roman Republic in 35 BC, when the Romans conquered Segestica, or modern-day Sisak. The conquest was completed in 11 BC, when the Roman province of Illyricum was established, encompassing modern-day Slavonia as well as a vast territory on the right bank of Danube. The province was renamed Pannonia and divided within two decades.

===Middle Ages===
After the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, which included the territory occupied by modern-day Slavonia, the area became a part of the Ostrogothic Kingdom by the end of the 5th century. However, control of the area proved a significant task, and Lombards were given increasing control of Pannonia in the 6th century, which ended in their withdrawal in 568 and the arrival of Pannonian Avars and Slavs, who established control of Pannonia by the year 582. After the fall of the Avar Khaganate at the beginning of the 9th century, in Lower Pannonia there was a principality, governed by Slavic rulers who were vassals of Francs. The invasion of the Hungarian tribes overwhelmed this state. The eastern part of Slavonia in the 9th century may have been ruled by Bulgars. The first king of Croatia Tomislav defeated Hungarian and Bulgarian invasions and spread the influence of Croatian kings northward to Slavonia. The medieval Croatian kingdom reached its peak in the 11th century during the reigns of Petar Krešimir IV (1058–1074) and Dmitar Zvonimir (1075–1089). When Stjepan II died in 1091, ending the Trpimirović dynasty, Ladislaus I of Hungary claimed the Croatian crown. Opposition to the claim led to a war and personal union of Croatia and Hungary in 1102, ruled by Coloman. In the 2nd half of the 12th century, Croatia and the territory between the Drava and the Sava were governed by the ban of all Slavonia, appointed by the king. From the 13th century, a separate ban governed parts of present-day central Croatia, western Slavonia, and northwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina, an area where a new entity emerged named Kingdom of Slavonia (), while modern-day eastern Slavonia was a part of Hungary. Croatia and Slavonia were in 1476 united under the same ban (viceroy), but kept separate parliaments until 1558.

The Ottoman conquests in Croatia led to the 1493 Battle of Krbava field and 1526 Battle of Mohács, both ending in decisive Ottoman victories. King Louis II of Hungary died at Mohács, and Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg was elected in 1527 as the new ruler of Croatia, under the condition that he provide protection to Croatia against the Ottoman Empire, while respecting its political rights. The period saw the rise to prominence of a native nobility such as the Frankopans and the Šubićs, and ultimately to numerous bans from the two families. The present coat of arms of Slavonia, used in an official capacity as a part of the coat of arms of Croatia, dates from this period—it was granted to Slavonia by king Vladislaus II Jagiellon on 8 December 1496.

===Ottoman conquest===
Following the Battle of Mohács, the Ottomans expanded their possessions in Slavonia seizing Đakovo in 1536 and Požega in 1537, defeating a Habsburg army led by Johann Katzianer, who was attempting to retake Slavonia, at Gorjani in September 1537. By 1540, Osijek was also under firm control of the Ottomans, and regular administration in Slavonia was introduced by establishing the Sanjak of Pojega. The Ottoman control in Slavonia expanded as Novska surrendered the same year. Turkish conquest continued—Našice were seized in 1541, Orahovica and Slatina in 1542, and in 1543, Voćin, Sirač and, after a 40-day siege, Valpovo. In 1544, Ottoman forces conquered Pakrac. Lessening hostilities brought about a five-year truce in 1547 and temporary stabilization of the border between Habsburg and Ottoman empires, with Virovitica becoming the most significant defensive Habsburg fortress and Požega the most significant Ottoman centre in Slavonia, as Ottoman advances to Sisak and Čazma were made, including a brief occupation of the cities. Further westward efforts of the Turkish forces presented a significant threat to Zagreb and the rest of Croatia and the Hungarian kingdom, prompting a greater defensive commitment by the Habsburg Monarchy. One year after the 1547 truce ended, Ivan Lenković devised a system of fortifications and troops in the border areas, a forerunner of the Croatian Military Frontier. Nonetheless, in 1552, the Ottoman conquest of Slavonia was completed when Virovitica was captured. Ottoman advances in the Croatian territory continued until the 1593 Battle of Sisak, the first decisive Ottoman defeat, and a more lasting stabilisation of the frontier. During the Great Turkish War (1683–1698), Slavonia was regained in between 1684 and 1691 when the Ottomans abandoned the region—unlike western Bosnia, which had been part of Croatia before the Ottoman conquest. The present-day southern border of Slavonia and the border between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina is a remnant of this outcome.

The Ottoman wars instigated great demographic changes. Croats migrated towards Austria and the present-day Burgenland Croats are direct descendants of these settlers. The Muslim population in Slavonia at the end of Turkish rule accounted for almost half of Slavonia&#x27;s population who was indigenous, primarily Croats, less immigrants from Bosnia and Serbia and rarely genuine Turks or Arabs. In the second half of the 16th century Vlachs from Slavonia were no longer an exclusive part of population because the Vlach privileges were attractive for many non-Vlachs who mixed with the Vlachs in order to get their status. To replace the fleeing Croats, the Habsburgs called on the Orthodox populations of Bosnia and Serbia to provide military service in the Croatian Military Frontier. Serb migration into this region peaked during the Great Serb Migrations of 1690 and 1737–39. The greatest Serb concentrations were in the eastern Slavonia, and Sremski Karlovci became the see of Serbian Orthodox metropolitans. Part of the colonists came to Slavonia from area south of the Sava, especially from the Soli and Usora areas, continuing the process which already started after 1521. At beginning of the 17th century it seems that there was a new wave of colonization, about 10,000 families which are assumed to come from Sanjak of Klis or with less possibility from area of Sanjak of Bosnia.

===Habsburg Monarchy and Austria-Hungary===
The areas acquired through the Treaty of Karlowitz were assigned to Croatia, itself in the union with Hungary and the union ruled by the Habsburgs. The border area along the Una, Sava and Danube rivers became the Slavonian Military Frontier. At this time, Osijek took over the role of the administrative and military centre of the newly formed Kingdom of Slavonia from Požega. The 1830s and 1840s saw romantic nationalism inspire the Croatian National Revival, a political and cultural campaign advocating unity of all South Slavs in the empire. Its primary focus was the establishment of a standard language as a counterweight to Hungarian, along with the promotion of Croatian literature and culture. During the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 Croatia sided with the Austrians, Ban Josip Jelačić helping to defeat the Hungarian forces in 1849, and ushering in a period of Germanization policy. By the 1860s, failure of the policy became apparent, leading to the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 and creation of a personal union between the crowns of the Austrian Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary. The treaty left the issue of Croatia&#x27;s status to Hungary as a part of Transleithania—and the status was resolved by the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement of 1868, when the kingdoms of Croatia and Slavonia were united as the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia. After Austria-Hungary occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina following the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, the Military Frontiers were abolished and the Croatian and Slavonian Military Frontier territory returned to Croatia-Slavonia in 1881, pursuant to provisions of the Croatian-Hungarian Settlement. At that time, the easternmost point of Croatia-Slavonia became Zemun, as all of Syrmia was encompassed by the kingdom.

===Kingdom of Yugoslavia and World War II===
On 29 October 1918, the Croatian Sabor declared independence and decided to join the newly formed State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs, which in turn entered into union with the Kingdom of Serbia on 4 December 1918 to form the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. The Treaty of Trianon was signed in 1920, at the end of World War I, between the Allies of World War I and Hungary as one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary. The treaty established the southern border of Hungary along the Drava and Mura rivers, except in Baranya, where only the northern part of the county was kept by Hungary. The territorial acquisition in Baranya was not made a part of Slavonia, even though adjacent to Osijek, because pre-1918 administrative divisions were disestablished by the new kingdom. The political situation in the new kingdom deteriorated, leading to the dictatorship of King Alexander in January 1929. The dictatorship formally ended in 1931 when the king imposed a more unitarian constitution transferring executive power to the king, and changed the name of the country to Yugoslavia. The Cvetković–Maček Agreement of August 1939 created the autonomous Banovina of Croatia incorporating Slavonia. Pursuant to the agreement, the Yugoslav government retained control of defence, internal security, foreign affairs, trade, and transport while other matters were left to the Croatian Sabor and a crown-appointed &#x27;Ban&#x27;.

In April 1941, Yugoslavia was occupied by Germany and Italy. Following the invasion the territory of Slavonia was incorporated into the Independent State of Croatia, a Nazi-backed puppet state and assigned as a zone under German occupation for the duration of World War II. The regime introduced anti-semitic laws and conducted a campaign of ethnic cleansing and genocide against Serb and Roma populations, exemplified by the Jasenovac and Stara Gradiška concentration camps, but to a much lesser extent in Slavonia than in other regions, due to strategic interests of the Axis in keeping peace in the area. The largest massacre occurred in 1942 in Voćin.

Armed resistance soon developed in the region, and by 1942, the Yugoslav Partisans controlled substantial territories, especially in mountainous parts of Slavonia. The Serbian royalist Chetniks, who carried out genocide against Croat civilian population, struggled to establish a significant presence in Slavonia throughout the war. Partisans led by Josip Broz Tito took full control of Slavonia in April 1945. After the war, the new Yugoslav government interned local Germans in camps in Slavonia, the largest of which were in Valpovo and Krndija, where many died of hunger and diseases.

===Federal Yugoslavia and the independence of Croatia===
After World War II, Croatia—including Slavonia—became a single-party Socialist federal unit of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, ruled by the Communists, but enjoying a degree of autonomy within the federation. The autonomy effectively increased after the 1974 Yugoslav Constitution, basically fulfilling a goal of the Croatian Spring movement, and providing a legal basis for independence of the federative constituents. In 1947, when all borders of the former Yugoslav constituent republics had been defined by demarcation commissions, pursuant to decisions of the AVNOJ of 1943 and 1945, the federal organization of &quot;Yugoslav Baranya&quot; was defined as Croatian territory allowing its integration with Slavonia. The commissions also set up the present-day border between Serbia and Croatia in Syrmia, and along the Danube River between Ilok and mouth of the Drava and further north to the Hungarian border, the section south of confluence of the Drava matching the border between the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia and the Bács-Bodrog County that existed until 1918 and the end of World War I.

In the 1980s the political situation in Yugoslavia deteriorated with national tension fanned by the 1986 Serbian SANU Memorandum and the 1989 coups in Vojvodina, Kosovo and Montenegro. In January 1990, the Communist Party fragmented along national lines, with the Croatian faction demanding a looser federation. In the same year, the first multi-party elections were held in Croatia, with Franjo Tuđman&#x27;s win raising nationalist tensions further. The Serbs in Croatia, intent on achieving independence from Croatia, left the Sabor and declared the autonomy of areas that would soon become the unrecognized self-declared Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK). As tensions rose, Croatia declared independence in June 1991; however the declaration came into effect on 8 October 1991. Tensions escalated into the Croatian War of Independence when the Yugoslav National Army and various Serb paramilitaries attacked Croatia. By the end of 1991, a high intensity war fought along a wide front reduced Croatia to controlling about two-thirds of its territory.
In Slavonia, the first armed conflicts were clashes in Pakrac, and Borovo Selo near Vukovar. Western Slavonia was occupied in August 1991, following an advance by the Yugoslav forces north from Banja Luka across the Sava River. This was partially pushed back by the Croatian Army in operations named Otkos 10, and Orkan 91, which established a front line around Okučani and south of Pakrac that would hold virtually unchanged for more than three years until Operation Flash in May 1995. Armed conflict in the eastern Slavonia, culminating in the Battle of Vukovar and a subsequent massacre, also included heavy fighting and the successful defence of Osijek and Vinkovci. The front line stabilized and a ceasefire was agreed to on 2 January 1992, coming into force the next day. After the ceasefire, United Nations Protection Force was deployed to the occupied areas, but intermittent artillery and rocket attacks, launched from Serb-held areas of Bosnia, continued in several areas of Slavonia, especially in Slavonski Brod and Županja. The war effectively ended in 1995 with Croatia achieving a decisive victory over the RSK in August 1995. The remaining occupied areas—eastern Slavonia—were restored to Croatia pursuant to the Erdut Agreement of November 1995, with the process concluded in mid-January 1998.

After the war, a number of towns and municipalities in the region were designated Areas of Special State Concern.

==Geography==

===Political geography===


The Croatian counties were re-established in 1992, but their borders changed in some instances, with the latest revision taking place in 2006. Slavonia consists of five counties—Brod-Posavina, Osijek-Baranja, Požega-Slavonia, Virovitica-Podravina and Vukovar-Syrmia counties—which largely cover the territory historically associated with Slavonia. The western borders of the five-county territory lie in the area where the western boundary of Slavonia generally has been located since the Ottoman conquest, with the remaining borders being at the international borders of Croatia. This places the Croatian part of Baranya into the Slavonian counties, constituting the Eastern Croatia macroregion. Terms &quot;Eastern Croatia&quot; and &quot;Slavonia&quot; are increasingly used as synonyms. The Brod-Posavina County comprises two cities—Slavonski Brod and Nova Gradiška—and 26 Municipalities of Croatia. The Osijek-Baranja County consists of seven cities—Beli Manastir, Belišće, Donji Miholjac, Đakovo, Našice, Osijek and Valpovo—and 35 municipalities. The Požega-Slavonia County comprises five cities—Kutjevo, Lipik, Pakrac, Pleternica and Požega—and five municipalities. The Virovitica-Podravina County covers three cities—Orahovica, Slatina and Virovitica—and 13 municipalities. The Vukovar-Srijem County encompasses five cities—Ilok, Otok, Vinkovci, Vukovar and Županja—and 26 municipalities. The whole of Slavonia is the eastern half of Central and Eastern (Pannonian) Croatia NUTS-2 statistical unit of Croatia, together with further areas of Central Croatia. Other statistical units correspond to the counties, cities and municipalities. The five counties combined cover area size of , representing 22.2% of territory of Croatia.

===Physical geography===

The boundaries of Slavonia, as a geographical region, do not necessarily coincide with the borders of the five counties, except in the south and east where the Sava and Danube rivers define them. The international borders of Croatia are boundaries common to both definitions of the region. In the north, the boundaries largely coincide because the Drava River is considered to be the northern border of Slavonia as a geographic region, but this excludes Baranya from the geographic region&#x27;s definition even though this territory is part of a county otherwise associated with Slavonia. The western boundary of the geographic region is not specifically defined and it was variously defined through history depending on the political divisions of Croatia. The eastern Croatia, as a geographic term, largely overlaps most definitions of Slavonia. It is defined as the territory of the Brod-Posavina, Osijek-Baranja, Požega-Slavonia, Virovitica-Podravina and Vukovar-Syrmia counties, including Baranya.

====Topography====


Slavonia is entirely located in the Pannonian Basin, one of three major geomorphological parts of Croatia. The Pannonian Basin took shape through Miocenian thinning and subsidence of crust structures formed during Late Paleozoic Variscan orogeny. The Paleozoic and Mesozoic structures are visible in Papuk, Psunj and other Slavonian mountains. The processes also led to the formation of a stratovolcanic chain in the basin 17 – 12 Mya (million years ago) and intensified subsidence observed until 5 Mya as well as flood basalts about 7.5 Mya. Contemporary uplift of the Carpathian Mountains prevented water flowing to the Black Sea, and the Pannonian Sea formed in the basin. Sediments were transported to the basin from uplifting Carpathian and Dinaric mountains, with particularly deep fluvial sediments being deposited in the Pleistocene during the uplift of the Transdanubian Mountains. Ultimately, up to of the sediment was deposited in the basin, and the Pannonian sea eventually drained through the Iron Gate gorge. In the southern Pannonian Basin, the Neogene to Quaternary sediment depth is normally lower, averaging , except in central parts of depressions formed by subduction—around in the Slavonia-Syrmia depression, in the Sava depression and nearly in the Drava depression, with the deepest sediment found between Virovitica and Slatina.

The results of those processes are large plains in eastern Slavonia, Baranya and Syrmia, as well as in river valleys, especially along the Sava, Drava and Kupa. The plains are interspersed by the horst and graben structures, believed to have broken the Pannonian Sea surface as islands. The tallest among such landforms in Slavonia are Psunj, and Papuk—flanking the Požega Valley from the west and the north. These two and Krndija, adjacent to Papuk, consist mostly of Paleozoic rocks which are 350 – 300 million years old. Požeška Gora and Dilj, to the east of Psunj and enveloping the valley from the south, consist of much more recent Neogene rocks, but Požeška Gora also contains Upper Cretaceous sediments and igneous rocks forming the main, ridge of the hill and representing the largest igneous landform in Croatia. A smaller igneous landform is also present on Papuk, near Voćin. The two mountains, as well as Moslavačka gora, west of Pakrac, are possible remnants of a volcanic arc related to Alpine orogeny—uplifting of the Dinaric Alps. The Đakovo – Vukovar loess plain, extending eastward from Dilj and representing the watershed between the Vuka and Bosut rivers, gradually rises to the Fruška Gora south of Ilok.


====Hydrography and climate====

The largest rivers in Slavonia are found along or near its borders—the Danube, Sava and Drava. The length of the Danube, flowing along the eastern border of Slavonia and through the cities of Vukovar and Ilok, is , and its main tributaries are the Drava and the Vuka. The Drava discharges into the Danube near Aljmaš, east of Osijek, while mouth of the Vuka is located in Vukovar. 

Major tributaries of the Sava, flowing along the southern border of Slavonia and through cities of Slavonski Brod and Županja are the Orljava flowing through Požega, and the Bosut—whose course in Slavonia takes it through Vinkovci. There are no large lakes in Slavonia. The largest ones are Lake Kopačevo whose surface area varies between , and Borovik Reservoir covering . The Lake Kopačevo is connected to the Danube via Hulovski canal, situated within the Kopački Rit wetland, while the Lake Borovik is an artificial lake created in 1978 in the upper course of the Vuka River.
The entirety of Slavonia belongs to the Danube basin and the Black Sea catchment area, but it is divided in two sub-basins. One of those drains into the Sava—itself a Danube tributary—and the other into the Drava or directly into the Danube. The drainage divide between the two sub-basins runs along the Papuk and Krndija mountains, in effect tracing the southern boundary of the Virovitica-Podravina County and the northern boundary of Požega-Slavonia County, cuts through the Osijek-Podravina County north of Đakovo, and finally bisects the Vukovar-Syrmia County running between Vukovar and Vinkovci to reach Fruška Gora southwest of Ilok. All of Brod-Posavina County is located in the Sava sub-basin.

Most of Croatia, including Slavonia, has a moderately warm and rainy humid continental climate as defined by the Köppen climate classification. Mean annual temperature averages , with the warmest month, July, averaging just below . Temperature peaks are more pronounced in the continental areas—the lowest temperature of was recorded on 24 January 1963 in Slavonski Brod, and the highest temperature of was recorded on 5 July 1950 in Đakovo. The lowest level of precipitation is recorded in the eastern parts of Slavonia at less than per year, mostly during the growing season. The western parts of Slavonia receive precipitation. Low winter temperatures and the distribution of precipitation throughout the year normally result in snow cover, and freezing rivers—requiring use of icebreakers, and in extreme cases explosives, to maintain the flow of water and navigation. Slavonia receives more than 2,000 hours of sunshine per year on average. Prevailing winds are light to moderate, northeasterly and southwesterly.

==Demographics==

According to the 2011 census, the total population of the five counties of Slavonia was 806,192, accounting for 19% of population of Croatia. The largest portion of the total population of Slavonia lives in Osijek-Baranja county, followed by Vukovar-Syrmia county. Požega-Slavonia county is the least populous county of Slavonia. Overall the population density stands at 64.2 persons per square kilometre. The population density ranges from 77.6 to 40.9 persons per square kilometre, with the highest density recorded in Brod-Posavina county and the lowest in Virovitica-Podravina county. Osijek is the largest city in Slavonia, followed by Slavonski Brod, Vinkovci and Vukovar. Other cities in Slavonia have populations below 20,000. According to the 2001 census, Croats account for 85.6 percent of population of Slavonia, and the most significant ethnic minorities are Serbs and Hungarians, comprising 8.8 percent and 1.4 percent of the population respectively. The largest portion of the Serb minority was recorded in Vukovar-Syrmia county (15 percent), while the largest Hungarian minority, in both relative and absolute terms, was observed in Osijek-Baranja county. The census recorded 85.4% of the population declaring themselves as Catholic, with further 4.4% belonging to Serbian Orthodox Church and 0.7% Muslims. 3.1% declared themselves as non-religious, agnostics or declined to declare their religion. The most widely used language in the region is Croatian, declared as the first language by 93.6% of the total population, followed by Serbian (2.6%) and Hungarian (1.0%).

The demographic history of Slavonia is characterised by significant migrations, as is that of Croatia as a whole, starting with the arrival of the Croats, between the 6th and 9th centuries. Following the establishment of the personal union of Croatia and Hungary in 1102, and the joining of the Habsburg monarchy in 1527, the Hungarian and German speaking population of Croatia began gradually increasing in number. The processes of Magyarization and Germanization varied in intensity but persisted until the beginning of the 20th century. The Ottoman conquests initiated a westward migration of parts of the Croatian population; the Burgenland Croats are direct descendants of some of those settlers. To replace the fleeing Croats the Habsburgs called on the Orthodox populations of Bosnia and Serbia to provide military service in the Croatian Military Frontier. Serb migration into this region peaked during the Great Serb Migrations of 1690 and 1737–39. Following the collapse of Austria-Hungary in 1918, the Hungarian population declined, due to emigration and ethnic bias. The changes were especially significant in the areas north of the Drava river, and Baranja County where they represented the majority before World War I.

Since the end of the 19th century there was substantial economic emigration abroad from Croatia in general. After World War I, the Yugoslav regime confiscated up to 50 percent of properties and encouraged settlement of the land by Serb volunteers and war veterans in Slavonia, only to have them evicted and replaced by up to 70,000 new settlers by the regime during World War II. During World War II and in the period immediately following the war, there were further significant demographic changes, as the German-speaking population, the Danube Swabians, were either forced or otherwise compelled to leave—reducing their number from the prewar German population of Yugoslavia of 500,000, living in Slavonia and other parts of present-day Croatia and Serbia, to the figure of 62,000 recorded in the 1953 census. The 1940s and the 1950s in Yugoslavia were marked by colonisation of settlements where the displaced Germans used to live, by people from the mountainous parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro, and migrations to larger cities spurred on by the development of industry. In the 1960s and 1970s, another wave of economic migrants left—largely moving to Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Western Europe.

The most recent changes to the ethnic composition of Slavonian counties occurred between censuses conducted in 1991 and 2001. The 1991 census recorded a heterogenous population consisting mostly of Croats and Serbs—at 72 percent and 17 percent of the total population respectively. The Croatian War of Independence, and the ethnic fracturing of Yugoslavia that preceded it, caused an exodus of the Croat population followed by an exodus of Serbs. The return of refugees since the end of hostilities is not complete—a majority of Croat refugees returned, while fewer Serbs did. In addition, ethnic Croats moved to Slavonia from Bosnia and Herzegovina and from Serbia.

==Economy and transport==
The economy of Slavonia is largely based on wholesale and retail trade and processing industry. Food processing is one of the most significant types of the processing industries in the region, supporting agricultural production in the area and encompassing meat packing, fruit and vegetable processing, sugar refining, confectionery and dairy industry. In addition, there are wineries in the region that are significant to economy of Croatia. Other types of the processing industry significant to Slavonia are wood processing, including production of furniture, cellulose, paper and cardboard; metalworking, textile industry and glass production. Transport and civil engineering are two further significant economic activities in Slavonia. 
The largest industrial centre of Slavonia is Osijek, followed by other county seats—Slavonski Brod, Virovitica, Požega and Vukovar, as well as several other cities, especially Vinkovci.

The gross domestic product (GDP) of the five counties in Slavonia combined (in year 2008) amounted to 6,454 million euro, or 8,005 euro per capita—27.5% below Croatia&#x27;s national average. The GDP of the five counties represented 13.6% of Croatia&#x27;s GDP. Several Pan-European transport corridors run through Slavonia: corridor Vc as the A5 motorway, corridor X as the A3 motorway and a double-track railway spanning Slavonia from west to east, and corridor VII—the Danube River waterway. The waterway is accessed through the Port of Vukovar, the largest Croatian river port, situated on the Danube itself, and the Port of Osijek on the Drava River, away from confluence of the rivers.

Another major sector of the economy of Slavonia is agriculture, which also provides part of the raw materials for the processing industry. Out of of utilized agricultural land in Croatia, , or more than 45%, are found in Slavonia, with the largest portion of the land situated in the Osijek-Baranja and Vukovar-Syrmia counties. The largest areas are used for production of cereals and oilseeds, covering and respectively. Slavonia&#x27;s share in Croatia&#x27;s agriculturally productive land is greatest in the production of cereals (53.5%), legumes (46.8%), oilseeds (88.8%), sugar beet (90%), tobacco (97.9%), plants used in pharmaceutical or perfume industry (80.9%), flowers, seedlings and seeds (80.3%) and plants used in the textile industry (69%). Slavonia also contributes 25.7% of cattle, 42.7% of pigs and 20% of the poultry stock of Croatia. There are of vineyards in Slavonia, representing 18.6% of total vineyards area in Croatia. Production of fruit and nuts also takes up a significant agricultural area. Apple orchards cover , representing 42.3% of Croatia&#x27;s apple plantations, plums are produced in orchards encompassing or 59.7% of Croatia&#x27;s plum plantations and hazelnut orchards cover , which account for 72.4% of hazelnut plantations in Croatia. Other significant permanent crops are cherries, pears, peaches and walnuts.


In 2010, only two companies headquartered in Slavonia ranked among top 100 Croatian companies—Belje, agricultural industry owned by Agrokor, and Belišće, paper mill and paper packaging material factory, headquartered in Darda and Belišće respectively, both in Osijek-Baranja County. Belje ranks as the 44th and Belišće as the 99th largest Croatian company by income. Other significant businesses in the county include civil engineering company Osijek-Koteks (rank 103), Saponia detergent and personal care product factory (rank 138), Biljemerkant retail business (rank 145), and Našicecement cement plant (rank 165), a part of Nexe Grupa construction product manufacturing company. Sugar refining company Viro, ranked the 101st and headquartered in Virovitica, is the largest company in Virovitica-Podravina County. Đuro Đaković Montaža d.d., a part of metal processing industry Đuro Đaković Holding of Slavonski Brod, ranks the 171st among the Croatian companies and it is the largest business in Brod-Posavina County. Another agricultural industry company, Kutjevo d.d., headquartered in Kutjevo, is the largest company in Požega-Slavonia County, ranks the 194th in Croatia by business income. Finally, the largest company by income in Vukovar-Syrmia county is another Agrokor owned agricultural production company—Vupik, headquartered in Vukovar, and ranking the 161st among the companies headquartered in Croatia.

==Culture==
The cultural heritage of Slavonia represents a blend of social influences through its history, especially since the end of the 17th century, and the traditional culture. A particular impact was made by Baroque art and architecture of the 18th century, when the cities of Slavonia started developing after the Ottoman wars ended and stability was restored to the area. The period saw great prominence of the nobility, who were awarded estates in Slavonia by the imperial court in return for their service during the wars. They included Prince Eugene of Savoy, the House of Esterházy, the House of Odescalchi, Philipp Karl von Eltz-Kempenich, the House of Prandau-Normann, the House of Pejačević and the House of Janković. That in turn encouraged an influx of contemporary European culture to the region. Subsequent development of the cities and society saw the influence of Neoclassicism, Historicism and especially of Art Nouveau.

The heritage of the region includes numerous landmarks, especially manor houses built by the nobility in largely in the 18th and the 19th centuries. Those include Prandau-Normann and Prandau-Mailath manor houses in Valpovo and Donji Miholjac respectively, manor houses in Baranja—in Bilje, at a former Esterházy estate in Darda, in Tikveš, and in Kneževo. Pejačevićs built several residences, the most representative ones among them being manor house in Virovitica and the Pejačević manor house in Našice. Further east, along the Danube, there are Odescalchi manor house in Ilok, and Eltz manor house in Vukovar—the latter sustained extensive damage during the Battle of Vukovar in 1991, but it was reconstructed by 2011. In the southeast of the region, the most prominent are Kutjevo Jesuit manor house, and Cernik manor house, located in Kutjevo and Cernik respectively. The period also saw construction of Tvrđa and Brod fortifications in Osijek and Slavonski Brod. Older, medieval fortifications are preserved only as ruins—the largest among those being Ružica Castle near Orahovica. Another landmark dating to the 19th century is the Đakovo Cathedral—hailed by the Pope John XXIII as the most beautiful church situated between Venice and Istanbul.
Slavonia significantly contributed to the culture of Croatia as a whole, both through works of artists and through patrons of the arts—most notable among them being Josip Juraj Strossmayer. Strossmayer was instrumental in the establishment of the Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts, later renamed the Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, and the reestablishment of the University of Zagreb. A number of Slavonia&#x27;s artists, especially writers, made considerable contributions to Croatian culture. Nineteenth-century writers who are most significant in Croatian literature include Josip Eugen Tomić, Josip Kozarac, and Miroslav Kraljević—author of the first Croatian novel. Significant twentieth-century poets and writers in Slavonia were Dobriša Cesarić, Dragutin Tadijanović, Ivana Brlić-Mažuranić and Antun Gustav Matoš. Painters associated with Slavonia, who contributed greatly to Croatian art, were Miroslav Kraljević and Bela Čikoš Sesija.

Slavonia is a distinct region of Croatia in terms of ethnological factors in traditional music. It is a region where traditional culture is preserved through folklore festivals. Typical traditional music instruments belong to the tamburica and bagpipe family. The tamburica is the most representative musical instrument associated with Slavonia&#x27;s traditional culture. It developed from music instruments brought by the Ottomans during their rule of Slavonia, becoming an integral part of the traditional music, its use surpassing or even replacing the use of bagpipes and gusle. A distinct form of traditional song, originating in Slavonia, the bećarac, is recognized as an intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO.

Out of 122 Croatia&#x27;s universities and other institutions of higher education, Slavonia is home to one university—Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek— as well as three polytechnics in Požega, Slavonski Brod and Vukovar, as well as a college in Virovitica—all set up and run by the government. The University of Osijek, has been established in 1975, but the first institution of higher education in the city was &quot;Studium Philosophicum Essekini&quot; founded in 1707, and active until 1780. Another historical institution of higher education was &quot;Academia Posegana&quot; operating in Požega between 1761 and 1776, as an extension of a gymnasium operating in the city continuously, since it opened in 1699 as the first secondary education school in Slavonia.

===Cuisine and wines===

The cuisine of Slavonia reflects cultural influences on the region through the diversity of its culinary influences. The most significant among those were from Hungarian, Viennese, Central European, as well as Turkish and Arab cuisines brought by series of conquests and accompanying social influences. The ingredients of traditional dishes are pickled vegetables, dairy products and smoked meats. The most famous traditional preserved meat product is kulen, one of a handful Croatian products protected by the EU as indigenous products.

Slavonia is one of Croatia&#x27;s winemaking sub-regions, a part of its continental winegrowing region. The best known winegrowing areas of Slavonia are centered on Đakovo, Ilok and Kutjevo, where Graševina grapes are predominant, but other cultivars are increasingly present. In past decades, an increasing quantity of wine production in Slavonia was accompanied by increasing quality and growing recognition at home and abroad. Grape vines were first grown in the region of Ilok, as early as the 3rd century AD. The oldest Slavonian wine cellar still in continuous use for winemaking is located in Kutjevo—built in 1232 by Cistercians.

Slavonian oak is used to make &quot;botti&quot;, large barrels traditionally used in the Piedmont region of Italy to make nebbiolo wines.

==See also==

*Regions of Croatia
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
* 
* 
==External links==

*Croatian National Tourist Board – Slavonia
*Regional Development Agency of Slavonia and Baranja </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="0" end="8" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="14" end="23" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="45" end="53" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="55" end="69" title="Croatia proper" label="Croatia proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q58268" start="75" end="81" title="Istria County" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471494" start="99" end="128" title="Regions of Croatia" label="historical regions of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="145" end="160" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q57053" start="233" end="250" title="Counties of Croatia" label="Croatian counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q58129" start="252" end="265" title="Brod-Posavina County" label="Brod-Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q58159" start="267" end="281" title="Osijek-Baranja County" label="Osijek-Baranja"/>
<link wikidata="Q58111" start="283" end="298" title="Požega-Slavonia County" label="Požega-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58092" start="300" end="320" title="Virovitica-Podravina County" label="Virovitica-Podravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q58225" start="326" end="340" title="Vukovar-Syrmia County" label="Vukovar-Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790230" start="390" end="397" title="Baranya (region)" label="Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="603" end="609" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686" start="623" end="637" title="Slavonski Brod" label="Slavonski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q221495" start="642" end="650" title="Vinkovci" label="Vinkovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="680" end="695" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="721" end="727" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="729" end="734" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="740" end="744" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514521" start="850" end="863" title="Požega Valley" label="Požega Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="869" end="874" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="916" end="935" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="982" end="986" title="Decline of the Roman Empire" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="994" end="1014" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="1083" end="1093" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="1098" end="1106" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="1149" end="1154" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1159" end="1164" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1191" end="1205" title="Pannonian Slavs#Principality" label="Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858841" start="1277" end="1295" title="Kingdom of Croatia (medieval)" label="Kingdom of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="1348" end="1375" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="personal union with Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906266" start="1400" end="1428" title="Lands of the Hungarian Crown" label="Lands of the Hungarian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1454" end="1461" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="1536" end="1553" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192303" start="1572" end="1591" title="Treaty of Karlowitz" label="Treaty of Karlowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q623589" start="1604" end="1623" title="Kingdom of Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1631" end="1640" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="1652" end="1687" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="1717" end="1744" title="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen" label="Hungarian part of the realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="1785" end="1812" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1828" end="1843" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="1897" end="1932" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1968" end="2006" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="2022" end="2032" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="2045" end="2073" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q505939" start="2137" end="2154" title="Battle of Vukovar" label="Battle of Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114240" start="2201" end="2220" title="processing industry" label="processing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q362087" start="2472" end="2486" title="permanent crop" label="permanent crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2578" end="2582" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="2881" end="2893" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="Ottoman wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="3015" end="3028" title="Patronage" label="art patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="3150" end="3158" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="3195" end="3204" title="tamburica" label="tamburica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253861" start="3215" end="3222" title="bećarac" label="bećarac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="3269" end="3297" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3301" end="3307" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q220669" start="3463" end="3468" title="Erdut" label="Erdut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882" start="3470" end="3474" title="Ilok" label="Ilok"/>
<link wikidata="Q398139" start="3479" end="3486" title="Kutjevo" label="Kutjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="3590" end="3607" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="3638" end="3642" title="Slav" label="Slav"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="3744" end="3753" title="Slavic languages" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q516459" start="3803" end="3808" title="Sutla" label="Sutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="3839" end="3843" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="3848" end="3853" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="3861" end="3872" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="3906" end="3915" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="3979" end="3991" title="Proto-Slavic" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="4068" end="4084" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4177" end="4186" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="4191" end="4203" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483547" start="4412" end="4428" title="Starčevo culture" label="Starčevo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686" start="4462" end="4476" title="Slavonski Brod" label="Slavonski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="4481" end="4486" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="4500" end="4502" title="Anno Domini" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q922829" start="4508" end="4523" title="Vučedol culture" label="Vučedol culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q687230" start="4529" end="4542" title="Baden culture" label="Baden culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603061" start="4551" end="4567" title="Kostolac culture" label="Kostolac culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="4691" end="4698" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221495" start="4700" end="4708" title="Vinkovci" label="Vinkovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="4713" end="4719" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="4841" end="4849" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="4875" end="4883" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="4884" end="4901" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="4910" end="4916" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="4917" end="4932" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q649179" start="5014" end="5024" title="Pannonii" label="Pannonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="5173" end="5185" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284387" start="5228" end="5234" title="Kaptol, Požega-Slavonia County" label="Kaptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q273114" start="5240" end="5246" title="Požega, Croatia" label="Požega"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5311" end="5325" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="5387" end="5392" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="5440" end="5467" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Roman province of Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="5686" end="5706" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="5800" end="5819" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="5911" end="5919" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="6040" end="6055" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Pannonian Avars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6197" end="6236" title="Pannonian Slavs#Principality" label="Lower Pannonia there was a principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="6284" end="6290" title="Francia" label="Francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q282226" start="6296" end="6328" title="Hungarian invasions of Europe" label="invasion of the Hungarian tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="6424" end="6431" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="6459" end="6467" title="Tomislav I of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q854523" start="6491" end="6510" title="Croatian–Bulgarian battle of 926" label="Bulgarian invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q281316" start="6665" end="6682" title="Petar Krešimir IV of Croatia" label="Petar Krešimir IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q470647" start="6699" end="6714" title="Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia" label="Dmitar Zvonimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060057" start="6733" end="6743" title="Stephen II of Croatia" label="Stjepan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259999" start="6769" end="6780" title="House of Trpimirović" label="Trpimirović"/>
<link wikidata="Q26486" start="6790" end="6812" title="Ladislaus I of Hungary" label="Ladislaus I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q842361" start="6874" end="6877" title="Battle of Gvozd Mountain" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="6882" end="6919" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="personal union of Croatia and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83066" start="6938" end="6945" title="Coloman of Hungary" label="Coloman"/>
<link wikidata="Q117814546" start="7062" end="7081" title="Ban of Slavonia" label="ban of all Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="7174" end="7189" title="central Croatia" label="central Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7226" end="7248" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="7428" end="7431" title="Ban of Croatia" label="ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="7433" end="7440" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="7490" end="7518" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Ottoman conquests in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q694379" start="7535" end="7557" title="Battle of Krbava field" label="Battle of Krbava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="7567" end="7583" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="7633" end="7652" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="7673" end="7684" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="7692" end="7709" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436757" start="7714" end="7729" title="1527 election in Cetin" label="elected in 1527"/>
<link wikidata="Q943292" start="7955" end="7964" title="Frankopan" label="Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="7974" end="7979" title="Šubić" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="8009" end="8013" title="Ban (title)" label="bans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184252" start="8121" end="8144" title="coat of arms of Croatia" label="coat of arms of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="8204" end="8227" title="Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary" label="Vladislaus II Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318961" start="8364" end="8370" title="Đakovo" label="Đakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q686170" start="8432" end="8448" title="Johann Katzianer" label="Johann Katzianer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008108" start="8492" end="8499" title="Gorjani, Croatia" label="Gorjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418378" start="8654" end="8670" title="Sanjak of Pojega" label="Sanjak of Pojega"/>
<link wikidata="Q397639" start="8716" end="8722" title="Novska" label="Novska"/>
<link wikidata="Q397652" start="8777" end="8783" title="Našice" label="Našice"/>
<link wikidata="Q397692" start="8805" end="8814" title="Orahovica" label="Orahovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q991263" start="8819" end="8826" title="Slatina, Croatia" label="Slatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q780950" start="8849" end="8854" title="Voćin" label="Voćin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184841" start="8856" end="8861" title="Sirač" label="Sirač"/>
<link wikidata="Q830300" start="8889" end="8896" title="Valpovo" label="Valpovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q398115" start="8932" end="8938" title="Pakrac" label="Pakrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q266168" start="9087" end="9097" title="Virovitica" label="Virovitica"/>
<link wikidata="Q337888" start="9249" end="9254" title="Čazma" label="Čazma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="9391" end="9397" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q379353" start="9553" end="9566" title="Ivan Lenković" label="Ivan Lenković"/>
<link wikidata="Q699015" start="9654" end="9680" title="Croatian Military Frontier" label="Croatian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q701335" start="9849" end="9864" title="Battle of Sisak" label="Battle of Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="9962" end="9979" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="10094" end="10100" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416014" start="10144" end="10160" title="Ottoman conquest of Bosnia" label="Ottoman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="10241" end="10263" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396146" start="10299" end="10311" title="Croatian–Ottoman Wars" label="Ottoman wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q699964" start="10374" end="10381" title="Archduchy of Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="10402" end="10419" title="Burgenland Croats" label="Burgenland Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="10978" end="10986" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="11002" end="11008" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="11013" end="11019" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q470265" start="11133" end="11154" title="Great Serb Migrations" label="Great Serb Migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q271922" start="11243" end="11259" title="Sremski Karlovci" label="Sremski Karlovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="11372" end="11376" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q174684" start="11398" end="11402" title="Tuzla" label="Soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q738451" start="11407" end="11412" title="Usora Municipality" label="Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511771" start="11615" end="11629" title="Sanjak of Klis" label="Sanjak of Klis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628176" start="11668" end="11684" title="Sanjak of Bosnia" label="Sanjak of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192303" start="11762" end="11781" title="Treaty of Karlowitz" label="Treaty of Karlowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="11905" end="11908" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q877234" start="11944" end="11971" title="Slavonian Military Frontier" label="Slavonian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q623589" start="12075" end="12094" title="Kingdom of Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="12132" end="12152" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="12165" end="12190" title="Illyrian movement" label="Croatian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="12362" end="12371" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="12445" end="12473" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="12512" end="12525" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="12602" end="12615" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="12692" end="12727" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="12746" end="12760" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="12787" end="12802" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="12811" end="12829" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="12906" end="12920" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q195384" start="12956" end="12985" title="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement" label="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="13056" end="13083" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="13091" end="13106" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="13116" end="13138" title="Condominium of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="13153" end="13174" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="1878 Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189419" start="13435" end="13440" title="Zemun" label="Zemun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="13452" end="13458" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="13635" end="13670" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="13714" end="13731" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="13763" end="13801" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="13807" end="13824" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13859" end="13870" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="13884" end="13905" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="13910" end="13917" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q204040" start="14043" end="14047" title="Mur (river)" label="Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q15891578" start="14066" end="14073" title="Baranya (former county)" label="Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="14397" end="14409" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="14418" end="14427" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382617" start="14634" end="14659" title="Cvetković–Maček Agreement" label="Cvetković–Maček Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="14698" end="14717" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Banovina of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="14986" end="15009" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia was occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="15013" end="15020" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="15025" end="15030" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="15107" end="15135" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="15151" end="15163" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15231" end="15243" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="15267" end="15279" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="15334" end="15355" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="genocide against Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="15360" end="15364" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="15397" end="15406" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561708" start="15411" end="15425" title="Stara Gradiška concentration camp" label="Stara Gradiška"/>
<link wikidata="Q56654289" start="15591" end="15599" title="Voćin massacre (1942)" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q780950" start="15620" end="15625" title="Voćin" label="Voćin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="15692" end="15710" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="15813" end="15821" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565489" start="15839" end="15861" title="Chetnik war crimes in World War II" label="genocide against Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="15978" end="15993" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q191669" start="16097" end="16104" title="Germans of Croatia" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912586" start="16156" end="16163" title="Valpovo work camp" label="Valpovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="16331" end="16343" title="single-party" label="single-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="16344" end="16366" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist federal unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="16374" end="16414" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="16429" end="16439" title="League of Communists of Croatia" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285081" start="16543" end="16569" title="1974 Yugoslav Constitution" label="1974 Yugoslav Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q616146" start="16606" end="16621" title="Croatian Spring" label="Croatian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="16854" end="16859" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="17112" end="17118" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882" start="17133" end="17137" title="Ilok" label="Ilok"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="17281" end="17308" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852564" start="17317" end="17335" title="Bács-Bodrog County" label="Bács-Bodrog County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256076" start="17502" end="17517" title="Memorandum of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="SANU Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q574965" start="17526" end="17572" title="1989 coups in Vojvodina, Kosovo and Montenegro" label="1989 coups in Vojvodina, Kosovo and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="17662" end="17669" title="Political faction" label="faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286953" start="17723" end="17750" title="Croatian parliamentary election, 1990" label="first multi-party elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="17778" end="17791" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="17845" end="17861" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="18014" end="18041" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Republic of Serbian Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085493" start="18075" end="18096" title="Croatian independence referendum, 1991" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="18199" end="18227" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="18237" end="18259" title="Yugoslav National Army" label="Yugoslav National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="18277" end="18291" title="Paramilitary" label="paramilitaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982703" start="18498" end="18504" title="Pakrac clash" label="Pakrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851834" start="18510" end="18521" title="Borovo Selo killings" label="Borovo Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416710" start="18536" end="18565" title="SAO Western Slavonia" label="Western Slavonia was occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="18610" end="18625" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="18637" end="18647" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753805" start="18709" end="18722" title="Croatian Army" label="Croatian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q663501" start="18743" end="18751" title="Operation Otkos 10" label="Otkos 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513572" start="18757" end="18765" title="Operation Orkan 91" label="Orkan 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q73123" start="18805" end="18812" title="Okučani" label="Okučani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374443" start="18901" end="18916" title="Operation Flash" label="Operation Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q65362" start="18952" end="18968" title="SAO Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia" label="eastern Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505939" start="18989" end="19006" title="Battle of Vukovar" label="Battle of Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q520741" start="19024" end="19032" title="Vukovar massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="19242" end="19273" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="United Nations Protection Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="19371" end="19396" title="Republika Srpska" label="Serb-held areas of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q394310" start="19471" end="19478" title="Županja" label="Županja"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="19539" end="19555" title="Operation Storm" label="decisive victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q321885" start="19672" end="19687" title="Erdut Agreement" label="Erdut Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279001" start="19837" end="19867" title="Areas of Special State Concern (Croatia)" label="Areas of Special State Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q57053" start="19917" end="19934" title="Counties of Croatia" label="Croatian counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q58129" start="20091" end="20104" title="Brod-Posavina County" label="Brod-Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q58159" start="20106" end="20120" title="Osijek-Baranja County" label="Osijek-Baranja"/>
<link wikidata="Q58111" start="20122" end="20137" title="Požega-Slavonia County" label="Požega-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58092" start="20139" end="20159" title="Virovitica-Podravina County" label="Virovitica-Podravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q58225" start="20164" end="20178" title="Vukovar-Srijem County" label="Vukovar-Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="20485" end="20492" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790230" start="20527" end="20534" title="Baranya (region)" label="Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434769" start="20597" end="20608" title="macroregion" label="macroregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="20743" end="20749" title="Cities of Croatia" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q58342" start="20769" end="20782" title="Nova Gradiška" label="Nova Gradiška"/>
<link wikidata="Q57058" start="20790" end="20815" title="Municipalities of Croatia" label="Municipalities of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q397645" start="20868" end="20881" title="Beli Manastir" label="Beli Manastir"/>
<link wikidata="Q399038" start="20883" end="20890" title="Belišće" label="Belišće"/>
<link wikidata="Q399261" start="20892" end="20906" title="Donji Miholjac" label="Donji Miholjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q398139" start="21015" end="21022" title="Kutjevo" label="Kutjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q396595" start="21024" end="21029" title="Lipik" label="Lipik"/>
<link wikidata="Q397633" start="21039" end="21049" title="Pleternica" label="Pleternica"/>
<link wikidata="Q994223" start="21251" end="21255" title="Otok, Vukovar-Srijem County" label="Otok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313890" start="21395" end="21429" title="NUTS of Croatia" label="NUTS-2 statistical unit of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="21462" end="21477" title="Central Croatia" label="Central Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="22738" end="22753" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="22774" end="22790" title="Geomorphology" label="geomorphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="22848" end="22857" title="Miocene" label="Miocenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="22871" end="22881" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="22921" end="22930" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="22931" end="22947" title="Variscan orogeny" label="Variscan orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="22967" end="22975" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778649" start="23002" end="23007" title="Papuk" label="Papuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269402" start="23009" end="23014" title="Psunj" label="Psunj"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="23091" end="23105" title="Stratovolcano" label="stratovolcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="23133" end="23136" title="Mya (unit)" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="23216" end="23228" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="23272" end="23292" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="23324" end="23333" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705990" start="23343" end="23356" title="Pannonian Sea" label="Pannonian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="23448" end="23465" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="23531" end="23542" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q911639" start="23568" end="23591" title="Transdanubian Mountains" label="Transdanubian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="23708" end="23717" title="Iron Gate (Danube)" label="Iron Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="23762" end="23769" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="23773" end="23783" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="23879" end="23889" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="24097" end="24102" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="24211" end="24215" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212136" start="24252" end="24257" title="Horst (geology)" label="horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="24262" end="24268" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230249" start="24334" end="24341" title="Pannonian island mountains" label="islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269402" start="24392" end="24397" title="Psunj" label="Psunj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514521" start="24422" end="24435" title="Požega Valley" label="Požega Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q136911" start="24479" end="24486" title="Krndija" label="Krndija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514528" start="24580" end="24592" title="Požeška Gora" label="Požeška Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559425" start="24597" end="24601" title="Dilj" label="Dilj"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="24746" end="24756" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="24771" end="24784" title="igneous rocks" label="igneous rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q740445" start="24803" end="24808" title="ridge" label="ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q136916" start="24974" end="24989" title="Moslavačka gora" label="Moslavačka gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="25034" end="25046" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q661478" start="25058" end="25072" title="Alpine orogeny" label="Alpine orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="25125" end="25130" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q676509" start="25210" end="25214" title="Vuka (river)" label="Vuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911647" start="25219" end="25224" title="Bosut (river)" label="Bosut"/>
<link wikidata="Q116285" start="25256" end="25267" title="Fruška Gora" label="Fruška Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q605652" start="25628" end="25634" title="Aljmaš" label="Aljmaš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276347" start="25835" end="25842" title="Orljava" label="Orljava"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="26054" end="26063" title="Reservoir" label="Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118811" start="26160" end="26171" title="Kopački Rit" label="Kopački Rit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="26172" end="26179" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494903" start="26321" end="26333" title="Danube basin" label="Danube basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="26342" end="26351" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="26527" end="26542" title="drainage divide" label="drainage divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="27055" end="27080" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="27099" end="27128" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="27548" end="27562" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="27767" end="27777" title="icebreaker" label="icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="28789" end="28795" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q837094" start="28905" end="28915" title="Hungarians of Croatia" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="29263" end="29271" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="29304" end="29327" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="29337" end="29343" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="29374" end="29387" title="Irreligion" label="non-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="29389" end="29398" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="29485" end="29493" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="29511" end="29525" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="29572" end="29579" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="29591" end="29600" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="30043" end="30056" title="Magyarization" label="Magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q470265" start="30525" end="30546" title="Great Serb Migrations" label="Great Serb Migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q699958" start="31384" end="31399" title="Danube Swabians" label="Danube Swabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="31511" end="31521" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="32023" end="32029" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="32031" end="32040" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="32042" end="32053" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="32058" end="32072" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="32813" end="32822" title="wholesale" label="wholesale"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="32827" end="32833" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114240" start="32844" end="32863" title="processing industry" label="processing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="32865" end="32880" title="Food processing" label="Food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q955043" start="33026" end="33038" title="meat packing" label="meat packing"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="33040" end="33070" title="Canning" label="fruit and vegetable processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q227857" start="33072" end="33086" title="sugar refining" label="sugar refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="33088" end="33101" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="33106" end="33120" title="dairy industry" label="dairy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q156362" start="33145" end="33153" title="Winery" label="wineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067" start="33192" end="33210" title="economy of Croatia" label="economy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609891" start="33279" end="33294" title="wood processing" label="wood processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="33320" end="33329" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="33331" end="33340" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q389782" start="33352" end="33361" title="Cardboard (paper product)" label="cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="33363" end="33375" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="33377" end="33393" title="textile industry" label="textile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q785222" start="33398" end="33414" title="glass production" label="glass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="33416" end="33425" title="Transport" label="Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="33430" end="33447" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="33813" end="33817" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="33967" end="33999" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European transport corridors"/>
<link wikidata="Q429719" start="34041" end="34052" title="A5 (Croatia)" label="A5 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q429577" start="34072" end="34083" title="A3 (Croatia)" label="A3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="34763" end="34769" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="34775" end="34782" title="oilseed" label="oilseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="34933" end="34939" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669700" start="35821" end="35839" title="List of companies of Croatia" label="Croatian companies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35840" end="35845" title="Belje" label="Belje"/>
<link wikidata="Q397347" start="35878" end="35885" title="Agrokor" label="Agrokor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35891" end="35898" title="Belišće (company)" label="Belišće"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="35900" end="35910" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="35921" end="35939" title="packaging material" label="packaging material"/>
<link wikidata="Q912592" start="35966" end="35971" title="Darda, Croatia" label="Darda"/>
<link wikidata="Q399038" start="35976" end="35983" title="Belišće" label="Belišće"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="36105" end="36111" title="Earnings before interest and taxes" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36190" end="36203" title="Osijek-Koteks" label="Osijek-Koteks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36216" end="36223" title="Saponia" label="Saponia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="36224" end="36233" title="detergent" label="detergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246832" start="36238" end="36251" title="personal care" label="personal care"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36280" end="36292" title="Biljemerkant" label="Biljemerkant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36325" end="36337" title="Našicecement" label="Našicecement"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="36338" end="36350" title="cement plant" label="cement plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36373" end="36383" title="Nexe Grupa" label="Nexe Grupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134595" start="36451" end="36455" title="Viro (company)" label="Viro"/>
<link wikidata="Q342143" start="36625" end="36645" title="Đuro Đaković (company)" label="Đuro Đaković Holding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36805" end="36817" title="Kutjevo (company)" label="Kutjevo d.d."/>
<link wikidata="Q398139" start="36836" end="36843" title="Kutjevo" label="Kutjevo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37063" end="37068" title="Vupik" label="Vupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="37181" end="37198" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="37379" end="37386" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="37712" end="37734" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369980" start="37740" end="37758" title="House of Esterházy" label="House of Esterházy"/>
<link wikidata="Q938697" start="37773" end="37783" title="Odescalchi" label="Odescalchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315620" start="37785" end="37816" title="Philipp Karl von Eltz-Kempenich" label="Philipp Karl von Eltz-Kempenich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260658" start="37831" end="37846" title="Prandau-Normann Castle" label="Prandau-Normann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578116" start="37852" end="37870" title="House of Pejačević" label="House of Pejačević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862546" start="37879" end="37896" title="List of noble families of Croatia" label="House of Janković"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="38050" end="38063" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q277466" start="38065" end="38076" title="Historicism (art)" label="Historicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="38095" end="38106" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895393" start="38154" end="38162" title="landmark" label="landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="38176" end="38187" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260658" start="38272" end="38287" title="Prandau-Normann Castle" label="Prandau-Normann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38292" end="38307" title="Prandau-Mailath Castle" label="Prandau-Mailath"/>
<link wikidata="Q830300" start="38324" end="38331" title="Valpovo" label="Valpovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q399261" start="38336" end="38350" title="Donji Miholjac" label="Donji Miholjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q792496" start="38392" end="38397" title="Bilje, Croatia" label="Bilje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297391" start="38441" end="38447" title="Tikveš, Croatia" label="Tikveš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282542" start="38456" end="38463" title="Kneževo, Croatia" label="Kneževo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164510" start="38548" end="38573" title="Pejačević Castle in Virovitica" label="manor house in Virovitica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38582" end="38613" title="Pejačević manor house in Našice" label="Pejačević manor house in Našice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124333" start="38657" end="38679" title="Ilok Castle" label="Odescalchi manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533265" start="38693" end="38709" title="Eltz Manor" label="Eltz manor house"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38886" end="38912" title="Kutjevo Jesuit manor house" label="Kutjevo Jesuit manor house"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38918" end="38936" title="Cernik manor house" label="Cernik manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q398139" start="38949" end="38956" title="Kutjevo" label="Kutjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285573" start="38961" end="38967" title="Cernik, Brod-Posavina County" label="Cernik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815788" start="39018" end="39023" title="Tvrđa" label="Tvrđa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276499" start="39028" end="39032" title="Brod Fortress" label="Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="39033" end="39047" title="fortifications" label="fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q109607" start="39131" end="39136" title="ruins" label="ruins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39167" end="39180" title="Ružica Castle" label="Ružica Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q397692" start="39186" end="39195" title="Orahovica" label="Orahovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q402221" start="39248" end="39264" title="Đakovo Cathedral" label="Đakovo Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="39279" end="39294" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="39341" end="39347" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="39352" end="39360" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q434257" start="39527" end="39550" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264085" start="39609" end="39646" title="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q675848" start="39736" end="39756" title="University of Zagreb" label="University of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497314" start="39951" end="39968" title="Josip Eugen Tomić" label="Josip Eugen Tomić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253353" start="39970" end="39983" title="Josip Kozarac" label="Josip Kozarac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39989" end="40007" title="Miroslav Kraljević (writer)" label="Miroslav Kraljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q259351" start="40109" end="40124" title="Dobriša Cesarić" label="Dobriša Cesarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q960984" start="40126" end="40146" title="Dragutin Tadijanović" label="Dragutin Tadijanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q254383" start="40148" end="40169" title="Ivana Brlić-Mažuranić" label="Ivana Brlić-Mažuranić"/>
<link wikidata="Q610015" start="40174" end="40192" title="Antun Gustav Matoš" label="Antun Gustav Matoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266673" start="40275" end="40293" title="Miroslav Kraljević" label="Miroslav Kraljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350945" start="40298" end="40315" title="Bela Čikoš Sesija" label="Bela Čikoš Sesija"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="40476" end="40484" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="40548" end="40557" title="tamburica" label="tamburica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187177" start="40562" end="40569" title="Croatian bagpipes" label="bagpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q669370" start="40895" end="40900" title="gusle" label="gusle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253861" start="40968" end="40975" title="bećarac" label="bećarac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="40997" end="41025" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="41029" end="41035" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="41103" end="41119" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708709" start="41156" end="41200" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="41219" end="41231" title="Institute of technology" label="polytechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="41284" end="41291" title="college" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443900" start="41332" end="41342" title="Ministry of Science, Education and Sports (Croatia)" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="41694" end="41703" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="41777" end="41796" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q264327" start="42003" end="42012" title="Hungarian cuisine" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q874327" start="42014" end="42022" title="Viennese cuisine" label="Viennese"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="42053" end="42060" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="42065" end="42077" title="Arab cuisine" label="Arab cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="42188" end="42195" title="pickling" label="pickled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682434" start="42227" end="42238" title="smoked meat" label="smoked meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412561" start="42295" end="42300" title="kulen" label="kulen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318961" start="42547" end="42553" title="Đakovo" label="Đakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882" start="42555" end="42559" title="Ilok" label="Ilok"/>
<link wikidata="Q398139" start="42564" end="42571" title="Kutjevo" label="Kutjevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q644796" start="42579" end="42588" title="Graševina" label="Graševina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="42623" end="42631" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="43007" end="43018" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q808963" start="43031" end="43034" title="oak (wine)" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16590178" start="43110" end="43125" title="Piemonte (wine)" label="Piedmont region"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="43129" end="43134" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202290" start="43143" end="43151" title="nebbiolo" label="nebbiolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471494" start="43175" end="43193" title="Regions of Croatia" label="Regions of Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149277" wikidata="Q399038" url="?curid=149277" title="Belišće">
<text>Belišće () (, ) is a town in Croatia, located in the region of Slavonia, Osijek-Baranja County, at the altitude of 93 m. The population of the town is 6,518 (2011), with 10,825 in the municipality. In 2011 census, the majority were Croats. This industrial town upon the Drava river lies near the border with Hungary north from here.

Chief occupations are forestry, timber and wood processing, (sawmill, chemical and mechanical wood processing), corrugated fiberboard, metal industry, chemicals and synthetic material processing.

The influential Gutmann family made a significant impact on the Belišće region in the 19th and 20th centuries. Once vast Slavonian oak forests were mostly replaced with farmland, and a section of the working-class quarters of Salamon H. Gutmann from 1884 became part of the present-day Belišće.

Major recreational activities include angling, rowing kayak and canoe on the Drava river and its backwaters and hunting in the broader surroundings.

The settlements in the administrative area are:
* Belišće, population 6,518
* Bistrinci, population 1,598
* Bocanjevci, population 457
* Gat, population 705
* Gorica Valpovačka, population 165
* Kitišanci, population 150
* Tiborjanci, population 291
* Veliškovci, population 685
* Vinogradci, population 256

==Politics==
===Minority councils===
Directly elected minority councils and representatives are tasked with consulting the local or regional authorities to advocate for minority rights and interests, integration into public life and participation in the management of local affairs. At the 2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections Roma and Serbs of Croatia each fulfilled legal requirements to elect 15 members minority councils of the Town of Belišće but the elections for Serb council were not held due to the lack of candidates.

==Notable people==
* Edmund Gutmann
* Viktor Gutmann
* Branko Mikasinovich

==References==
==External links==

*Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q399038" start="0" end="7" title="Belišće" label="Belišće"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="29" end="36" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="63" end="71" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58159" start="73" end="94" title="Osijek-Baranja County" label="Osijek-Baranja County"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="232" end="238" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="270" end="275" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="308" end="315" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="356" end="364" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="366" end="372" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609891" start="377" end="392" title="wood processing" label="wood processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="395" end="402" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463524" start="446" end="467" title="corrugated fiberboard" label="corrugated fiberboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="469" end="474" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="475" end="483" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="485" end="494" title="Chemical industry" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q273499" start="499" end="517" title="Synthetic chemical" label="synthetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339518" start="547" end="554" title="Edmund Gutmann" label="Gutmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="652" end="660" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="662" end="665" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194492" start="865" end="872" title="angling" label="angling"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="904" end="909" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="939" end="946" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q399038" start="1027" end="1034" title="Belišće" label="Belišće"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442594" start="1055" end="1064" title="Bistrinci" label="Bistrinci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1085" end="1095" title="Bocanjevci" label="Bocanjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729417" start="1114" end="1117" title="Gat, Croatia" label="Gat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1136" end="1153" title="Gorica Valpovačka" label="Gorica Valpovačka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1172" end="1181" title="Kitišanci" label="Kitišanci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1200" end="1210" title="Tiborjanci" label="Tiborjanci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919066" start="1229" end="1239" title="Veliškovci" label="Veliškovci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1258" end="1268" title="Vinogradci" label="Vinogradci"/>
<link wikidata="Q118134387" start="1576" end="1648" title="2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections" label="2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="1649" end="1653" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="1658" end="1674" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339518" start="1872" end="1886" title="Edmund Gutmann" label="Edmund Gutmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929690" start="1889" end="1903" title="Viktor Gutmann" label="Viktor Gutmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957475" start="1906" end="1925" title="Branko Mikasinovich (academic)" label="Branko Mikasinovich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149279" wikidata="Q1206726" url="?curid=149279" title="Images (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Images]] are artifacts that depict visual perception, such as photographs or other two-dimensional pictures.

Images may also refer to:
== Music ==

=== Classical ===
* &quot;Images&quot; (composition) (1901–1907), a cycle of six compositions for solo piano by Claude Debussy
* &quot;Images pour orchestre&quot; (1905–1912), an orchestral composition by Claude Debussy
* &quot;Images&quot; (Skempton) (1989), a set of piano pieces by Howard Skempton

=== Popular music ===
* Images (band), a French synth-pop band
* Image song, a song related to a fictional work, sung in-character

=== Albums ===
* &quot;Images&quot; (Sarah Vaughan album), 1954
* &quot;Images&quot; (Sonny Red album), 1962
* &quot;Images&quot; (The Walker Brothers album), 1967
* &quot;Images&quot; (Cilla Black album), 1971
* &quot;Images&quot; (Dan Hartman album), 1976
* &quot;Images&quot; (Lucio Battisti album), 1977
* &quot;Images&quot; (Brotherhood of Man album), 1977
* &quot;Images&quot; (Ronnie Milsap album), 1979
* &quot;Images&quot; (Amii Stewart album), 1981
* &quot;Images&quot; (Ralph Moore album), 1989
* &quot;Images&quot; (Reggie Workman album), 1990
* &quot;Images – The Best of Jean-Michel Jarre&quot;, 1991
* &quot;Images&quot; (Kenny Barron album), 2004
* &quot;Images&quot; (EP), 1993 extended-play disc by Dive

== Other ==
* The Images (Tasmania), a set of rocky islets off Tasmania
* &quot;Images&quot; (ballet), a 1992 ballet by Miriam Mahdaviani
* &quot;Images&quot; (film), a 1972 film directed by Robert Altman
* &quot;Images&quot; (book), a 1994 book by David Lynch

==See also==
* Image (disambiguation)
* Imagery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1206726" start="0" end="10" title="Images (disambiguation)" label="[[Images]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206726" start="112" end="118" title="Images (disambiguation)" label="Images"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132712" start="171" end="203" title="Images (composition)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (composition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q665871" start="286" end="307" title="Images pour orchestre" label="Images pour orchestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002354" start="373" end="402" title="Images (Skempton)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Skempton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659622" start="477" end="490" title="Images (band)" label="Images (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625206" start="518" end="528" title="Image song" label="Image song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658668" start="602" end="642" title="Images (Sarah Vaughan album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Sarah Vaughan album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013185" start="651" end="687" title="Images (Sonny Red album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Sonny Red album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002356" start="696" end="742" title="Images (The Walker Brothers album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (The Walker Brothers album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002341" start="751" end="789" title="Images (Cilla Black album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Cilla Black album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002344" start="798" end="836" title="Images (Dan Hartman album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Dan Hartman album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508164" start="845" end="886" title="Images (Lucio Battisti album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Lucio Battisti album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002339" start="895" end="940" title="Images (Brotherhood of Man album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Brotherhood of Man album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002350" start="949" end="989" title="Images (Ronnie Milsap album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Ronnie Milsap album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013175" start="998" end="1037" title="Images (Amii Stewart album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Amii Stewart album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787573" start="1046" end="1084" title="Images (Ralph Moore album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Ralph Moore album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111939152" start="1093" end="1134" title="Images (Reggie Workman album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Reggie Workman album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096601" start="1149" end="1187" title="Images – The Best of Jean-Michel Jarre" label="Images – The Best of Jean-Michel Jarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598231" start="1202" end="1241" title="Images (Kenny Barron album)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (Kenny Barron album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711921" start="1250" end="1273" title="Images (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741444" start="1322" end="1343" title="The Images (Tasmania)" label="The Images (Tasmania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002359" start="1382" end="1409" title="Images (ballet)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (ballet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259762" start="1448" end="1473" title="Images (film)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796547" start="1515" end="1540" title="Images (book)" label="&amp;quot;Images&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185675" start="1585" end="1607" title="Image (disambiguation)" label="Image (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817665" start="1610" end="1617" title="Imagery" label="Imagery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149280" wikidata="Q830300" url="?curid=149280" title="Valpovo">
<text>Valpovo is a town in Slavonia, Croatia. It is close to the Drava river, northwest of Osijek. As of 2021, the population of Valpovo is 7,406, with a total of 11,563 in the municipality.

==Name==
In Hungarian the town is known as &quot;Valpó&quot; and in German as &quot;Walpach&quot;. In antiquity, it was called Iovalum. There are several suggested etymologies. One is that it comes from the Latin root *Iov-, meaning &quot;divine&quot;. However, the ending can&#x27;t be explained by Latin. One explanation is that it comes from the Indo-European words *yow and *h2elut, so that it means &quot;magical beer.&quot; The other, more likely, is that it comes from the Indo-European roots *yow and *h2elom, so that it means &quot;magical herb&quot;, whatever plant that signified. Perhaps the simplest explanation is that it comes from the Indo-European word *wel, meaning &quot;valley&quot;, whatever &quot;Io-&quot; meant.

==Demographics==
The settlements in the municipal area of Valpovo are:
* Harkanovci, population 506
* Ivanovci, population 460
* Ladimirevci, population 1,587
* Marjančaci, population 308
* Nard, population 516
* Šag, population 429
* Valpovo, population 7,406
* Zelčin, population 351

In the census of 2011, the absolute majority were Croats.

==History==

The town is first mentioned in 1332. In June of 1543, during Sultan Suleiman&#x27;s campaign into Hungary, Valpovo was besieged, taken, and annexed to the Ottoman Empire. It was initially a kaza centre in the Sanjak of Pojega until 1601. It was later in sanjak centre in Kanije Eyalet until Austrian conquest in 1687.

In the late 19th and early 20th century, Valpovo was part of the Virovitica County of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia. In March 1945, German forces launched Operation Spring Awakening. On the southern arm which moved north through Valpovo was the 1st Cossack Cavalry Division. The operation was as disastrous as it was ambitious. Yugoslav partisans of the 3rd Army (Yugoslav Partisans) continuously harassed and delayed the Cossacks. Shortly after the end of World War II, officials in the communist Yugoslav regime established a labor camp for Germans which operated until May 1946.

==Economy==
Economy is based on farming, livestock breeding, forestry, wood and timber and foodstuffs industries; close to the town are oil and natural gas deposits. Valpovo lies on a regional road that connects it to Osijek and Donji Miholjac, as well a road to Belišće and to Bizovac through Ladimirevci.

==Attractions==

Located close to the banks of the Drava river (5 km), Valpovo was an ancient dwelling of feudal families. Major tourist attraction include important cultural and historical heritage, (remains of a mediaeval fortification, the old brickwork bridge, churches) and a landscaped park, protected as a horticultural monument. Prandau-Normann Castle: Count Normann-Ehrenfels and Baron Prandau-Hilleprandt had a magnificent castle that was rebuilt seven times. They planted 121 herbal sorts on 250,000 square meters. Valpovo&#x27;s park is one of the most beautiful in Slavonia.

The most important annual event is the Valpovo Summer (), attended by a number of cultural clubs with folklore, music, theatrical and other performances. Angling opportunities are provided on the nearby rivers Karašica, Vučica, Drava, as well as on lakes and fishponds; hunting grounds are offered nearby. Slavonian specialities, venison and freshwater fish, and quality wines add to the visitor opportunities of the Valpovo region.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q830300" start="0" end="7" title="Valpovo" label="Valpovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="21" end="29" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="31" end="38" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="59" end="64" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="85" end="91" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="198" end="207" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="254" end="260" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658126" start="996" end="1006" title="Harkanovci" label="Harkanovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510826" start="1025" end="1033" title="Ivanovci, Osijek-Baranja County" label="Ivanovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002340" start="1052" end="1063" title="Ladimirevci" label="Ladimirevci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1084" end="1094" title="Marjančaci" label="Marjančaci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1113" end="1117" title="Nard, Croatia" label="Nard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082690" start="1136" end="1139" title="Šag" label="Šag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068849" start="1186" end="1192" title="Zelčin" label="Zelčin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="1260" end="1266" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q113540587" start="1389" end="1409" title="Siege of Valpovo" label="Valpovo was besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1437" end="1451" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418378" start="1491" end="1507" title="Sanjak of Pojega" label="Sanjak of Pojega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078820" start="1553" end="1566" title="Kanije Eyalet" label="Kanije Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1573" end="1580" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q928745" start="1666" end="1683" title="Virovitica County" label="Virovitica County"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="1691" end="1718" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155995" start="1758" end="1784" title="Operation Spring Awakening" label="Operation Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q25747" start="1848" end="1876" title="1st Cossack Cavalry Division" label="1st Cossack Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559312" start="1957" end="1986" title="3rd Army (Yugoslav Partisans)" label="3rd Army (Yugoslav Partisans)"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2060" end="2072" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912586" start="2131" end="2141" title="Valpovo work camp" label="labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q191669" start="2146" end="2153" title="Germans of Croatia" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="2404" end="2410" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q399261" start="2415" end="2429" title="Donji Miholjac" label="Donji Miholjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q399038" start="2449" end="2456" title="Belišće" label="Belišće"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293830" start="2464" end="2471" title="Bizovac" label="Bizovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002340" start="2480" end="2491" title="Ladimirevci" label="Ladimirevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2623" end="2630" title="tourist" label="tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="2786" end="2790" title="park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260658" start="2831" end="2853" title="Prandau-Normann Castle" label="Prandau-Normann Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="3072" end="3080" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="3185" end="3193" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="3195" end="3200" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501015" start="3293" end="3301" title="Karašica (Drava)" label="Karašica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501015" start="3303" end="3309" title="Vučica (river)" label="Vučica"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="3311" end="3316" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296872" start="3413" end="3420" title="venison" label="venison"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="3436" end="3440" title="fish" label="fish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="149281" wikidata="Q213156" url="?curid=149281" title="Performance art">
<text>Performance art is an artwork or art exhibition created through actions executed by the artist or other participants. It may be witnessed live or through documentation, spontaneously developed or written, and is traditionally presented to a public in a fine art context in an interdisciplinary mode. Also known as artistic action, it has been developed through the years as a genre of its own in which art is presented live. It had an important and fundamental role in 20th century avant-garde art.

It involves five basic elements: time, space, body, presence of the artist, and the relation between the artist and the public. The actions, generally developed in art galleries and museums, can take place in any kind of setting or space, and during any time period. Its goal is to generate a reaction, sometimes with the support of improvisation and a sense of aesthetics. The themes are commonly linked to life experiences of the artist themselves, the need for denunciation or social criticism and with a spirit of transformation.

The term &quot;performance art&quot; and &quot;performance&quot; became widely used in the 1970s, even though the history of performance in visual arts dates back to futurist productions and cabarets from the 1910s. Art critic and performance artist John Perreault credits Marjorie Strider with the invention of the term in 1969. The main pioneers of performance art include Carolee Schneemann, Marina Abramović, Ana Mendieta, Chris Burden, Hermann Nitsch, Joseph Beuys, Nam June Paik, Tehching Hsieh, Yves Klein and Vito Acconci. Some of the main exponents more recently are Tania Bruguera, Abel Azcona, Regina José Galindo, Marta Minujín, Melati Suryodarmo and Petr Pavlensky. The discipline is linked to the &quot;happenings&quot; and &quot;events&quot; of the Fluxus movement, Viennese Actionism, body art and conceptual art.

==Definition==

The definition and historical and pedagogical contextualization of performance art is controversial. One of the handicaps comes from the term itself, which is polysemic, and one of its meanings relates to the scenic arts. This meaning of &quot;performance&quot; in the scenic-arts context differs radically from the concept of &quot;performance art&quot;, since performance art emerged with a critical and antagonistic position towards scenic arts. Performance art only adjoins the scenic arts in certain aspects such as the audience and the present body, and still not every performance-art piece contains these elements.

The meaning of the term &quot;performance art&quot; in the narrower sense is related to postmodernist traditions in Western culture. From about the mid-1960s into the 1970s, often derived from concepts of visual art, with respect to Antonin Artaud, Dada, the Situationists, Fluxus, installation art, and conceptual art, performance art tended to be defined as an antithesis to theatre, challenging orthodox art-forms and cultural norms. The ideal had been an ephemeral and authentic experience for performer and audience in an event that could not be repeated, captured or purchased. The widely discussed difference, how concepts of visual arts and concepts of performing arts are used, can determine the meanings of a performance-art presentation.

&quot;Performance art&quot; is a term usually reserved to refer to a conceptual art that conveys a content-based meaning in a more drama-related sense, rather than being simple performance for its own sake for entertainment purposes. It largely refers to a performance presented to an audience, but which does not seek to present a conventional theatrical play or a formal linear narrative, or which alternately does not seek to depict a set of fictitious characters in formal scripted interactions. It therefore can include action or spoken word as a communication between the artist and audience, or even ignore expectations of an audience, rather than following a script written beforehand.

Some types of performance art nevertheless can be close to performing arts. Such performance may use a script or create a fictitious dramatic setting, but still constitute performance art in that it does not seek to follow the usual dramatic norm of creating a fictitious setting with a linear script which follows conventional real-world dynamics; rather, it would intentionally seek to satirize or to transcend the usual real-world dynamics which are used in conventional theatrical plays.

Performance artists often challenge the audience to think in new and unconventional ways, break conventions of traditional arts, and break down conventional ideas about &quot;what art is&quot;. As long as the performer does not become a player who repeats a role, performance art can include satirical elements; use robots and machines as performers, as in pieces of the Survival Research Laboratories; involve ritualised elements (e.g. Shaun Caton); or borrow elements of any performing arts such as dance, music, and circus. Performance art can also involve intersection with architecture, and may intertwine with religious practice
and with theology.

Some artists, e.g. the Viennese Actionists and neo-Dadaists, prefer to use the terms &quot;live art&quot;, &quot;action art&quot;, &quot;actions&quot;, &quot;intervention&quot; (see art intervention) or &quot;manoeuvre&quot; to describe their performing activities. As genres of performance art appear body art, fluxus-performance, happening, action poetry, and intermedia.

==Origins==
Performance art is a form of expression that was born as an alternative artistic manifestation. The discipline emerged in 1916 parallel to dadaism, under the umbrella of conceptual art. The movement was led by Tristan Tzara, one of the pioneers of Dada. Western culture theorists have set the origins of performance art in the beginnings of the 20th century, along with constructivism, Futurism and Dadaism. Dada was an important inspiration because of their poetry actions, which drifted apart from conventionalisms, and futurist artists, specially some members of Russian futurism, could also be identified as part of the starting process of performance art.


===Cabaret Voltaire===
The Cabaret Voltaire was founded in Zürich, Switzerland by the couple Hugo Ball and Emmy Hennings for artistic and political purposes, and was a place where new tendencies were explored. Located on the upper floor of a theater, whose exhibitions they mocked in their shows, the works interpreted in the cabaret were avant garde and experimental. It is thought that the Dada movement was founded in the ten-meter-square locale. Moreover, Surrealists, whose movement descended directly from Dadaism, used to meet in the Cabaret. On its brief existence—barely six months, closing the summer of 1916—the Dadaist Manifesto was read and it held the first Dada actions, performances, and hybrid poetry, plastic art, music and repetitive action presentations. Founders such as Richard Huelsenbeck, Marcel Janco, Tristan Tzara, Sophie Taeuber-Arp and Jean Arp participated in provocative and scandalous events that were fundamental and the basis of the foundation for the anarchist movement called Dada.

Dadaism was born with the intention of destroying any system or established norm in the art world. It is an anti-art movement, anti-literary and anti-poetry, that questioned the existence of art, literature and poetry itself. Not only was it a way of creating, but of living; it created a whole new ideology. It was against eternal beauty, the eternity of principles, the laws of logic, the immobility of thought and clearly against anything universal. It promoted change, spontaneity, immediacy, contradiction, randomness and the defense of chaos against the order and imperfection against perfection, ideas similar to those of performance art. They stood for provocation, anti-art protest and scandal, through ways of expression many times satirical and ironic. The absurd or lack of value and the chaos protagonized their breaking actions with traditional artistic form.

Cabaret Voltaire closed in 1916, but was revived in the 21st century.


===Futurism===
Futurism was an artistic avant garde movement that appeared in 1909. It first started as a literary movement, even though most of the participants were painters. In the beginning it also included sculpture, photography, music and cinema. The First World War put an end to the movement, even though in Italy it went on until the 1930s. One of the countries where it had the most impact was Russia. In 1912 manifestos such as the &quot;Futurist Sculpture Manifesto&quot; and the &quot;Futurist Architecture&quot; arose, and in 1913 the &quot;Manifesto of Futurist Lust&quot; by Valentine de Saint-Point, dancer, writer and French artist. The futurists spread their theories through encounters, meetings and conferences in public spaces, that got close to the idea of a political concentration, with poetry and music-halls, which anticipated performance art.

===Bauhaus===

The Bauhaus, an art school founded in Weimar in 1919, included an experimental performing arts workshops with the goal of exploring the relationship between the body, space, sound and light. The Black Mountain College, founded in the United States by instructors of the original Bauhaus who were exiled by the Nazi Party, continued incorporating experimental performing arts in the scenic arts training twenty years before the events related to the history of performance in the 1960s. The name Bauhaus derives from the German words Bau, &quot;construction&quot; and Haus, &quot;house&quot;; ironically, despite its name and the fact that his founder was an architect, the Bauhaus did not have an architecture department the first years of its existence.

===Action painting===

In the 1940s and 1950s, the action painting technique or movement gave artists the possibility of interpreting the canvas as an area to act in, rendering the paintings as traces of the artist&#x27;s performance in the studio According to art critic Harold Rosenberg, it was one of the initiating processes of performance art, along with abstract expressionism. Jackson Pollock is the action painter par excellence, who carried out many of his actions live. In Europe Yves Klein did his Anthropométries using (female) bodies to paint canvasses as a public action. Names to be highlighted are Willem de Kooning and Franz Kline, whose work include abstract and action painting.

===Nouveau réalisme===

Nouveau réalisme is another one of the artistic movements cited in the beginnings of performance art. It was a painting movement founded in 1960 by art critic Pierre Restany and painter Yves Klein, during the first collective exhibition in the Apollinaire Gallery in Milan. Nouveau réalisme was, along with Fluxus and other groups, one of the many avant garde tendencies of the 1960s. Pierre Restany created various performance art assemblies in the Tate Modern, amongst other spaces. Yves Klein is one of the main exponents of the movement. He was a clear pioneer of performance art, with his conceptual pieces like &quot;Zone de Sensibilité Picturale Immatérielle&quot; (1959–62), &quot;Anthropométries&quot; (1960), and the photomontage &quot;Saut dans le vide&quot;. All his works have a connection with performance art, as they are created as a live action, like his best-known artworks of paintings created with the bodies of women. The members of the group saw the world as an image, from which they took parts and incorporated them into their work; they sought to bring life and art closer together.

===Gutai===

One of the other movements that anticipated performance art was the Japanese movement Gutai, who made action art or happening. It emerged in 1955 in the region of Kansai (Kyōto, Ōsaka, Kōbe). The main participants were Jirō Yoshihara, Sadamasa Motonaga, Shozo Shimamoto, Saburō Murakami, Katsuō Shiraga, Seichi Sato, Akira Ganayama and Atsuko Tanaka. The Gutai group arose after World War II. They rejected capitalist consumerism, carrying out ironic actions with latent aggressiveness (object breaking, actions with smoke). They influenced groups such as Fluxus and artists like Joseph Beuys and Wolf Vostell.

=== Land art and performance ===

In the late 1960s, diverse land art artists such as Robert Smithson or Dennis Oppenheim created environmental pieces that preceded performance art in the 1970s. Works by conceptual artists from the early 1980s, such as Sol LeWitt, who made mural drawing into a performance act, were influenced by Yves Klein and other land art artists. Land art is a contemporary art movement in which the landscape and the artwork are deeply bound. It uses nature as a material (wood, soil, rocks, sand, wind, fire, water, etc.) to intervene on itself. The artwork is generated with the place itself as a starting point. The result is sometimes a junction between sculpture and architecture, and sometimes a junction between sculpture and landscaping that is increasingly taking a more determinant role in contemporary public spaces. When incorporating the artist&#x27;s body in the creative process, it acquires similarities with the beginnings of performance art.

==1960s==
In the 1960s, with the purpose of evolving the generalized idea of art and with similar principles of those originary from Cabaret Voltaire or Futurism, a variety of new works, concepts and a growing number of artists led to new kinds of performance art. Movements clearly differentiated from Viennese Actionism, avant garde performance art in New York City, process art, the evolution of The Living Theatre or happening, but most of all the consolidation of the pioneers of performance art.

=== Viennese actionism ===

The term Viennese Actionism (&quot;Wiener Aktionismus&quot;) comprehends a brief and controversial art movement of the 20th century, which is remembered for the violence, grotesque and visual of their artworks. It is located in the Austrian vanguard of the 1960s, and it had the goal of bringing art to the ground of performance art, and is linked to Fluxus and Body Art. Amongst their main exponents are Günter Brus, Otto Muehl and Hermann Nitsch, who developed most of their actionist activities between 1960 and 1971. Hermann, pioneer of performance art, presented in 1962 his &quot;Theatre of Orgies and Mysteries&quot; (Orgien und Mysterien Theater). Marina Abramović participated as a performer in one of his performances in 1975.

=== New York and avant-garde performance ===

In the early 1960s, New York City harbored many movements, events and interests regarding performance art. Amongst others, Andy Warhol began creating films and videos, and mid decade he sponsored The Velvet Underground and staged events and performative actions in New York, such as the Exploding Plastic Inevitable (1966), that included live rock music, explosive lights and films.

=== The Living Theatre ===

Indirectly influential for art-world performance, particularly in the United States, were new forms of theatre, embodied by the San Francisco Mime Troupe and the Living Theatre and showcased in Off-Off Broadway theaters in SoHO and at La MaMa in New York City. The Living Theatre is a theater company created in 1947 in New York. It is the oldest experimental theatre in the United States. Throughout its history it has been led by its founders: actress Judith Malina, who had studied theatre with Erwin Piscator, with whom she studied Bertolt Brecht&#x27;s and Meyerhold&#x27;s theory; and painter and poet Julian Beck. After Beck&#x27;s death in 1985, the company member Hanon Reznikov became co-director along with Malina. Because it is one of the oldest random theatre or live theatre groups nowadays, it is looked upon by the rest. They understood theatre as a way of life, and the actors lived in a community under libertary principles. It was a theatre campaign dedicated to transformation of the power organization of an authoritarian society and hierarchical structure. The Living Theatre chiefly toured in Europe between 1963 and 1968, and in the U.S. in 1968. A work of this period, &quot;Paradise Now&quot;, was notorious for its audience participation and a scene in which actors recited a list of social taboos that included nudity, while disrobing.

===Fluxus===

Fluxus, a Latin word that means &quot;flow&quot;, is a visual arts movement related to music, literature, and dance. Its most active moment was in the 1960s and 1970s. They proclaimed themselves against the traditional artistic object as a commodity and declared themselves a sociological art movement. Fluxus was informally organized in 1962 by George Maciunas (1931–1978). This movement had representation in Europe, the United States and Japan. The Fluxus movement, mostly developed in North America and Europe under the stimulus of John Cage, did not see the avant-garde as a linguistic renovation, but it sought to make a different use of the main art channels that separate themselves from specific language; it tries to be interdisciplinary and to adopt mediums and materials from different fields. Language is not the goal, but the mean for a renovation of art, seen as a global art. As well as Dada, Fluxus escaped any attempt for a definition or categorization. As one of the movement&#x27;s founders, Dick Higgins, stated:

Fluxus started with the work, and then came together, applying the name Fluxus to work which already existed. It was as if it started in the middle of the situation, rather than at the beginning.

Robert Filliou places Fluxus opposite to conceptual art for its direct, immediate and urgent reference to everyday life, and turns around Duchamp&#x27;s proposal, who starting from Ready-made, introduced the daily into art, whereas Fluxus dissolved art into the daily, many times with small actions or performances.

John Cage was an American composer, music theorist, artist, and philosopher. A pioneer of indeterminacy in music, electroacoustic music, and non-standard use of musical instruments, Cage was one of the leading figures of the post-war avant-garde. Critics have lauded him as one of the most influential composers of the 20th century. He was also instrumental in the development of modern dance, mostly through his association with choreographer Merce Cunningham, who was also Cage&#x27;s romantic partner for most of their lives.

Cage&#x27;s friend Sari Dienes can be seen as an important link between the Abstract Expressionists, Neo-Dada artists like Robert Rauschenberg and Ray Johnson, and Fluxus. Dienes inspired all these artists to blur the lines between life, Zen, performative art-making techniques and &quot;events,&quot; in both pre-meditated and spontaneous ways.

=== Process art ===

Process art is an artistic movement where the end product of &quot;art&quot; and &quot;craft&quot;, the &quot;objet d’art&quot; (work of art/found object), is not the principal focus; the process of its making is one of the most relevant aspects if not the most important one: the gathering, sorting, collating, associating, patterning, and moreover the initiation of actions and proceedings. Process artists saw art as pure human expression. Process art defends the idea that the process of creating the work of art can be an art piece itself. Artist Robert Morris predicated &quot;anti-form&quot;, &quot;process&quot; and &quot;time &quot; over an objectual finished product.

=== Happening ===

Wardrip-Fruin and Montfort in &quot;The New Media Reader&quot;, &quot;The term &#x27;Happening&#x27; has been used to describe many performances and events, organized by Allan Kaprow and others during the 1950s and 1960s, including a number of theatrical productions that were traditionally scripted and invited only limited audience interaction.&quot; A &quot;happening&quot; allows the artist to experiment with the movement of the body, recorded sounds, written and talked texts, and even smells. One of Kaprow&#x27;s first works was &quot;Happenings in the New York Scene&quot;, written in 1961. Allan Kaprow&#x27;s happenings turned the public into interpreters. Often the spectators became an active part of the act without realizing it. Other actors who created &quot;happenings&quot; were Jim Dine, Al Hansen, Claes Oldenburg, &quot;Robert Whitman&quot; and Wolf Vostell: &quot;Theater is in the Street&quot; (Paris, 1958).

=== Main artists ===
The works by performance artists after 1968 showed many times influences from the political and cultural situation that year. Barbara T. Smith with &quot;Ritual Meal&quot; (1969) was at the vanguard of body and scenic feminist art in the seventies, which included, amongst others, Carolee Schneemann and Joan Jonas. These, along with Yoko Ono, Joseph Beuys, Nam June Paik, Wolf Vostell, Allan Kaprow, Vito Acconci, Chris Burden and Dennis Oppenheim were pioneers in the relationship between body art and performance art, as well as the Zaj collective in Spain with Esther Ferrer and Juan Hidalgo.

Barbara Smith is an artist and United States activist. She is one of the main African-American exponents of feminism and LGBT activism in the United States. In the beginning of the 1970s she worked as a teacher, writer and defender of the black feminism current. She has taught at numerous colleges and universities in the last five years. Smith&#x27;s essays, reviews, articles, short stories and literary criticism have appeared in a range of publications, including &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;The Village Voice&quot; and &quot;The Nation&quot;.

Carolee Schneemann was an American visual experimental artist, known for her multi-media works on the body, narrative, sexuality and gender. She created pieces such as &quot;Meat Joy&quot; (1964) and &quot;Interior Scroll&quot; (1975). Schneemann considered her body a surface for work. She described herself as a &quot;painter who has left the canvas to activate the real space and the lived time.&quot;

Joan Jonas (born July 13, 1936) is an American visual artist and a pioneer of video and performance art, who is one of the most important female artists to emerge in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Jonas&#x27; projects and experiments provided the foundation on which much video performance art would be based. Her influences also extended to conceptual art, theatre, performance art and other visual media. She lives and works in New York and Nova Scotia, Canada. Immersed in New York&#x27;s downtown art scene of the 1960s, Jonas studied with the choreographer Trisha Brown for two years.
Jonas also worked with choreographers Yvonne Rainer and Steve Paxton.

Yoko Ono was part of the avant-garde movement of the 1960s. She was part of the Fluxus movement. She is known for her performance art pieces in the late 1960s, works such as &quot;Cut Piece&quot;, where visitors could intervene in her body until she was left naked. One of her best known pieces is &quot;Wall piece for orchestra&quot; (1962).

Joseph Beuys was a German Fluxus, happening, performance artist, painter, sculptor, medallist and installation artist. In 1962 his actions alongside the Fluxus neodadaist movement started, group in which he ended up becoming the most important member. His most relevant achievement was his socialization of art, making it more accessible for every kind of public. In &quot;How to Explain Pictures to a Dead Hare&quot; (1965) he covered his face with honey and gold leaf and explained his work to a dead hare that lay in his arms. In this work he linked spacial and sculptural, linguistic and sonorous factors to the artist&#x27;s figure, to his bodily gesture, to the conscience of a communicator whose receptor is an animal. Beuys acted as a shaman with healing and saving powers toward the society that he considered dead. In 1974 he carried out the performance &quot;I Like America and America Likes Me&quot; where Beuys, a coyote and materials such as paper, felt and thatch constituted the vehicle for its creation. He lived with the coyote for three days. He piled United States newspapers, a symbol of capitalism. With time, the tolerance between Beuys and the coyote grew and he ended up hugging the animal. Beuys repeats many elements used in other works. Objects that differ form Duchamp&#x27;s ready-mades, not for their poor and ephemerality, but because they are part of Beuys&#x27;s own life, who placed them after living with them and leaving his mark on them. Many have an autobiographical meaning, like the honey or the grease used by the tartars who saved in World War Two. In 1970 he made his &quot;Felt Suit&quot;. Also in 1970, Beuys taught sculpture in the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf. In 1979, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum of New York City exhibited a retrospective of his work from the 1940s to 1970.

Nam June Paik was a South Korean performance artist, composer and video artist from the second half of the 20th century. He studied music and art history in the University of Tokyo. Later, in 1956, he traveled to Germany, where he studied Music Theory in Munich, then continued in Cologne in the Freiburg conservatory. While studying in Germany, Paik met the composers Karlheinz Stockhausen and John Cage and the conceptual artists Sharon Grace as well as George Maciunas, Joseph Beuys and Wolf Vostell and was from 1962 on, a member of the experimental art movement Fluxus. Nam June Paik then began participating in the Neo-Dada art movement, known as Fluxus, which was inspired by the composer John Cage and his use of everyday sounds and noises in his music. He was mates with Yoko Ono as a member of Fluxus.

Wolf Vostell was a German artist, one of the most representative of the second half of the 20th century, who worked with various mediums and techniques such as painting, sculpture, installation, decollage, video art, happening and fluxus.

Vito Acconci was an influential American performance, video and installation artist, whose diverse practice eventually included sculpture, architectural design, and landscape design. His foundational performance and video art was characterized by &quot;existential unease,&quot; exhibitionism, discomfort, transgression and provocation, as well as wit and audacity, and often involved crossing boundaries such as public–private, consensual–nonconsensual, and real world–art world. His work is considered to have influenced artists including Laurie Anderson, Karen Finley, Bruce Nauman, and Tracey Emin, among others. Acconci was initially interested in radical poetry, but by the late 1960s, he began creating Situationist-influenced performances in the street or for small audiences that explored the body and public space. Two of his most famous pieces were &quot;Following Piece&quot; (1969), in which he selected random passersby on New York City streets and followed them for as long as he was able, and &quot;Seedbed&quot; (1972), in which he claimed that he masturbated while under a temporary floor at the Sonnabend Gallery, as visitors walked above and heard him speaking.

Chris Burden was an American artist working in performance, sculpture and installation art. Burden became known in the 1970s for his performance art works, including &quot;Shoot&quot; (1971), in which he arranged for a friend to shoot him in the arm with a small-caliber rifle. A prolific artist, Burden created many well-known installations, public artworks and sculptures before his death in 2015. Burden began to work in performance art in the early 1970s. He made a series of controversial performances in which the idea of personal danger as artistic expression was central. His first significant performance work, &quot;Five Day Locker Piece&quot; (1971), was created for his master&#x27;s thesis at the University of California, Irvine, and involved his being locked in a locker for five days.

Dennis Oppenheim was an American conceptual artist, performance artist, earth artist, sculptor and photographer. Dennis Oppenheim&#x27;s early artistic practice is an epistemological questioning about the nature of art, the making of art and the definition of art: a meta-art which arose when strategies of the Minimalists were expanded to focus on site and context. As well as an aesthetic agenda, the work progressed from perceptions of the physical properties of the gallery to the social and political context, largely taking the form of permanent public sculpture in the last two decades of a highly prolific career, whose diversity could exasperate his critics.

Yayoi Kusama is a Japanese artist who, throughout her career, has worked with a great variety of media including:sculpture, installation, painting, performance, film, fashion, poetry, fiction, and other arts; the majority of them exhibited her interest in psychedelia, repetition and patterns. Kusama is a pioneer of the pop art, minimalism and feminist art movements and influenced her coetaneous, Andy Warhol and Claes Oldenburg. She has been acknowledged as one of the most important living artists to come out of Japan and a very relevant voice in avant garde art.

== 1970s ==

In the 1970s, artists that had derived to works related to performance art evolved and consolidated themselves as artists with performance art as their main discipline, deriving into installations created through performance, video performance, or collective actions, or in the context of a socio-historical and political context.

=== Video performance ===
In the early 1970s the use of video format by performance artists was consolidated. Some exhibitions by Joan Jonas and Vito Acconci were made entirely of video, activated by previous performative processes. In this decade, various books that talked about the use of the means of communication, video and cinema by performance artists, like &quot;Expanded Cinema&quot;, by Gene Youngblood, were published. One of the main artists who used video and performance, with notorious audiovisual installations, is the South Korean artist Nam June Paik, who in the early 1960s had already been in the Fluxus movement until becoming a media artist and evolving into the audiovisual installations he is known for.

Carolee Schneemann&#x27;s and Robert Whitman&#x27;s 1960s work regarding their video-performances must be taken into consideration as well. Both were pioneers of performance art, turning it into an independent art form in the early seventies.

Joan Jonas started to include video in her experimental performances in 1972, while Bruce Nauman scenified his acts to be directly recorded on video. Nauman is an American multimedia artist, whose sculptures, videos, graphic work and performances have helped diversify and develop culture from the 1960s on. His unsettling artworks emphasized the conceptual nature of art and the creation process. His priority is the idea and the creative process over the result. His art uses an incredible array of materials and especially his own body.

Gilbert and George are Italian artist Gilbert Proesch and English artist George Passmore, who have developed their work inside conceptual art, performance and body art. They were best known for their live-sculpture acts. One of their first makings was &quot;The Singing Sculpture&quot;, where the artists sang and danced &quot;Underneath the Arches&quot;, a song from the 1930s. Since then they have forged a solid reputation as live-sculptures, making themselves works of art, exhibited in front of spectators through diverse time intervals. They usually appear dressed in suits and ties, adopting diverse postures that they maintain without moving, though sometimes they also move and read a text, and occasionally they appear in assemblies or artistic installations. Apart from their sculptures, Gilbert and George have also made pictorial works, collages and photomontages, where they pictured themselves next to diverse objects from their immediate surroundings, with references to urban culture and a strong content; they addressed topics such as sex, race, death and HIV, religion or politics, critiquing many times the British government and the established power. The group&#x27;s most prolific and ambitious work was &quot;Jack Freak Pictures&quot;, where they had a constant presence of the colors red, white and blue in the Union Jack. Gilbert and George have exhibited their work in museums and galleries around the world, like the Stedelijk van Abbemuseum of Eindhoven (1980), the Hayward Gallery in London (1987), and the Tate Modern (2007). They have participated in the Venice Biennale. In 1986 they won the Turner Prize.

=== Endurance art ===

Endurance performance art deepens the themes of trance, pain, solitude, deprivation of freedom, isolation or exhaustion. Some of the works, based on the passing of long periods of time are also known as long-durational performances. One of the pioneering artists was Chris Burden in California since the 1970s. In one of his best known works, &quot;Five days in a locker&quot; (1971) he stayed for five days inside a school locker, in &quot;Shoot&quot; (1971) he was shot with a firearm, and inhabited for twenty two days a bed inside an art gallery in &quot;Bed Piece&quot; (1972). Another example of endurance artist is Tehching Hsieh. During a performance created in 1980–1981 (&quot;Time Clock Piece&quot;), where Hsieh took a photo of himself next to time clock installed in his studio every hour for an entire year. Hsieh is also known for his performances about deprivation of freedom; he spent an entire year confined. In &quot;The House With the Ocean View&quot; (2003), Marina Abramović lived silently for twelve days without food. The Nine Confinements or The Deprivation of Liberty is a conceptual endurance artwork of critical content carried out in the years 2013 and 2016. All of them have in common the illegitimate deprivation of freedom.

=== Performance in a political context ===
In the mid-1970s, behind the Iron Curtain, in major Eastern Europe cities such as Budapest, Kraków, Belgrade, Zagreb, Novi Sad and others, scenic arts of a more experimental content flourished. Against political and social control, different artists who made performance of political content arose. Orshi Drozdik&#x27;s performance series, titled &quot;Individual Mythology&quot; 1975–77 and the &quot;NudeModel&quot; 1976–77. All her actions were critical of the patriarchal discourse in art and the forced emancipation programme and constructed by the equally patriarchal state. Drozdik showed a pioneer and feminist point of view on both, becoming one of the precursors of this type of critical art in Eastern Europe. In the 1970s, performance art, due to its fugacity, had a solid presence in the Eastern European avant-garde, specially in Poland and Yugoslavia, where dozens of artists who explored the body conceptually and critically emerged.

=== The Other ===
In the mid-1976s, Ulay and Marina Abramović founded the collective The Other in the city of Amsterdam. When Abramović and Ulay started their collaboration. The main concepts they explored were the ego and artistic identity. This was the start of a decade of collaborative work. Both artists were interested in the tradition of their cultural heritage and the individual&#x27;s desire for rituals. In consecuense, they formed a collective named &quot;The Other&quot;. They dressed and behaved as one, and created a relation of absolute confidence. They created a series of works in which their bodies created additional spaces for the audience&#x27;s interaction. In &quot;Relation in Space&quot; they ran around the room, two bodies like two planets, meshing masculine and feminine energies into a third component they called &quot;that self&quot;. &quot;Relation in Movement&quot; (1976) had the couple driving their car inside the museum, doing 365 spins. A black liquid dripped out of the car, forming a sculpture, and each round represented a year. After this, they created &quot;Breathing In/Breathing Out&quot;, where both of them united their lips and inspired the air expired by the other one until they used up all oxygen. Exactly 17 minutes after the start of the performance, both of them fell unconscious, due to their lungs filling with carbon dioxide. This piece explored the idea of the ability of a person to absorb the life out of another one, changing them and destroying them. In 1988, after some years of a tense relationship, Abramović and Ulay decided to make a spiritual travel that would put an end to the collective. They walked along the Great Wall of China, starting on opposite ends and finding each other halfway. Abramović conceived this walk on a dream, and it gave her what she saw as an appropriate and romantic ending to the relationship full of mysticism, energy and attraction. Ulay started on the Gobi dessert and Abramovic in the Yellow sea. Each one of them walked 2500 kilometres, found each other in the middle and said goodbye.

=== Main artists ===
In 1973, Laurie Anderson interpreted &quot;Duets on Ice&quot; in the streets of New York. Marina Abramović, in the performance &quot;Rhythm 10&quot;, included conceptually the violation of a body. Thirty years later, the topic of rape, shame and sex exploitation would be reimagined in the works of contemporary artists such as &quot;Clifford Owens&quot;, &quot;Gillian Walsh&quot;, &quot;Pat Oleszko&quot; and &quot;Rebecca Patek,&quot; amongst others. New artists with radical acts consolidated themselves as the main precursors of performance, like Chris Burden, with the 1971 work &quot;Shoot&quot;, where an assistant shot him in the arm from a five-meter distance, and Vito Acconci the same year with &quot;Seedbed&quot;. The work &quot;Eye Body&quot; (1963) by Carolee Schneemann en 1963, had already been considered a prototype of performance art. In 1975, Schneemann recurred to innovative solo acts such as &quot;Interior Scroll&quot;, that showed the feminine body as an artistic media.

One of the main artists was Gina Pane, French artist of Italian origins. She studied at the École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts in París from 1960 until 1965 and was a member of the performance art movement in the 1970 in France, called &quot;Art Corporel&quot;. Parallel to her art, Pane taught in the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Mans from 1975 until 1990 and directed an &quot;atelier&quot; dedicated to performance art in the Pompidou Centre from 1978 to 1979. One of her best known works is &quot;The Conditioning &quot; (1973), in which she was lied into a metal bed spring over an area of lit candles. &quot;The Conditioning &quot; was created as an homage to Marina Abramović, part of her &quot;Seven Easy Pieces&quot;(2005) in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City in 2005. Great part of her works are protagonized by self-inflicted pain, separating her from most of other woman artists in the 1970s. Through the violence of cutting her skin with razors or extinguishing fires with her bare hands and feet, Pane has the intention of inciting a &quot;real experience&quot; in the visitor, who would feel moved for its discomfort. The impactful nature of these first performance art pieces or actions, as she preferred to call them, many times eclipsed her prolific photographic and sculptural work. Nonetheless, the body was the main concern in Panes&#x27;s work, either literally or conceptually.

== 1980s ==
=== The technique of performance art ===
Until the 1980s, performance art has demystified virtuosism, this being one of its key characteristics. Nonetheless, from the 1980s on it started to adopt some technical brilliancy. In reference to the work &quot;Presence and Resistance&quot; by Philip Auslander, the dance critic Sally Banes writes, &quot;... by the end of the 1980s, performance art had become so widely known that it no longer needed to be defined; mass culture, especially television, had come to supply both structure and subject matter for much performance art; and several performance artists, including Laurie Anderson, Spalding Gray, Eric Bogosian, Willem Dafoe, and Ann Magnuson, had indeed become crossover artists in mainstream entertainment.&quot; In this decade the parameters and technicalities built to purify and perfect performance art were defined.


=== Critique and investigation of performance art ===
Despite the fact that many performances are held within the circle of a small art-world group, Roselee Goldberg notes in &quot;Performance Art: From Futurism to the Present&quot; that &quot;performance has been a way of appealing directly to a large public, as well as shocking audiences into reassessing their own notions of art and its relation to culture. Conversely, public interest in the medium, especially in the 1980s, stems from an apparent desire of that public to gain access to the art world, to be a spectator of its ritual and its distinct community, and to be surprised by the unexpected, always unorthodox presentations that the artists devise.&quot; In this decade, publications and compilations about performance art and its best known artists emerged.

=== Performance art from a political context ===
In the 1980s, the political context played an important role in the artistic development and especially in performance, as almost every one of the works created with a critical and political discourse were in this discipline. Until the decline of the European Eastern bloc during the late 1980s, performance art had actively been rejected by most communist governments. With the exception of Poland and Yugoslavia, performance art was more or less banned in countries where any independent public event was feared. In the GDR, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Latvia it happened in apartments, at seemingly spontaneous gatherings in artist studios, in church-controlled settings, or was covered as another activity, like a photo-shoot. Isolated from the western conceptual context, in different settings it could be like a playful protest or a bitter comment, using subversive metaphors to express dissent with the political situation. Amongst the most remarkable performance art works of political content in this time were those of Tehching Hsieh between July 1983 and July 1984, &quot;Art/Life: One Year Performance&quot; (Rope Piece).

=== Performance poetry ===
In 1982 the terms &quot;poetry&quot; and &quot;performance&quot; were first used together. Performance poetry appeared to distinguish text-based vocal performances from performance art, especially the work of escenic and musical performance artists, such as Laurie Anderson, who worked with music at that time. Performance poets relied more on the rhetorical and philosophical expression in their poetics than performance artists, who arose from the visual art genres of painting and sculpture. Many artists since John Cage fuse performance with a poetical base.

=== Feminist performance art ===


Since 1973 the Feminist Studio Workshop in the Woman&#x27;s Building of Los Ángeles had an impact in the wave of feminist acts, but until 1980 they did not completely fuse. The conjunction between feminism and performance art progressed through the last decade. In the first two decades of performance art development, works that had not been conceived as feminist are seen as such now.

Still, not until 1980 did artists self-define themselves as feminists. Artist groups in which women influenced by the 1968 student movement as well as the feminist movement stood out. This connection has been treated in contemporary art history research. Some of the women whose innovative input in representations and shows was the most relevant were Pina Bausch and the Guerrilla Girls who emerged in 1985 in New York City, anonymous feminist and anti-racist art collective. They chose that name because they used guerrilla tactics in their activism to denounce discrimination against women in art through political and performance art. Their first performance was placing posters and making public appearances in museums and galleries in New York, to critique the fact that some groups of people were discriminated against for their gender or race. All of this was done anonymously; in all of these appearances they covered their faces with gorilla masks (this was due to the similar pronunciation of the words &quot;gorilla&quot; and &quot;guerrilla&quot;). They used as nicknames the names of female artists who had died. From the 1970s until the 1980s, amongst the works that challenged the system and their usual strategies of representation, the main ones feature women&#x27;s bodies, such as Ana Mendieta&#x27;s works in New York City where her body is outraged and abused, or the artistic representations by Louise Bourgeois with a rather minimalist discourse that emerge in the late seventies and eighties. Special mention to the works created with feminine and feminist corporeity such as Lynda Benglis and her phallic performative actions, who reconstructed the feminine image to turn it into more than a fetish. Through feminist performance art the body becomes a space for developing these new discourses and meanings. Artist Eleanor Antin, creator in the 1970s and 1980s, worked on the topics of gender, race and class. Cindy Sherman, in her first works in the seventies and already in her artistic maturity in the eighties, continues her critical line of overturning the imposed self, through her use of the body as an object of privilege.

Cindy Sherman is an American photographer and artist. She is one of the most representative post-war artists and exhibited more than the work of three decades of her work in the MoMA. Even though she appears in most of her performative photographies, she does not consider them self-portraits. Sherman uses herself as a vehicle to represent a great array of topics of the contemporary world, such as the part women play in our society and the way they are represented in the media as well as the nature of art creation. In 2020 she was awarded with the &quot;Wolf prize in arts&quot;.

Judy Chicago is an artist and pioneer of feminist art and performance art in the United States. Chicago is known for her big collaborative art installation pieces on images of birth and creation, that examine women&#x27;s part in history and culture. In the 1970s, Chicago has founded the first feminist art programme in the United States. Chicago&#x27;s work incorporates a variety of artistic skills such as sewing, in contrast with skills that required a lot of workforce, like welding and pyrotechnics. Chicago&#x27;s best known work is &quot;The Dinner Party&quot;, that was permanently installed in the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art in the Brooklyn Museum. &quot;The Dinner Party&quot; celebrated the achievements of women throughout history and is widely considered as the first epic feminist artwork. Other remarkable projects include &quot;International Honor Quilt&quot;, &quot;The Birth Project,&quot; &quot;Powerplay,&quot; and &quot;The Holocaust Project.&quot;

=== Expansion to Latin America ===
In this decade performance art spread until reaching Latin America through the workshops and programmes that universities and academic institutions offered. It mainly developed in Mexico, Colombia -with artists such as &quot;Maria Teresa Hincapié&quot;—, in Brasil and in Argentina.

Ana Mendieta was a conceptual and performance artist born in Cuba and raised in the United States. She&#x27;s mostly known for her artworks and performance art pieces in land art. Mendieta&#x27;s work was known mostly in the feminist art critic environment. Years after her death, specially since the Whitney Museum of American Art retrospective in 2004 and the retrospective in the Haywart Gallery in London in 2013 she is considered a pioneer of performance art and other practices related to body art and land art, sculpture and photography. She described her own work as &quot;earth-body art&quot;.

Tania Bruguera is a Cuban artist specialized in performance art and political art. Her work mainly consists of her interpretation of political and social topics.
She has developed concepts such as &quot;conduct art&quot; to define her artistic practices with a focus on the limits of language and the body confronted to the reaction and behavior of the spectators. She also came up with &quot;useful art&quot;, that it ought to transform certain political and legal aspects of society. Brugera&#x27;s work revolves around power and control topics, and a great portion of her work questions the current state of her home country, Cuba. In 2002 she created the Cátedra Arte de Conducta in La Habana.

Regina José Galindo is a Guatemalan artist specialized in performance art. Her work is characterized by its explicit political and critical content, using her own body as a tool of confrontation and social transformation. Her artistic career has been marked by the Guatemalan Civil War that took place from 1960 to 1996, which triggered a genocide of more than 200 thousand people, many of them indigenous, farmers, women and children. With her work, Galindo denounces violence, sexism (one of her the main topics is femicide), the western beauty standards, the repression of the estates and the abuse of power, especially in the context of her country, even though her language transgresses borders. Since her beginnings she only used her body as media, which she occasionally takes to extreme situations (like in &quot;Himenoplasty&quot; (2004) where she goes through a hymen reconstruction, a work that won the Golden Lyon in the Venice Biennale), to later have volunteers or hired people to interact with her, so that she loses control over the action.

== 1990s ==


The 1990s was a period of absence for classic European performance, so performance artists kept a low profile. Nevertheless, Eastern Europe experienced a peak. On the other hand, Latin American performance continued to boom, as well as feminist performance art. There also was a peak of this discipline in Asian countries, whose motivation emerged from the Butō dance in the 1950s, but in this period they professionalized and new Chinese artists arose, earning great recognition. There was also a general professionalization in the increase of exhibitions dedicated to performance art, at the opening of the Venice Art Biennial to performance art, where various artists of this discipline have won the Leone d&#x27;Oro, including Anne Imhof, Regina José Galindo or Santiago Sierra.

=== Performance with political context ===
While the Soviet Bloc dissolved, some forbidden performance art pieces began to spread. Young artists from the former Eastern Bloc, including Russia, devoted themselves to performance art. Scenic arts emerged around the same time in Cuba, the Caribbean and China. &quot;In these contexts, performance art became a new critical voice with a social strength similar to that of Western Europe, the United States and South America in the sixties and early seventies. It must be emphasized that the rise of performance art in the 1990s in Eastern Europe, China, South Africa, Cuba and other places must not be considered secondary or an imitation of the West&quot;.

=== Professionalization of performance art ===
In the Western World, in the 1990s, performance art joined the mainstream culture. Diverse performance artworks, live, photographed or through documentation started to become part of galleries and museums that began to understand performance art as an art discipline. Nevertheless, it was not until the next decade that a major institutionalization happened, when every museum started to incorporate performance art pieces into their collections and dedicating great exhibitions and retrospectives, museums such as the Tate Modern in London, the MoMA in New York City or the Pompidou Centre in Paris. From the 1990s on, many more performance artists were invited to important biennials like the Venice Biennale, the Sao Paulo Biennial and the Lyon Biennial.

=== Performance in China ===
In the late 1990s, Chinese contemporary art and performance art received great recognition internationally, as 19 Chinese artists were invited to the Venice Biennial. Performance art in China and its history had been growing since the 1970s due to the interest between art, process and tradition in Chinese culture, but it gained recognition from the 1990s on. In China, performance art is part of the fine arts education programme, and is becoming more and more popular. In the early 1990s, Chinese performance art was already acclaimed in the international art scene.

==Since the 2000s==
=== New-media performance ===
In the late 1990s and into the 2000s, a number of artists incorporated technologies such as the World Wide Web, digital video, webcams, and streaming media, into performance artworks. Artists such as Coco Fusco, Shu Lea Cheang, and Prema Murthy produced performance art that drew attention to the role of gender, race, colonialism, and the body in relation to the Internet. Other artists, such as Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Disturbance Theater, and Yes Men, used digital technologies associated with hacktivism and interventionism to raise political issues concerning new forms of capitalism and consumerism.

In the second half of the decade, computer-aided forms of performance art began to take place. Many of these works led to the development of algorithmic art, generative art, and robotic art, in which the computer itself, or a computer-controlled robot, becomes the performer.

Coco Fusco is an interdisciplinary Cuban-American artist, writer and curator who lives and works in the United States. Her artistic career began in 1988. In her work, she explores topics such as identity, race, power and gender through performance. She also makes videos, interactive installations and critical writing.

=== Radical performance ===


During the 2000s and 2010s, artists such as Pussy Riot, Tania Bruguera, and Petr Pavlensky have been judged for diverse artistic actions.

On February 21, 2012, as a part of their protest against the re-election of Vladímir Putin, various women of the artistic collective Pussy Riot entered the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour of Moscow of the Russian Orthodox Church. They made the sign of the cross, bowed before the shrine, and started to interpret a performance compound by a song and a dance under the motto &quot;Virgin Mary, put Putin Away&quot;. On March 3, they were detained. On March 3, 2012, Maria Alyokhina and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, Pussy Riot members, were arrested by the Russian authorities and accused of vandalism. At first, they both denied being members of the group and started a hunger strike for being incarcerated and taken apart from their children until the trials began in April. On March 16 another woman, Yekaterina Samutsévitch, who had been previously interrogated as a witness, was arrested and accused as well. On July 5, formal charges against the group and a 2800-page accusation were filed. That same day they were notified that they had until July 9 to prepare their defense. In reply, they announced a hunger strike, pleading that two days was an inappropriate time frame to prepare their defense. On July 21, the court extended their preventive prison to last six more months. The three detained members were recognized as political prisoners by the Union of Solidarity with Political Prisoners. Amnesty International considers them to be prisoners of conscience for &quot;the severity of the response of the Russian authorities&quot;.

Since 2012, artist Abel Azcona has been prosecuted for some of his works. The demand that gained the most repercussion was the one carried out by the Archbishopric of Pamplona and Tudela, in representation of the Catholic Church. The Church demanded Azcona for desecration and blasphemy crimes, hate crime and attack against the religious freedom and feelings for his work &quot;Amen or The Pederasty&quot;. In 2016, Azcona was denounced for extolling terrorism for his exhibition &quot;Natura Morta&quot;, in which the artist recreated situations of violence, historical memory, terrorism or war conflicts through performance and hyperrealistic sculptures and installations.

In December 2014 Tania Bruguera was detained in La Habana to prevent her from carrying out new reivindicative works. Her performance art pieces have earned her harsh critiques, and she has been accused of promoting resistance and public disturbances. In December 2015 and January 2016, Bruguera was detained for organizing a public performance in the plaza de la Revolución of La Habana. She was detained along with other Cuban artists, activists and reporters who took part in the campaign &quot;Yo También Exijo&quot;, which was created after the declarations of Raúl Castro and Barack Obama in favor of restoring their diplomatic relationship. During the performance &quot;El Susurro de Tatlin #6&quot; she set microphones and talkers in the Plaza de la Revolución so the Cubans could express their feelings regarding the new political climate. The event had great repercussion in international media, including a presentation of &quot;El Susurro de Tatlin #6&quot; in Times Square, and an action in which various artists and intellectuals expressed themselves in favour of the liberation of Bruguera by sending an open letter to Raúl Castro signed by thousands of people around the world asking for the return of her passport and claiming criminal injustice, as she only gave a microphone to the people so they could give their opinion.

In November 2015 and October 2017 Petr Pavlensky was arrested for carrying out a radical performance art piece in which he set on fire the entry of the Lubyanka Building, headquarters of the Federal Security Service of Russia, and a branch office of the Bank of France. On both occasions he sprayed the main entrance with gasoline; in the second performance he sprayed the inside as well, and ignited it with a lighter. The doors of the building were partially burnt. Both times Pavlenski was arrested without resistance and accused of debauchery. A few hours after the actions, several political and artistic reivindicative videos appeared on the internet.

=== Institutionalization of performance art / performance collecting processes ===
Since the 2000s, big museums, institutions and collections have supported performance art. Since January 2003, Tate Modern in London has had a curated programme of live art and performance. With exhibitions by artists such as Tania Bruguera or Anne Imhof. In 2012 The Tanks at Tate Modern were opened: the first dedicated spaces for performance, film and installation in a major modern and contemporary art museum.

The Museum of Modern Art held a major retrospective and performance recreation of Marina Abramović&#x27;s work, the biggest exhibition of performance art in MoMA&#x27;s history, from March 14 to 31, 2010. The exhibition consisted of more than twenty pieces by the artist, most of them from the years 1960–1980. Many of them were re-activated by other young artists of multiple nationalities selected for the show. In parallel to the exhibition, Abramovic performed &quot;The Artist is Present&quot;, a 726-hour and 30-minute static, silent piece, in which she sat immobile in the museum&#x27;s atrium, while spectators were invited to take turns sitting opposite her. The work is an updated reproduction of one of the pieces from 1970, shown in the exhibition, where Abramovic stayed for full days next to Ulay, who was her sentimental companion. The performance attracted celebrities such as Björk, Orlando Bloom and James Franco who participated and received media coverage.

Against the background of the institutionalisation of performance, the Bruxelles-based initiative A Performance Affair and the London-based format Performance Exchange inquire about the collectability of performance works. With The Non-fungible Body?, the Austrian museum and culture centre OÖLKG/OK reflects upon recent developments in institutionalizing performance through a discursive festival format that was presented for the first time in June 2022.

=== Collective revindication performance art ===

In 2014 the performance art piece &quot;Carry That Weight&quot; is created, also known as &quot;the mattress performance&quot;. The artist behind this piece is Emma Sulkowicz who, during her end of degree thesis in visual arts in the Columbia University in the city of New York City. In September 2014, Sulkowicz&#x27;s piece began, as she started carrying her own mattress around the Columbia University campus. This work was created by the artist with the goal of denouncing her rape in that same mattress years before, in her own dormitory, which she reported and was not heard by the university or the justice, so she decided to carry the mattress with her for the entire semester, without leaving it at any moment, until her graduation ceremony in May 2015. The piece generated great controversy, but was supported by a bunch of her companions and activists who joined Sulkowicz multiple times when carrying the mattress, making the work an international revindication. Art critic Jerry Saltz considered the artwork to be one of the most important of the year 2014. 

In 2019 the collective performance art piece &quot;A Rapist in Your Path&quot; was created by a feminist group from Valparaíso, Chile named Lastesis, which consisted of a demonstration against the women&#x27;s rights violations in the context of the 2019–2020 Chilean protests. It was first performed in front of the Second Police Station of the Carabineros de Chile in Valparaíso on November 18, 2019. A second performance done by 2000 Chilean women on November 25, 2019, as a part of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, was filmed and became viral on social media. Its reach became global after feminist movements in dozens of countries adopted and translated the performance for their own protests and demands for the cessation and punishment of femicide and sexual violence, amongst others.

==See also==

* ART/MEDIA
* Classificatory disputes about art
* COUM Transmissions
* Danger music
* Digital Live Art
* Flash mob
* Graphic arts
* Guerrilla theatre
* List of performance artists
* Living statue
* New media art
* Noise music
* Poetry slam
* Radio drama
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Bäckström, Per. &quot;Performing the Poem: The Cross-Aesthetic Art of the Nordic Neo-Avant-Garde&quot;, &quot;The Angel of History. Literature, History and Culture&quot;. Vesa Haapala, Hannamari Helander, Anna Hollsten, Pirjo Lyytikäinen &amp; Rita Paqvalen (eds.), Helsinki: The Department of Finnish Language and Literature, University of Helsinki, 2009.
* Bäckström, Per. “Kisses Sweeter than Wine: Öyvind Fahlström and Billy Klüver: The Swedish Neo-Avant-Garde in New York”, &quot;Artl@s Bulletin&quot;, vol. 6, 2017: 2 &quot;Migrations, Transfers, and Resemantization&quot;.
* Bäckström, Per. “The Intermedial Cluster.Åke Hodell&#x27;s Lågsniff”, &quot;Acta Universitatis Sapientiae&quot;, Series Film &amp; Media Studies, de Gruyter, no. 10 2015.
* Bäckström, Per. ”’The Trumpet in the Bottom’. Öyvind Fahlström and the Uncanny”, &quot;Edda&quot; 2017: 2.
*Beisswanger, Lisa: &quot;Performance on Display. Zur Geschichte lebendiger Kunst im Museum.&quot; Deutscher Kunstverlag, Berlin 2021. (in German)
* &quot;Beuys Brock Vostell. Aktion Demonstration Partizipation 1949–1983&quot;. ZKM – Zentrum für Kunst und Medientechnologie, Hatje Cantz, Karlsruhe, 2014, .
* Battcock, Gregory; Nickas, Robert (1984). &quot;The Art of Performance: A Critical Anthology&quot;. New York, E.P. Dutton. 
* Carlson, Marvin (1996). &quot;Performance: A Critical Introduction&quot;. London and New York: Routledge. , 
* Carr, C. (1993). &quot;On Edge: Performance at the End of the Twentieth Century&quot;. Wesleyan University Press. , 
* Dempsey, Amy, &quot;Art in the Modern Era: A Guide to Styles, Schools, &amp; Movements&quot;, Publisher: Harry N. Abrams, (basic definition and basic overview provided).
* Dreher, Thomas: &quot;Performance Art nach 1945. Aktionstheater und Intermedia.&quot; München: Wilhelm Fink 2001. (in German)
* Fischer-Lichte, Erika: &quot;Ästhetik des Performativen&quot;. Frankfurt: edition suhrkamp 2004. (in German)
* 
* Goldberg, Roselee (1998) &quot;Performance: Live Art Since 1960&quot;. Harry N. Abrams, NY NY. 
* Goldberg, Roselee (2001). &quot;Performance Art: From Futurism to the Present&quot; (World of Art). Thames &amp; Hudson
* Goldberg, Roselee (2018) Performance Now: Live Art for the 21st Century, London: Thames &amp; Hudson, .
* Gómez-Peña, Guillermo (2005). &quot;Ethno-techno: Writings on performance, activism and pedagogy&quot;. Routledge, London. 
* Jones, Amelia and Heathfield, Adrian (eds.) (2012), &quot;Perform, Repeat, Record. Live Art in History&quot;. Intellect, Bristol. 
*Phelan, Peggy: &quot;Unmarked. The Politics of Performance.&quot; Routledge, London 1993. 
* Rockwell, John (2004). &quot;Preserve Performance Art?&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;, April 30.
* Schimmel, Paul (ed.) (1998). &quot;Out of Actions: Between Performance and the Object, 1949–1979&quot;. Thames and Hudson, Los Angeles. Library of the Congress NX456.5.P38 S35 1998
* Smith, Roberta (2005). &quot;Performance Art Gets Its Biennial&quot;. &quot;New York Times&quot;, November 2.
* Best, Susan, &quot;The Serial Spaces of Ana Mendieta&quot; Art History, April 2007 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8365.2007.00532.x
* Best, Susan, &quot;Ana Mendieta: Affect Miniatiarizatin, Emotional Ties and the Silueta Series,&quot; Visualizing Feeling: Affect and the Feminine Avant-Garde (London: I B Tauris, 2011) 92–115 
* Del Valle, Alejandro. &quot;Ana Mendieta: Performance in the way of the primitive&quot;. &quot;Arte, Individuo y Sociedad&quot;, 26 (1) 508–523
* &quot;Ana Mendieta: Earth Body, Sculpture and Performance 1972–1985.&quot; Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. Traditional Fine Arts Organization, Inc.
* Ana Mendieta: New Museum archive

==External links==

* Live Art Archives at the University of Bristol Theatre Collection
* Thomas Dreher: Intermedia Art: Performance Art (most articles in German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="0" end="15" title="Performance art" label="Performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="253" end="261" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="314" end="329" title="Performance art" label="artistic action"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="376" end="381" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="482" end="497" title="avant-garde art" label="avant-garde art"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="1175" end="1186" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351727" start="1285" end="1299" title="John Perreault" label="John Perreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766337" start="1308" end="1324" title="Marjorie Strider" label="Marjorie Strider"/>
<link wikidata="Q299662" start="1410" end="1428" title="Carolee Schneemann" label="Carolee Schneemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="1430" end="1446" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q463639" start="1448" end="1460" title="Ana Mendieta" label="Ana Mendieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q720832" start="1462" end="1474" title="Chris Burden" label="Chris Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q651376" start="1476" end="1490" title="Hermann Nitsch" label="Hermann Nitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="1492" end="1504" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="1506" end="1519" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q554030" start="1521" end="1535" title="Tehching Hsieh" label="Tehching Hsieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="1537" end="1547" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="1552" end="1564" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="1611" end="1625" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907909" start="1627" end="1638" title="Abel Azcona" label="Abel Azcona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769472" start="1640" end="1659" title="Regina José Galindo" label="Regina José Galindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774151" start="1661" end="1674" title="Marta Minujín" label="Marta Minujín"/>
<link wikidata="Q38394658" start="1676" end="1693" title="Melati Suryodarmo" label="Melati Suryodarmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144057" start="1698" end="1712" title="Petr Pavlensky" label="Petr Pavlensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="1752" end="1761" title="happening" label="happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="1799" end="1805" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q695830" start="1816" end="1834" title="Viennese Actionism" label="Viennese Actionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q678649" start="1836" end="1844" title="body art" label="body art"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="1849" end="1863" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="2594" end="2607" title="postmodernist" label="postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187166" start="2739" end="2753" title="Antonin Artaud" label="Antonin Artaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="2755" end="2759" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="2765" end="2777" title="Situationist" label="Situationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="2780" end="2786" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="2788" end="2804" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="2810" end="2824" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q487994" start="2869" end="2879" title="antithesis" label="antithesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="4010" end="4025" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647183" start="4815" end="4845" title="Survival Research Laboratories" label="Survival Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490813" start="4881" end="4892" title="Shaun Caton" label="Shaun Caton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="4963" end="4969" title="circus (performing art)" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="5060" end="5069" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="5088" end="5096" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q695830" start="5122" end="5141" title="Viennese Actionism" label="Viennese Actionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q935292" start="5146" end="5154" title="neo-Dada" label="neo-Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937287" start="5281" end="5297" title="art intervention" label="art intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q678649" start="5401" end="5409" title="body art" label="body art"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="5431" end="5440" title="happening" label="happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228787" start="5442" end="5455" title="action poetry" label="action poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q358151" start="5461" end="5471" title="intermedia" label="intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="5696" end="5709" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="5734" end="5738" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="5856" end="5870" title="Constructivism (art)" label="constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="5872" end="5880" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q617166" start="6052" end="6068" title="Russian futurism" label="Russian futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q661745" start="6176" end="6192" title="Cabaret Voltaire (Zürich)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="6208" end="6214" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q70989" start="6242" end="6251" title="Hugo Ball" label="Hugo Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q76815" start="6256" end="6269" title="Emmy Hennings" label="Emmy Hennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q76853" start="6941" end="6960" title="Richard Huelsenbeck" label="Richard Huelsenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q366217" start="6962" end="6974" title="Marcel Janco" label="Marcel Janco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="6976" end="6989" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q254395" start="6991" end="7009" title="Sophie Taeuber-Arp" label="Sophie Taeuber-Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153739" start="7014" end="7022" title="Jean Arp" label="Jean Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="8130" end="8138" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="8155" end="8166" title="avant garde" label="avant garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q273338" start="8706" end="8730" title="Valentine de Saint-Point" label="Valentine de Saint-Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="9006" end="9013" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q880447" start="9197" end="9219" title="Black Mountain College" label="Black Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q959768" start="10030" end="10046" title="Harold Rosenberg" label="Harold Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37571" start="10142" end="10157" title="Jackson Pollock" label="Jackson Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="10248" end="10258" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q132305" start="10372" end="10389" title="Willem de Kooning" label="Willem de Kooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q374492" start="10394" end="10405" title="Franz Kline" label="Franz Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q276308" start="10481" end="10497" title="Nouveau réalisme" label="Nouveau réalisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460571" start="10640" end="10654" title="Pierre Restany" label="Pierre Restany"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="10667" end="10677" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460571" start="10866" end="10880" title="Pierre Restany" label="Pierre Restany"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="10931" end="10942" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073932" start="11104" end="11146" title="Zone de Sensibilité Picturale Immatérielle" label="Zone de Sensibilité Picturale Immatérielle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028956" start="11689" end="11694" title="Gutai" label="Gutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="11719" end="11728" title="happening" label="happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="11766" end="11772" title="Kansai" label="Kansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="11774" end="11779" title="Kioto" label="Kyōto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="11781" end="11786" title="Osaka" label="Ōsaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="11788" end="11792" title="Kōbe" label="Kōbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303860" start="11822" end="11836" title="Jirō Yoshihara" label="Jirō Yoshihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="12183" end="12195" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="12200" end="12212" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q326478" start="12276" end="12284" title="land art" label="land art"/>
<link wikidata="Q328341" start="12301" end="12316" title="Robert Smithson" label="Robert Smithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q439856" start="12320" end="12336" title="Dennis Oppenheim" label="Dennis Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q168587" start="12468" end="12478" title="Sol LeWitt" label="Sol LeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="12546" end="12556" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="12599" end="12615" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q661745" start="13333" end="13349" title="Cabaret Voltaire (Zürich)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="13353" end="13361" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q695830" start="13503" end="13521" title="Viennese Actionism" label="Viennese Actionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="13523" end="13534" title="avant garde" label="avant garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q545851" start="13569" end="13580" title="process art" label="process art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202416" start="13599" end="13617" title="The Living Theatre" label="The Living Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="13621" end="13630" title="happening" label="happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q695830" start="13740" end="13758" title="Viennese Actionism" label="Viennese Actionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q677218" start="14136" end="14147" title="Günter Brus" label="Günter Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78663" start="14149" end="14159" title="Otto Muehl" label="Otto Muehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q651376" start="14164" end="14178" title="Hermann Nitsch" label="Hermann Nitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="14387" end="14403" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="14638" end="14649" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="14711" end="14733" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384522" start="14802" end="14830" title="Exploding Plastic Inevitable" label="Exploding Plastic Inevitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096995" start="15274" end="15294" title="experimental theatre" label="experimental theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213844" start="15381" end="15394" title="Judith Malina" label="Judith Malina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978" start="15425" end="15439" title="Erwin Piscator" label="Erwin Piscator"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="15463" end="15477" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q165721" start="15489" end="15498" title="Meyerhold" label="Meyerhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332885" start="15535" end="15546" title="Julian Beck" label="Julian Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="16306" end="16312" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q455931" start="16652" end="16667" title="George Maciunas" label="George Maciunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="16842" end="16851" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="17209" end="17213" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="17318" end="17330" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q469833" start="17538" end="17552" title="Robert Filliou" label="Robert Filliou"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="17719" end="17729" title="Found object" label="Ready-made"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="17855" end="17864" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="17891" end="17905" title="Music theory" label="music theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993367" start="17945" end="17967" title="Indeterminacy (music)" label="indeterminacy in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326777" start="17969" end="17990" title="electroacoustic music" label="electroacoustic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q946962" start="17996" end="18035" title="Extended technique" label="non-standard use of musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="18089" end="18100" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q850130" start="18235" end="18247" title="modern dance" label="modern dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q318364" start="18299" end="18315" title="Merce Cunningham" label="Merce Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012873" start="18404" end="18415" title="Sari Dienes" label="Sari Dienes"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="18461" end="18484" title="Abstract Expressionists" label="Abstract Expressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="18490" end="18494" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="18508" end="18527" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q178040" start="18532" end="18543" title="Ray Johnson" label="Ray Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q545851" start="18753" end="18764" title="Process art" label="Process art"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="18771" end="18788" title="artistic movement" label="artistic movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18863" end="18874" title=":wikt:objet d’art" label="objet d’art"/>
<link wikidata="Q838948" start="18882" end="18893" title="work of art" label="work of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="18894" end="18906" title="found object" label="found object"/>
<link wikidata="Q465168" start="19305" end="19318" title="Robert Morris (artist)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045465" start="19451" end="19464" title="Noah Wardrip-Fruin" label="Wardrip-Fruin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027563" start="19469" end="19477" title="Nick Montfort" label="Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q531234" start="20248" end="20256" title="Jim Dine" label="Jim Dine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636085" start="20258" end="20267" title="Al Hansen" label="Al Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156731" start="20269" end="20284" title="Claes Oldenburg" label="Claes Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="20317" end="20329" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634688" start="20531" end="20547" title="Barbara Smith" label="Barbara T. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q299662" start="20686" end="20704" title="Carolee Schneemann" label="Carolee Schneemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="20709" end="20719" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="20739" end="20747" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="20749" end="20761" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="20763" end="20776" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="20778" end="20790" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q366380" start="20792" end="20804" title="Allan Kaprow" label="Allan Kaprow"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="20806" end="20818" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q720832" start="20820" end="20832" title="Chris Burden" label="Chris Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q439856" start="20837" end="20853" title="Dennis Oppenheim" label="Dennis Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9097429" start="20941" end="20944" title="Zaj" label="Zaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058973" start="20970" end="20983" title="Esther Ferrer" label="Esther Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299988" start="20988" end="21000" title="Juan Hidalgo Codorniu" label="Juan Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634688" start="21003" end="21016" title="Barbara Smith" label="Barbara Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="21111" end="21119" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="21124" end="21128" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="21401" end="21419" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21478" end="21496" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="21510" end="21522" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="21536" end="21553" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="21570" end="21580" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q299662" start="21589" end="21607" title="Carolee Schneemann" label="Carolee Schneemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="21624" end="21650" title="visual artist" label="visual experimental artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="21708" end="21717" title="human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="21722" end="21728" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="21995" end="22005" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="22073" end="22078" title="video art" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="22338" end="22352" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q460833" start="22558" end="22570" title="Trisha Brown" label="Trisha Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="22657" end="22665" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="23001" end="23013" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="23035" end="23044" title="happening" label="happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708232" start="23085" end="23094" title="medallist" label="medallist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="23099" end="23118" title="installation artist" label="installation artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655307" start="23871" end="23906" title="I Like America and America Likes Me" label="I Like America and America Likes Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="24719" end="24747" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="24828" end="24841" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="25197" end="25218" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="25223" end="25232" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="25241" end="25255" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490076" start="25260" end="25272" title="Sharon Grace" label="Sharon Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q455931" start="25284" end="25299" title="George Maciunas" label="George Maciunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="25301" end="25313" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="25318" end="25330" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="25395" end="25401" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q935292" start="25449" end="25457" title="Neo-Dada" label="Neo-Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="25481" end="25487" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="25524" end="25533" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="25608" end="25616" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="25632" end="25638" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="25641" end="25653" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="25822" end="25834" title="installation art" label="installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270454" start="25836" end="25845" title="decollage" label="decollage"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="25847" end="25856" title="video art" label="video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="25858" end="25867" title="happening" label="happening"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="25872" end="25878" title="fluxus" label="fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="25881" end="25893" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="25945" end="25961" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q235066" start="26422" end="26437" title="Laurie Anderson" label="Laurie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369637" start="26439" end="26451" title="Karen Finley" label="Karen Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="26453" end="26465" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q241185" start="26471" end="26482" title="Tracey Emin" label="Tracey Emin"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="26591" end="26603" title="Situationist" label="Situationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445655" start="26896" end="26903" title="Seedbed (performance piece)" label="Seedbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q531499" start="26995" end="27012" title="Sonnabend Gallery" label="Sonnabend Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q720832" start="27064" end="27076" title="Chris Burden" label="Chris Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="27111" end="27122" title="Performance Art" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="27138" end="27154" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495443" start="27236" end="27241" title="Shoot (Burden)" label="Shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q97495702" start="27690" end="27711" title="Five Day Locker Piece" label="Five Day Locker Piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q439856" start="27866" end="27882" title="Dennis Oppenheim" label="Dennis Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="27899" end="27913" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q326478" start="27938" end="27950" title="Land art" label="earth artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q231121" start="28535" end="28547" title="Yayoi Kusama" label="Yayoi Kusama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="28934" end="28945" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q156731" start="28950" end="28965" title="Claes Oldenburg" label="Claes Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="29580" end="29590" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="29595" end="29607" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="30006" end="30019" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q299662" start="30180" end="30198" title="Carolee Schneemann" label="Carolee Schneemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q453808" start="30424" end="30434" title="Joan Jonas" label="Joan Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="30508" end="30520" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q684974" start="30965" end="30983" title="Gilbert and George" label="Gilbert and George"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="32438" end="32447" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="32502" end="32513" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q720832" start="32895" end="32907" title="Chris Burden" label="Chris Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="33608" end="33624" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q93001610" start="33670" end="33721" title="The Nine Confinements or The Deprivation of Liberty" label="The Nine Confinements or The Deprivation of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="34010" end="34018" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="34020" end="34026" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="34038" end="34044" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="34046" end="34054" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104136" start="34227" end="34240" title="Orshi Drozdik" label="Orshi Drozdik"/>
<link wikidata="Q69562" start="34915" end="34919" title="Ulay" label="Ulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="34924" end="34940" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="34989" end="34998" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q235066" start="36998" end="37013" title="Laurie Anderson" label="Laurie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="37079" end="37095" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q720832" start="37541" end="37553" title="Chris Burden" label="Chris Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q433471" start="37664" end="37676" title="Vito Acconci" label="Vito Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q267845" start="38016" end="38025" title="Gina Pane" label="Gina Pane"/>
<link wikidata="Q273593" start="38080" end="38121" title="École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts" label="École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="38656" end="38672" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="38729" end="38757" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368234" start="40447" end="40463" title="Roselee Goldberg" label="Roselee Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q554030" start="42202" end="42216" title="Tehching Hsieh" label="Tehching Hsieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168247" start="42426" end="42444" title="Performance poetry" label="Performance poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="42849" end="42858" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q155538" start="43674" end="43685" title="Pina Bausch" label="Pina Bausch"/>
<link wikidata="Q515658" start="43694" end="43709" title="Guerrilla Girls" label="Guerrilla Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q463639" start="44623" end="44635" title="Ana Mendieta" label="Ana Mendieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159409" start="44740" end="44756" title="Louise Bourgeois" label="Louise Bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q538986" start="44923" end="44936" title="Lynda Benglis" label="Lynda Benglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325708" start="45163" end="45176" title="Eleanor Antin" label="Eleanor Antin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229455" start="45258" end="45271" title="Cindy Sherman" label="Cindy Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q229455" start="45480" end="45493" title="Cindy Sherman" label="Cindy Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="45658" end="45662" title="MoMA" label="MoMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q441440" start="46066" end="46078" title="Judy Chicago" label="Judy Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915473" start="46613" end="46629" title="The Dinner Party" label="The Dinner Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="46727" end="46742" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q463639" start="47376" end="47388" title="Ana Mendieta" label="Ana Mendieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="47980" end="47994" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769472" start="48679" end="48698" title="Regina José Galindo" label="Regina José Galindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="49612" end="49627" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018001" start="50108" end="50112" title="Butō" label="Butō"/>
<link wikidata="Q23059531" start="50482" end="50492" title="Anne Imhof" label="Anne Imhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769472" start="50494" end="50513" title="Regina José Galindo" label="Regina José Galindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350715" start="50517" end="50532" title="Santiago Sierra" label="Santiago Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="50588" end="50599" title="Soviet Bloc" label="Soviet Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="51806" end="51817" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="51833" end="51837" title="MoMA" label="MoMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="51862" end="51877" title="Pompidou Centre" label="Pompidou Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="51982" end="51997" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q653360" start="52003" end="52021" title="Sao Paulo Biennial" label="Sao Paulo Biennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="52030" end="52034" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139737" start="52896" end="52906" title="Coco Fusco" label="Coco Fusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482619" start="52908" end="52922" title="Shu Lea Cheang" label="Shu Lea Cheang"/>
<link wikidata="Q66685249" start="52928" end="52940" title="Prema Murthy" label="Prema Murthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140521" start="53093" end="53114" title="Critical Art Ensemble" label="Critical Art Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249660" start="53116" end="53146" title="Electronic Disturbance Theater" label="Electronic Disturbance Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547127" start="53152" end="53159" title="Yes Men" label="Yes Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q22685" start="53203" end="53213" title="hacktivism" label="hacktivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="53218" end="53233" title="Interventionist art" label="interventionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835759" start="53454" end="53469" title="algorithmic art" label="algorithmic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502032" start="53471" end="53485" title="generative art" label="generative art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864727" start="53491" end="53502" title="robotic art" label="robotic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139737" start="53590" end="53600" title="Coco Fusco" label="Coco Fusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551" start="53985" end="53995" title="Pussy Riot" label="Pussy Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="53997" end="54011" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144057" start="54017" end="54031" title="Petr Pavlensky" label="Petr Pavlensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="54156" end="54170" title="Vladímir Putin" label="Vladímir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194474" start="54236" end="54267" title="Cathedral of Christ the Saviour" label="Cathedral of Christ the Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="54285" end="54308" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760992" start="54545" end="54560" title="Maria Alyokhina" label="Maria Alyokhina"/>
<link wikidata="Q288956" start="54565" end="54587" title="Nadezhda Tolokonnikova" label="Nadezhda Tolokonnikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="55478" end="55499" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907909" start="55638" end="55649" title="Abel Azcona" label="Abel Azcona"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="55769" end="55782" title="Archbishopric" label="Archbishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="55786" end="55794" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="55799" end="55805" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55832" end="55847" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q85865019" start="55998" end="56019" title="Amen or The Pederasty" label="Amen or The Pederasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="56313" end="56327" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="56344" end="56353" title="La Habana" label="La Habana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144057" start="57672" end="57686" title="Petr Pavlensky" label="Petr Pavlensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="58491" end="58502" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="58606" end="58620" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q23059531" start="58624" end="58634" title="Anne Imhof" label="Anne Imhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="58657" end="58668" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="58800" end="58820" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496" start="58878" end="58894" title="Marina Abramović" label="Marina Abramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="59689" end="59694" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q44467" start="59696" end="59709" title="Orlando Bloom" label="Orlando Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="59714" end="59726" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q51322722" start="60322" end="60339" title="Mattress Performance (Carry That Weight)" label="Carry That Weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389633" start="60442" end="60456" title="Emma Sulkowicz" label="Emma Sulkowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="60516" end="60535" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="60667" end="60686" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q76885421" start="61406" end="61427" title="A Rapist in Your Path" label="A Rapist in Your Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="61471" end="61481" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q78314857" start="61495" end="61503" title="Lastesis" label="Lastesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q71500435" start="61605" end="61631" title="2019–2020 Chilean protests" label="2019–2020 Chilean protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317752" start="61701" end="61721" title="Carabineros de Chile" label="Carabineros de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="61725" end="61735" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q470642" start="61845" end="61908" title="International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women" label="International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975379" start="62200" end="62209" title="ART/MEDIA" label="ART/MEDIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976552" start="62212" end="62245" title="Classificatory disputes about art" label="Classificatory disputes about art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137000" start="62248" end="62266" title="COUM Transmissions" label="COUM Transmissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216036" start="62269" end="62281" title="Danger music" label="Danger music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275912" start="62284" end="62300" title="Digital Live Art" label="Digital Live Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q152263" start="62303" end="62312" title="Flash mob" label="Flash mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q911059" start="62315" end="62327" title="Graphic arts" label="Graphic arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615049" start="62330" end="62347" title="Guerrilla theatre" label="Guerrilla theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633299" start="62350" end="62377" title="List of performance artists" label="List of performance artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q932003" start="62380" end="62393" title="Living statue" label="Living statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q378604" start="62396" end="62409" title="New media art" label="New media art"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="62412" end="62423" title="Noise music" label="Noise music"/>
<link wikidata="Q20852" start="62426" end="62437" title="Poetry slam" label="Poetry slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="62440" end="62451" title="Radio drama" label="Radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375058" start="62486" end="62500" title="Per Bäckström" label="Bäckström, Per"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375058" start="62845" end="62859" title="Per Bäckström" label="Bäckström, Per"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375058" start="63068" end="63082" title="Per Bäckström" label="Bäckström, Per"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375058" start="63241" end="63255" title="Per Bäckström" label="Bäckström, Per"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459524" start="63623" end="63634" title="Hatje Cantz Verlag" label="Hatje Cantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368234" start="64427" end="64444" title="Roselee Goldberg" label="Goldberg, Roselee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685095" start="64897" end="64915" title="Adrian Heathfield" label="Heathfield, Adrian"/>
</links>
</doc>
