<doc id="152687" wikidata="Q313211" url="?curid=152687" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont">
<text>Alberto Santos-Dumont (self-stylised as Alberto Santos=Dumont; 20 July 1873 – 23 July 1932) was a Brazilian aeronaut, sportsman, inventor, and one of the few people to have contributed significantly to the early development of both lighter-than-air and heavier-than-air aircraft. The heir of a wealthy family of coffee producers, he dedicated himself to aeronautical study and experimentation in Paris, where he spent most of his adult life. He designed, built, and flew the first powered airships and won the in 1901, when he flew around the Eiffel Tower in his airship No. 6, becoming one of the most famous people in the world in the early 20th century.

Santos-Dumont then progressed to powered heavier-than-air machines and on 23 October 1906 flew about 60 metres at a height of two to three metres with the fixed-wing &quot;14-bis&quot; (also dubbed the —&quot;bird of prey&quot;) at the Bagatelle Gamefield in Paris, taking off unassisted by an external launch system. On 12 November in front of a crowd, he flew 220 metres at a height of six metres. These were the first heavier-than-air flights certified by the Aeroclub of France, the first such flights officially witnessed by an aeronautics recordkeeping body, and the first of their kind recognised by the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale.

Santos-Dumont is a national hero in Brazil, where it is popularly held that he preceded the Wright brothers in demonstrating a practical aeroplane. Numerous roads, plazas, schools, monuments, and airports there are dedicated to him, and his name is inscribed on the Tancredo Neves Pantheon of the Fatherland and Freedom.
He was a member of the Brazilian Academy of Letters from 1931 until his suicide in 1932.

==Childhood==

Alberto Santos-Dumont was the sixth child of Henrique Dumont, an engineer who graduated from the Central School of Arts and Manufactures in Paris, and Francisca de Paula Santos. The couple had eight children, three sons and five daughters: Henrique dos Santos-Dumont, Maria Rosalina Dumont Vilares, Virgínia Dumont Vilares, , Gabriela, Alberto Santos-Dumont, Sofia, and Francisca. In 1873, the family moved to the small town of Cabangu, in the municipality of João Aires, for Henrique Dumont to work on the construction of the D. Pedro II railroad. The construction work finished when Alberto was 6, and the family moved to São Paulo. Here he began to show signs of his aeronautical interest; according to his parents, at the age of one he used to puncture rubber balloons to see what was inside. He was baptised in Valença at the on 20 February 1877, by Teodoro Teotônio da Silva Carolina.



In 1879, the Dumonts sold their farm in Valença, Rio de Janeiro, and settled in Sítio do Cascavel, in Ribeirão Preto, where they bought the Arindeúva Farm, of José Bento Junqueira, producing 1200 bushels. Until he was 10, he was taught by his older sister, Virginia. From 10 to 12 years old he studied at Colégio Culto à Ciência. He then attended Colégio Kopke in São Paulo, Colégio Morton, and Colégio Menezes Vieira in Rio de Janeiro, and later at the School of Engineering from Minas, without finishing the course. He was not considered an outstanding student, studying only what interested him, and extending his studies independently in his father&#x27;s library. By this time he already displayed the refined manners that would later become part of his image in France, and an introverted personality. He saw his first human flight in São Paulo at the age of 15, in 1888, when the aeronaut Stanley Spencer ascended in a spherical balloon and parachuted down. After a family trip to Paris in 1891, he became interested in mechanics, especially the internal combustion engine. From then on, he never stopped searching for alternatives, receiving from the City Council of Ribeirão Preto, according to Law no. 100, of 4 November 1903, a million réis subsidy to continue his researches that, three years later, resulted in the creation of his aeroplane. A newspaper of the time stated that Santos-Dumont would only accept if &quot;...that amount was intended for an aircraft contest prize.&quot;

Santos-Dumont would remember with nostalgia the times spent on his father&#x27;s farm, where he enjoyed the greatest freedom:

At the age of seven Santos-Dumont was already driving the farm&#x27;s trains, and at twelve he could operate a locomotive on his own, but the speed achievable on land was not enough for him. By observing coffee machines he deduced that oscillatory machines wore out more, while those with circular motion were more efficient.

By reading the works of Jules Verne, with whose fictional heroes he was later compared and who he would meet in adulthood, Santos-Dumont got the desire to conquer the air. The submarines, balloons, ocean liners, and vehicles that the novelist envisioned in his works made a deep impression on the boy&#x27;s mind. Years later, as an adult, he still remembered the adventures lived in imagination:

Technology fascinated him. He began building kites and small aeroplanes powered by a propeller driven by twisted rubber springs, as he says in a commentary on the letter he received the day he won the Deutsch prize, recalling his childhood: &quot;This letter brings back to me the happiest days of my life, when I exercised myself in making light aeroplanes with bits of straw, moved by screw propellers driven by springs of twisted rubber, or ephemeral silk-paper balloons.&quot; (Santos-Dumont) Every year, on 24 June he would fill whole fleets of tiny silk balloons over the bonfires of St. John, to watch them climbing into the sky.

==Career==

===Mountaineering, motorsports and ballooning===

In 1891, when he was 18, Santos-Dumont visited Europe. In England he spent a few months practising his English, and in France he climbed Mont Blanc. This adventure, at an altitude of almost 5,000 metres, gave him a taste for heights. The following year, his father had a serious accident, and released Alberto from parental care on 12 February 1892, advising him to focus on learning mechanics, chemistry, and electricity. With that, Alberto left the Ouro Preto Mining Engineering School and returned to France where he took part in motor racing and cycling. He also began technical and scientific studies with a professor of Spanish origin named Garcia. In 1894 Santos-Dumont travelled to the United States, visiting New York, Chicago, and Boston. Around this time he went on to study at Merchant Venturers&#x27; Technical College, but never graduated. Agenor Barbosa described Santos-Dumont in this period as a &quot;student of little diligence, or rather, not at all studious for &#x27;theories&#x27;, but of admirable practical and mechanical talent and, since then, revealing himself in everything, of inventive genius&quot;, but who was later described by Agnor as someone focused on aviation from when &quot;...&#x27;explosion engines&#x27; began to succeed.&quot;

In 1897, independent and heir to an immense fortune which he invested in the development of his projects, applied in the stock market, allowing him to work without being accountable to any investor. At 24 years of age, Santos-Dumont left for France, where he hired professional aeronauts to teach him ballooning after reading the book &quot;Andrée – Au Pôle Nord en ballon&quot;. On 23 March 1898, he made his first ascent in a Lachambre &amp; Machuron balloon at a cost of 400 francs, later saying that: &quot;I will never forget the genuine pleasure of my first balloon ascent&quot;. That year, even before he was known as a balloonist, he began to be quoted by the media due to his involvement in motor racing.

On 30 May 1898 he made his first night ascent, and the following month he started working as a captain, taking groups of passengers aloft in a hired balloon. By 1900 he had created nine balloons, of which two became famous: the &quot;Brazil&quot; and the &quot;Amérique&quot;. &quot;Brazil&quot; first flew on 4 July 1898, and was the smallest aircraft built at the time – inflated with hydrogen, it covered 113 metres in a silk envelope of 6 metres in diameter, weighing 27.5 kg without the crewman and made more than 200 flights. According to biographer , he was influenced to create his first balloon after racing at the Paris-Amsterdam race on his tricycle, where he crossed 110 kilometers in two hours, abandoning after an accident. The second balloon, &quot;Amérique&quot;, held 500m³ of hydrogen and was 10 metres in diameter, and was capable of carrying passengers. With the second balloon he faced everything from storms to accidents. In his first experiments he was awarded a prize by the French Aeroclub for his study of atmospheric currents; he reached high altitudes and stayed airborne for more than 22 hours. Santos-Dumont advocated for government investment in aviation development and the importance of public opinion, something previously noted by .

===Airships===

Airships, powered aerostats, were first demonstrated and patented by the Brazilian priest Bartolomeu de Gusmão in 1709, and were flown by the Montgolfier Brothers in 1783, but until the late 19th century had yet to be mastered, having been attempted by Henri Giffard, Charles Renard and Arthur Constantin Krebs in a flight with an electric motor in a closed circuit in a project abandoned by the French Army, and by the Brazilian , without success. Public demonstrations, such as those performed by Santos-Dumont, were important in the sceptical academic environment.

Due to the weight of electric motors, Santos-Dumont chose the internal combustion engine. In initial tests, he hoisted the tricycle he had used in the Paris-Amsterdam race up a tree to check for vibration, which did not occur. He modified the engine by putting the two cylinders on top of each other, creating a lightweight 3.5 horsepower unit, which was the first internal combustion engine successfully used in aeronautics. An article presented in , claims that the aeronautical movement in France was sparked by Santos-Dumont&#x27;s experiments and Santos-Dumont said he believed his experiences led to the founding of the Aéro-Club de France.

A detail raised by Santos-Dumont refers to the definition of what would be heavier than air: in June 1902 he published an article in the &quot;North American Review&quot; arguing that his work on airships was about aviation, because hydrogen gas itself was not capable of taking off, and engine power was also needed. He also wrote: &quot;...the flying-machine will be achieved only by the way of evolution, by making the air-ship pass through a series of transformations analogous to the metamorphoses by which the chrysalis becomes the winged butterfly.&quot;

;No. 1


The first airship designed by Santos-Dumont, the No. 1, was 25 metres long with a volume of 186 cubic metres, made its first takeoff attempt in February 1898, after being inflated in Henri Lachambre&#x27;s workshops in Vaugirard. Snowy conditions caused the airship to flex and crash. &quot;At a height of five or six metres, over Longchamp, the apparatus suddenly bent and the crash began. Of my entire career, this is the most abominable memory I have in store.&quot;

No. 1 was inflated again in the Aclimation Garden in Paris on 18 September 1898, but was damaged before it could fly, due to a misjudgement by the ground crew holding the ropes. Repaired two days later, the aircraft took off and flew. The air pump for the internal balloon, which kept the envelope rigid, did not work properly, and the airship, at a height of 400 metres, began to flex and descend rapidly. In an interview, Santos-Dumont told how he escaped death:

;No. 2
In 1899, Santos-Dumont built a new aircraft, No. 2, with the same length and similar shape, but a larger diameter of 3.8 metres, increasing the volume to 200 cubic metres. To address the unreliability of the air pump which had almost killed him, he added a small aluminium fan to maintain pressure and rigidity.

The first test was scheduled for 11 May 1899. At the time of the flight, rain made the balloon heavy. The demonstration consisted of simple manoeuvres with the aircraft attached by a rope, but ended in the adjacent trees. The airship had folded under the combined action of the contraction of the hydrogen and the force of the wind.

;No. 3
In September 1899 Santos-Dumont started the construction of a new elongated airship, the No. 3, inflated with lighting gas, 20 metres long and 7.5 metres in diameter, with a capacity of 500 cubic metres. The basket was the same one used in the two other aircraft.

At 3:30 pm on 13 November Santos-Dumont took off in No. 3 from Vaugirard Aerostation Park and went around the Eiffel Tower for the first time. From the monument he went to the Parc des Princes then to the Bagatelle Gamefield in the Bois de Boulogne (near the Hippodrome of Longchamp). He landed at the exact spot where No. 1 had crashed, this time under control.

Santos-Dumont had a large hangar built at the Saint-Cloud site, large enough to hold No. 3 when completely filled, as well as the equipment to make the hydrogen gas. This hangar, completed on 15 June 1900, was 30 metres long, 7 metres wide, and 11 metres high. It was no longer intended to house No. 3, which had been abandoned, but No. 4, completed on 1 August 1900. With No. 3 he broke the record of 23 hours in the air. He tried to fly almost every day, demonstrating the reliability and usefulness of his aircraft.

;No. 4
On 24 March 1900, the millionaire oil magnate Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe sent the President of the Aéro-Club de France, which had been founded two years earlier, a letter in which he promised 100,000 francs to anyone who could invent an efficient flying machine:


The challenge became known as the Deutsch Prize. The regulations stipulated that an aircraft must be able to fly to the Eiffel Tower, round the monument, and return to the place of ascent in no more than thirty minutes, without stops, a total of 11 kilometres, under the eyes of a commission from the Aeroclub de France convened at least one day in advance. This required a minimum average speed of 22 km/h.

The award encouraged Alberto Santos-Dumont to try faster flights with No. 4. The aircraft was 420 cubic metres in volume, 29 metres long, and 5.6 metres in diameter. Underneath was a 9.4-metre bamboo keel, in the middle of which were the saddle and pedals of an ordinary bicycle. Astride the saddle, the pilot had under his feet the starting pedals of a 7 hp engine, which powered a front propeller with two 4-metre long silk blades. Next to the pilot were ropes with which he could control the carburettor and valve settings, the rudder, ballast, and displacement weights. Santos-Dumont made almost daily flights in No. 4 from Saint Cloud during August. On 19 September, before members of the International Congress of Aeronauts, he proved the effectiveness of an aerial propeller driven by an oil engine by flying repeatedly against the wind, even with a broken rudder, impressing the scientists present. The general impression was that he would win the Deutsch Prize, and upon going to Nice after falling ill, he began designing No. 5.

;No. 5 and No. 6


No. 5 was built to compete for the Henry Deutsch de la Meurthe award for a flight from the Aero-Club de France airfield in Saint-Cloud to the Eiffel Tower and back in 30 minutes. It used the extended envelope of No. 4, from which a triangular gondola made of pine was suspended. Other innovations included the use of piano wire to suspend the gondola, reducing drag, and the use of water ballast tanks. It was powered by a 12 hp, 4-cylinder air-cooled engine driving a propeller,

On 13 April the Santos-Dumont Prize was created. It was similar to the Deutsch Prize, but had no time limit. On 13 July 1901, After some experimental outings, with No. 5 in the Deutsch Award for the first time. It completed the required course, but exceeded the time limit for the race by ten minutes. At that time, he met Princess Imperial Isabel, after an accident. On 29 July he aborted a flight when he cut his fingers on the guide-rope; around that time French aeronauts started a smear campaign against Santos-Dumont.

On 8 May, trying for the prize again, he crashed his aircraft into the Hotel Trocadero; the balloon exploded and was completely destroyed, but he escaped unscathed and publicly tested the engine to show its reliability. The accident was caused by one of the automatic valves having a weakened spring, which allowed the escape of gas.

After offering his own 21 cubic metre balloon which was under construction – and being politely refused – Henri Deutsch said, &quot;I&#x27;m afraid the experiments will not be conclusive. Mr Santos-Dumont&#x27;s balloon will always be at the mercy of the wind, and is therefore not the kind of aircraft we dream of.&quot; Santos-Dumont crashed his No. 6 at the Longchamps racetrack on 19 September 1901.

On 19 October 1901, with the 622-cubic-metre No. 6 balloon powered by a 20 hp engine, he executed the test in 29 minutes and 30 seconds, but it took about a minute to land, which caused the committee to initially deny the award. This became a , as the public and Deutsch believed that the aviator had won. After some time and the aviator protesting this decision, it was reversed. He became internationally recognised as the world&#x27;s greatest aviator and the inventor of the airship. The prize was then 100,000 francs plus interest, that Santos-Dumont distributed among his staff and the unemployed and workers in Paris who for some reason had &quot;pawned their tools of labor&quot; with help from the City Hall of Paris. A month before the event, by announcing this intention, he had obtained &quot;unrestricted support from public opinion&quot;. The money was released on 4 November after a vote in which nine members of the Aeroclub opposed and fifteen supported. This delay served to put public opinion further in Santos-Dumont&#x27;s favour. The same afternoon, he sent a letter of resignation to the Aeroclub. Mauricio Pazini Brandão, in &quot;The Santos-Dumont legacy to aeronautics&quot;, says that this event should be considered as the certification of the airship.

After winning the Deutsch Prize, Santos-Dumont received letters from several countries, congratulating him; magazines published lavish, richly illustrated editions to reproduce his image and perpetuate the achievement; an Alexander Graham Bell interview in the &quot;New York Herald&quot; explored the reasons for Santos-Dumont&#x27;s success, envy of other inventors, and the experiments that preceded him; tributes were paid in France, Brazil, England, where the English Aero Club offered a banquet, and several other countries. The president of Brazil, Campos Sales sent him prize money of 100 million réis following the proposal of Augusto Severo, as well as a gold medal with his effigy and an allusion to Camões: &quot;Through skies never sailed before&quot;; The Brazilian people were apathetic, and in January 1902, Albert I, Prince of Monaco invited him to continue his experiments in the Principality. He offered him a new hangar on the beach at La Condamine, and everything else Albert thought necessary for his comfort and safety, which was accepted; his success also inspired the creation of several biographies and influenced fictional characters, such as Tom Swift; That April, Santos-Dumont travelled to the United States, where he visited Thomas Edison&#x27;s laboratories in New York. They discussed patents. The American asked Santos-Dumont to create the Aero Club of the US; when justifying not charging for demonstration flights in St Louis, Santos-Dumont said: &quot;I am an amateur&quot;. After the meeting with Edison, Santos-Dumont told the American press that he did not intend to patent his aircraft. He was received at the White House in Washington, DC, by President Theodore Roosevelt and talked to U.S. Navy and Army officials about the possibility of using airships as a defence tool against submarines. In July 1902, after the creation of the Aeroclub of the US, Santos-Dumont announced a series of flights in American territory. These did not take place, confusing the media and American public opinion. He left New York in late 1902, without having made any flights, and the American public did not consider his inventions to be practical.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Santos-Dumont was the only person in the world capable of controlled flight. After his time in the US, he learned of the fatal accident of Augusto Severo and the suicide of his mother; he returned to England, where he had left No. 6 being prepared for an exhibition at the Crystal Palace, as well as planning to fly into London. The fabric of the airship was punctured, as confirmed by the balloonist Stanley Spencer. The initial view was that the balloon had been cut with a knife, with Santos-Dumont stating that &quot;...whole sections were cut and removed&quot; and that he had previously experienced similar.

;Monaco

In Monaco, after accepting Prince Albert&#x27;s invitation, Santos-Dumont guided the construction of a 55 metre long, 10 metre wide and 15 metre high hangar, with doors he designed which weighed 10 tons, on the Boulevard de La Condamine by the sea. On testing the guide wire over the sea, he found that it stabilised the aircraft in low-level flight. Santos-Dumont also demonstrated that overall the aircraft behaved well over water, reaching up to 42 km/h (26 mph). Its success made clear the potential military use of the aircraft, especially for anti-submarine warfare, but its flights in the principality were interrupted by a crash in the Bay of Monaco on 14 February 1902. The crash was due to the balloon being &quot;imperfectly filled when leaving the garage.&quot; After the accident he began to perform a check list before each take-off, but No. 6 was badly damaged.

;Nos. 7, 8, 9 and 10
Santos-Dumont started to dedicate himself to the construction of new airship models, two years after he left Paris, each one with a specific purpose: the No. 7, with 1,257 cubic metres and 45 hp engine, designed to be a racing airship, was tested in Neuilly (France) in May 1904. The following month the aircraft was sabotaged in an exhibition organised in St. Louis, United States, when a person who was never identified made four 1-metre cuts in the balloon which, because it was folded, resulted in forty-eight cuts in the envelope, when it was in New York Customs. On this trip, he also met the Wright brothers. No. 8 was a copy of No. 6 ordered by Edward Boyce, vice president of the Aeroclub of America, having made a single flight in New York; No. 9, with 261 cubic metres and 3 hp, was a travel airship, in which Santos-Dumont made several flights throughout 1903, including the first night flight of an airship on 24 June, and the last of these came on 14 July, when it took part in a military parade in commemoration of the 114th anniversary of the Storming of the Bastille. As he passed the President of the Republic, he fired 21 revolver shots into the air. The military considered the balloon to be a practical instrument for wartime. Santos-Dumont placed himself and his flotilla of three aircraft at the disposal of the government in the event of war, provided it was not against the nations of the Americas and that, &quot;in the impossible event of war between France and Brazil,&quot; he considered himself obliged to support his motherland. The French military encouraged several industries to develop the technology proposed by Santos-Dumont.
The first woman to fly an aircraft was Aida de Acosta, on 29 June 1903, in No. 9. The 11 August 1905 issue of &quot;La Vie au Grand Air&quot; describes the organisation of the second Coupe des Femmes Aéronautes and in the second half of 1906, the magazine &quot;Le Sport Universel Illustré&quot; reported that three years after the start of the Grand Prix of the Aéro-Club de France, seven countries were already participating in the competition.

No. 10, a 2,010 cubic metre airship with a 60 hp engine, was large enough to carry several people and serve as public transport. It made a few flights in October 1903, but was never completely finished; No. 11 was an unmanned monoplane. No. 12 was a helicopter never completed due to the technological limitations of the time and finally, No. 13, a luxurious double hot air and hydrogen balloon.

On his first return to Rio de Janeiro in 1903, a group of climbers put up a banner on Sugarloaf Mountain, beside Guanabara Bay, greeting the aviator on his return by ship from Europe. On 7 September 1903, he returned as a hero and met the President of Brazil, Rodrigues Alves, at the Catete Palace. When asked why he did not fly in Brazil, Santos-Dumont justified himself that it was because he could not &quot;...count on the help of his mechanics, and much less on a hydrogen production plant like he had in France.&quot; He returned to Paris on 12 October. In 1904 he was nominated as a Knight of the Legion of Honour of France, and published the work &quot;Dans L&#x27;Air&quot;, whose translation into Portuguese, &quot;Os Meus Balões&quot; (My Balloons), was published in Brazil in 1938.

===Heavier-than-air flight===

In October 1904, three aviation prizes were founded in France: the , the , and the . The first, promoted by millionaire Ernest Archdeacon, would award 3,500 francs to anyone who flew 25 metres; the second, instituted by the French aeroclub, would award 1,500 francs ($300) to anyone who flew 100 metres; and the third, sponsored by Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe and Ernest Archdeacon, would award 1,500 francs to anyone who flew 1,000 metres.

With the exception of the Deutsch-Archdeacon Award, which prohibited the competing aircraft from using a balloon for launch, the other awards left the question of takeoff open. The flight could take place on flat or uneven terrain, in calm weather or wind – the French Aeroclub&#x27;s Award required the flight to be into the wind – and the use of an engine was not mandatory. This allowed human-powered gliders and ornithopters to compete. It was required for all prizes that the race took place in France and under the supervision of an aeronautical commission convened no later than the evening of the previous day.

Very little of what was required was new. Inventors in other countries had already met or exceeded some of the required goals including 2-axis (pitch and roll) control of gliders. In Germany, Otto Lilienthal had made thousands of glider flights in the early 1890s, often reaching distances far greater than the 25 metres stipulated by the Archdeacon Prize. In the United States, German immigrant Gustave Whitehead had allegedly pioneered powered glide, though claims and eye witness accounts remain controversial. The Wright brothers had simultaneously been making progress in developing surface-control gliders, at first using Lilienthal&#x27;s foil concepts, then relying on their own wind tunnel data, and finally adding yaw control via a rudder, leading to the first 3-axis surface-controlled aeroplane in 1903. However, because their 12 horsepower engine could only provide two-thirds of the thrust required for takeoff on a rail of practical size, their takeoffs were aided by headwinds near Kitty Hawk and a catapult in Ohio, and without any official observers. Lilienthal&#x27;s death due to a stall led the Wright brothers to place the elevator in front, which helped prevent stalls but made stable flight difficult until the Wrights modified the design; the 3-axis surface control (pitch, yaw and roll) pioneered by the Wrights was also adopted by other inventors including Santos-Dumont and remains the standard airplane control configuration.

====Glider and helicopter====
Having already accumulated technical knowledge, mainly concerning engines, in early 1905, Santos-Dumont built a model glider, No. 11, inspired by a self-stabilising prototype made 100 years earlier by English scientist George Cayley, considered to be the first aeroplane in history: the model, 1.5 metres long by 1.2 metres wide, had fixed wings, a cruciform tail and a movable weight to adjust the centre of gravity. Santos-Dumont&#x27;s glider differed from Cayley&#x27;s in size, wing profile, and the fact that it had no movable weight. The project was abandoned due to poor stability. An article by Georges Blanchet published in April 1904 diverges from the description of the No. 11 as a model aeroplane by presenting it as a dirigible balloon capable of carrying five people and a 34-metre-long envelope, being purchased by an American.

The first experiment, conducted on 13 May at the Aeroclub de France, was made by the Dufaux brothers with a prototype helicopter. The model, weighing 17 kilograms and with a 3 hp engine, repeatedly soared to the roof of the air club&#x27;s porch, raising clouds of dust. It had been demonstrated that heavier, larger aircraft could be lifted by their own means. The second experiment was made on 8 June on the Seine: Gabriel Voisin went up in the hydroplane Archdeacon, towed by a speedboat piloted by , La Rapière. The device barely rose out of the water and the project was abandoned due to poor stability. Watching tests like this, Santos-Dumont realised that the Antoinette engine from the tugboat could be used in an aeroplane, giving the concept of the 14-bis.

He began to study the two solutions for heavier-than-air flight. On 3 January 1906, he entered the Deutsch-Archdeacon Prize, and before that he had begun building a helicopter, the No. 12, but gave up on it on 1 June because it was impossible to create a light, powerful engine. Between June 12 and August 25, 1905, he tested the No. 14 airship, which flew in two versions (14-a and 14-b): the first was 41 metres long, 3.4 in diameter and 186 cubic metres, with a 14 hp engine, and the second was 20 metres long, 6 in diameter and with a 16 hp engine.

====Olympic diploma, 1905====
On 13 June 1905, represented by the Italian Count Eugenio Brunetta d&#x27;Usseaux, Baron Pierre de Coubertin awarded Santos-Dumont the Olympic Diploma No. 3 for &quot;...representing the Olympic ideal...&quot; according to Coubertin, who was also received by Theodore Roosevelt, Fridtjof Nansen and William-Hippolyte Grenfell. De Coubertin considered aviation a sport; Santos-Dumont was described as a sportsman in FAI Bulletins and the &quot;Paris Sport&quot; of 15 July 1901 described the Brazilian as &quot;a true sportsman in every sense of the word.&quot; Santos-Dumont was already famous at that time and already a hero in his country. Santos&#x27; diploma was passed to the Brazilian ambassador in Belgium, who then passed it on to the aviator, according to the 21 June 1905 edition of the . Santos-Dumont was not the only one represented by others at the ceremony and only William Grenfell received the diploma personally. The FAI was created on 14 October 1905, along the lines of the International Olympic Committee.

====14-bis====


In 1906 Santos-Dumont built a hybrid machine, the 14-bis or &quot;Oiseau de Proie&quot;, consolidating his studies of what had been done in aviation until then, without having had experience with gliders. By mid-year, within two months of starting, he completed an aeroplane attached to a hydrogen balloon to assist takeoff. On 18 July, after completing the 14-bis, Santos-Dumont signed up for a competition and presented the aircraft for the first time the next day. at Bagatelle, achieving some short hops. Excited, he decided to apply for the Archdeacon and Aeroclub of France awards the following day, his 33rd birthday, but was discouraged by Captain Ferdinand Ferber, another aviation enthusiast. Ferber had attended the demonstrations and did not like the solution presented by Santos-Dumont; he considered the hybrid an impure machine. &quot;Aviation must be solved by aviation!&quot; he declared.

====&quot;Oiseau de Proie I&quot;====
Santos-Dumont decided not to compete for the prizes with the hybrid, but on 20 July signed up for the tests and over the next three days continued to test the plane tethered to the balloon, to practise steering. Throughout the tests he realised that, although the balloon helped take-off, it made flight difficult as the drag generated was too great. The airship was discarded, and the biplane received the name &quot;Oiseau de Proie&quot; (&quot;Bird of Prey&quot;) from the press. The &quot;Oiseau de Proie&quot; had been inspired by the hydroplane tested by Voisin. Like the water glider, the invention also consisted of a cellular biplane based on the structure created in 1893 by Australian researcher Lawrence Hargrave, which offered good support and rigidity. The plane was 4 metres high, 10 metres long, and had a span of 12 metres, with a wing area of 50 square metres. Its mass was 205 kilograms. The wings were attached to a beam, in front of which lay the rudder, consisting of a cell identical to those of the wings. At the rear end was the propeller, powered by a 24 hp Levavasseur engine. The landing gear had two wheels, and the pilot stood upright. The 23 September 1906 issue of &quot;Le Sport Universel Illustré&quot; published the technical details of the 14-bis.

On 29 July, using a donkey and a system of cables, Santos-Dumont hoisted the &quot;Oiseau de Proie&quot; to the top of a tower 13 metres high (2 metres were stuck in the ground), installed a few days earlier on his property in Neuilly. This frame was very similar to the one Ferber had used at Chalais-Meudon for the May 1905 experiments with the 6-bis. The plane, suspended on a movable hook connected to an inclined steel wire, glided without a propeller 60 metres from the top of the tower to a smaller one, only six metres long, on the Boulevard de la Seine. This allowed Santos-Dumont to get a feel for the aeroplane and to study its centre of gravity. In August the 14-bis was unsuccessful in trying to take off because the 24-hp engine was not powerful enough. On 13 September, the 14-bis made a 7 to 13-metre test flight with a 50 hp Antoinette engine, at 8:40 a.m, which ended in an accident that damaged the propeller and landing gear, but that was praised by La Nature magazine. On 30 September he interrupted the tests of the 14-bis to compete in the Gordon Bennett Cup with the &quot;Deux Amériques&quot; balloon. He abandoned it after an accident, having flown 134 kilometres in 6 hours and 20 minutes. The accident occurred while attempting a manoeuvre that caused the engine gear to fracture his arm.

====&quot;Oiseau de Proie II&quot;====
On 23 October, Santos-Dumont presented himself at Bagatelle with the &quot;Oiseau de Proie II&quot;, a modification of the original model. The plane had been varnished to reduce the porosity of the fabric and increase lift. The rear wheel had been removed. In the morning he limited himself to manoeuvring the aircraft across the field, until the propeller shaft broke. It was repaired in the afternoon, and the plane was moved into position for an official attempt. An expectant crowd was present. At 4:45 pm, Santos-Dumont started the engine. The plane lifted off and flew for 60 metres, without taking advantage of headwinds, ramps, catapults, slopes, or other devices. The flight had taken place solely by the aircraft&#x27;s own means, and Europeans at the time believed it was the first such achievement.

The crowd celebrated, ran up to the pilot and carried him off in triumph. The judges had been overcome with emotion and forgot to time and track the flight, and due to this the record was not made official. says that because the Aeroclub Committee was partially present, a new test was scheduled for 12 November.

====&quot;Oiseau de Proie III&quot;====

The aeroplane was still experimental. To compete for the French Aeroclub&#x27;s prize, Santos-Dumont inserted two octagonal surfaces (rudimentary ailerons) between the wings for better steering control and created the &quot;Oiseau de Proie III&quot;. Santos-Dumont was a pioneer in implementing ailerons in his aircraft.

Santos-Dumont competed for the award on 12 November 1906, again in Bagatelle. He did five public flights that day: one at 10 am, of 40 metres; two others at 10:25 am, of 40 and 60 metres, when the axle of the right wheel broke. The damage was repaired during lunch and Santos-Dumont resumed at 4:09 pm. He covered 82.60 metres, surpassing the feat of 23 October and reaching 41.3 km/h. At 4:45 pm, with the day ending, he took off against the wind and flew 220 metres, for 21 seconds at an average speed of 37.4 km/h, winning the French Aeroclub Award. These were the first aeroplane flights recorded by a film company, Pathé. The Wright brothers, after learning of 
the 12 November experiment, sent a letter to Captain Ferdinand Ferber asking for &quot;exact news of the Bagatelle experiments,&quot; including &quot;a faithful report of the trials and a description of the flying machine, accompanied by a schematic.&quot; Santos-Dumont even adopted the configuration proposed by the Wright brothers and placed the rudder at the front of the 14-bis, which he described as &quot;the same as trying to shoot an arrow forward with the tail...&quot;. To test the idea that the rudder at the rear increased the angle of incidence of the wings, Santos-Dumont built a new aircraft, without abandoning the 14-bis, and tested it in March 1907, without taking off as the primitive landing gear did not allow it.

====&quot;Oiseau de Proie IV&quot;====
He returned to the 14-bis having made other changes to the aircraft after 12 November, and on 4 April 1907, at Saint-Cyr, the aircraft flew for 50 metres, oscillated, crashed, and was torn to pieces. The project was abandoned.

====New aeroplanes====


He also made the No. 15, a biplane with a rear-mounted rudder, as opposed to the canard format, the No. 16, a mix of airship and aeroplane, No. 17 and No. 18, a waterslide used to test the wing shape underwater.

Dissatisfied with numbers 15 to 18, he made a new series, smaller in size and more refined, like the Demoiselle, that was capable of reaching up to 90 kilometres per hour. It was first tested in November 1907, returning on an abandoned idea from 1905, but soon realised that it &quot;... had serious structural problems&quot; according to Henrique Lins de Barros. However, on November 17, 1907, he competed for the Deutsch-Archdeacon award, crossing 200 meters at a height of 6 meters, but abandoning before the required 1000 meters due to a breakdown in the aircraft.

In 1909 he presented the Demoiselle No. 20, improved and considered &quot;the first ultralight in history&quot;. This aeroplane was designed for sports competitions and 300 were built in several European countries and in the United States. His schemes were published in the June–July 1910 issues of &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;. This plane consolidated Santos-Dumont&#x27;s role in the birth of aviation in the 20th century. The Demoiselle also featured an engine of original invention by Santos-Dumont and model No. 20, capable of flights of up to 2 kilometres and reaching 96 km/h, Because of the aircraft&#x27;s low cost and high safety, it was used for pilot training during World War I.

The aircraft is on permanent display at the Musée de l&#x27;air et de l&#x27;espace near Paris. In 1908, when the Wright brothers went public, andaccording to Mattosused European technology and his colleagues were already being rewarded, he already seemed to have moved away from the events.

==Last years==

Santos-Dumont began to show symptoms of multiple sclerosis. He aged in appearance and felt too tired to continue competing with new inventors in races. On 22 August 1909 he attended the Great Aviation Week in Reims, where he made his last flights. After an accident with the Demoiselle on 4 January 1910, he closed down his workshop and withdrew from social life. He continued to work on popularising aviation. On 12 November 1910 a monument was unveiled in Bagatelle, and on 4 October 1913, the Icarus monument was unveiled, celebrating his winning the Deutsch Prize, made by sculptor Georges Colin. On the same day he was promoted to Commander of the Legion of Honour and soon after these events he returned to Brazil after a 10-year absence, returning to France the following year. He ordered a new Demoiselle in 1913, but there is no evidence that he ever flew it.

In August 1914, World War I began, and Santos-Dumont offered his services to the French Ministry of War. He went on to enlist as a chauffeur. Aeroplanes began to be used in warfare, first for observation of enemy troops, and then in aerial combat. The combats became more violent, with the use of machine guns and bombs. Santos-Dumont saw his dream turn into a nightmare.

Santos-Dumont now devoted himself to the study of astronomy, residing in Trouville, near the sea. For this he used several observation devices, with which his neighbours thought he was spying for the Germans. He was arrested on this charge. After the incident was cleared up, the French government apologised. This made him feel depressed, considering that he had offered his help to the military, and he destroyed all his aeronautical documents.

In 1915, his health worsened and he decided to return to Brazil. That year, he took part in the 11th Pan-American Scientific Congress in the United States, dealing with the theme of the use of aeroplanes to improve relationships between the countries of the Americas. In his speech he showed concern about the efficiency of the aeroplane as a weapon of war, but advocated the creation of a squadron for coastal defence with the words, &quot;Who knows when a European power will threaten an American state?&quot; Because of its pacifism, this position can be viewed in a surprising way. In the afterword to the historical novel &quot;O Homem com Asas&quot; (&quot;De gevleugelde&quot;), Arthur Japin says that when Santos-Dumont returned to Brazil, he &quot;burned all his diaries, letters and drawings.&quot; In 1916, he was the Honorary President of the 1st Pan-American Aronautics Conference in Chile, which aimed to create an Aeronautical Federation with all the Americas, where, while representing the Aeroclub of America, he advocated the peaceful use of the aeroplane. When he returned to Brazil, passing through Paraná, he suggested the creation of the Iguaçu National Park.}

In the book &quot;O Que Eu Vi, O Que Nós Veremos&quot;, Santos-Dumont transcribed his letters of 1917 to the President of the Republic of Brazil, stressing the need to build military airfields for the Army and the Navy. He also pointed out that Brazil was falling behind Europe, the United States and even Argentina and Chile. The book also argues for the need to train people in aeronautics, and to make the country technologically independent.

In 1918 Santos-Dumont bought a small plot of land on the side of a hill in Petrópolis in the Serra Fluminense mountains, and built a small house there filled with mechanical devices, including an alcohol-heated shower of his own design. The hill was chosen because of its steep slope, as proof that ingenuity could make it possible to build a comfortable home in that unlikely location. After he built it in land given by the government, he spent summers there to escape the heat of Rio de Janeiro, calling it &quot;The Enchanted&quot; because of the Rua do Encanto. The steps of the outside stairs are dug alternately to the right and left, to allow people to climb up comfortably. The house is now a museum. In 1918 he wrote his second work, &quot;O que eu vi, o que nós veremos&quot; in this house. In 1919 he got the United States Minister in Brazil to contact the Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt, as a way to &quot;lobby&quot; for more aeronautical cooperation between Brazil and the US.

In 1920, Santos-Dumont had a tomb erected for his parents and himself in the São João Batista Cemetery in Rio de Janeiro. The tomb is a replica of Saint-Cloud&#x27;s Icarus. Also in 1920, he began an international campaign against the warlike use of aircraft, but without success.

In 1922, he decorated Anésia Pinheiro Machado, who, during the commemorations of the centenary of Brazil&#x27;s independence, made the trip from Rio de Janeiro to São Paulo in an aeroplane. On 14 May he made his last balloon ascent. Also in 1922 he visited friends in France. He spent time in Paris, Petrópolis and Cabangu Farm, in his home town.

On 23 April 1923 he went to Portugal to collect his mother&#x27;s remains. On 7 June he was awarded the Comendador of Military Order of Saint James of the Sword, in Portugal. On 21 August, he started the construction of his parents&#x27; tomb, where a replica of the Icarus of Saint Cloud offered by the French Government was placed, and he carried out the transfer of his parents&#x27; remains on 23 October. Beside his parents&#x27; graves, Santos-Dumont personally dug his own.

On 6 November 1924, he was elected Grand Officer of the Order of Leopold II. On 25 January 1925, Santos tried to improve his health with thermal waters containing radium, but was unsuccessful. In March, in a letter, Santos-Dumont described himself as being &quot;extremely thin, like a skeleton.&quot; In a letter dated 29 April he complained of noises in his ear. In July, he was hospitalised in Switzerland.

In January 1926, he appealed to the League of Nations, through his friend and ambassador , to stop the use of aeroplanes as weapons of war. He offered ten thousand francs to whoever wrote the best piece against the military use of aeroplanes. Santos-Dumont was the first aeronaut to speak out against the warlike use of the aeroplane. In the same year he wrote to Senator refusing a third-party proposal to make him a general.

In May 1927, he was invited by the Aeroclub of France to preside over the banquet in honour of Charles Lindbergh for his crossing of the Atlantic Ocean, but he declined due to his health. He spent some time convalescing in Glion, Switzerland, and then returned to France. Researcher Henrique Lins de Barros describes that &quot;around 1925, he gradually enters a state of almost permanent depression.&quot;

On 3 December 1928 he returned to Brazil on the ship &quot;Capitão Arcona&quot;. The city of Rio de Janeiro received him with honour. A seaplane carrying several professors from the Escola Politécnica, from the Condor Syndikat company, baptised with his name, crashed, with no survivors, while flying over Santos-Dumont&#x27;s ship. After this event, he locked himself in the Copacabana Palace and only came out to attend the funerals. On 10 June 1930, he was decorated by the Aeroclub of France with the title of Grand Officer of the French Legion of Honour. His speech was recorded on a sound film.

==Death==


On 28 October 1930, Santos-Dumont was hospitalised in France, and on 14 April 1931 he wrote his first will. In 1931, he was treated in sanatoriums in Biarritz, and Orthez, in the Pyrénées-Atlantiques, where he attempted suicide by overdosing on medication. , former mayor of Rio de Janeiro (then the capital of Brazil), had been exiled by the 1930 revolution and had gone to France. He found Santos-Dumont in a delicate state of health due to his worsening multiple sclerosis. Juniór contacted Santos-Dumont&#x27;s family and asked the aeronaut&#x27;s nephew Jorge Dumont Vilares to fetch his uncle from France. On 3 June 1931, while returning to Brazil aboard the steamer &quot;Lutetia&quot;, Santos-Dumont tried to kill himself again, but his nephew intervened. He would never return to France. On 4 June 1931, he was elected a member of the Brazilian Academy of Letters, even though he had no desire to be elected. Back in Brazil, they passed through Araxá, in Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and finally settled in Grand Hôtel La Plage, in Guarujá, in May 1932.

In July 1932, the state of São Paulo rose up in the Constitutionalist revolution against the revolutionary government of Getúlio Vargas. On the 14th, Santos-Dumont wrote a letter in favour of &quot;...constitutional order in the country...&quot; to Governor Pedro de Toledo. When talking to professor and friend José de Oliveira Orlandi by phone, Santos-Dumont said: &quot;My God! My God! Is there no way to avoid the bloodshed of brothers? Why did I make this invention which, instead of contributing to the love between men, turns into a cursed weapon of war? I am horrified by these airplanes that are constantly passing over Santos&quot;.

The conflict continued, and aeroplanes attacked the Campo de Marte in São Paulo on 23 July. They may have flown over Guarujá, and the sight of planes in combat may have caused deep anguish in Santos-Dumont who, in his nephew&#x27;s absence, died by suicide at the age of 59. Decree No. 21,668 established three days of mourning. Coroners Roberto Catunda and Angelo Esmolari, who signed his death certificate, recorded the death as a heart attack. The chambermaids who found the body reported that he had hanged himself with his tie. According to Henrique Lins de Barros, for a long time it was forbidden to say that he had killed himself and that the idea that he committed suicide due to the military use of the aeroplane would be a legend of the getulista period, as the government sought to mythologise him; the suicide could weaken this. The real cause may have been depression and bipolar disorder. The order of the governor Pedro de Toledo, following Santos-Dumont&#x27;s death, was: &quot;There will be no investigation, Santos Dumont did not commit suicide&quot;. Journalist publicised the cause of death as suicide in 1944.

Santos-Dumont left no suicide note and had no descendants. His body was buried in São João Batista Cemetery, in Rio de Janeiro, on 21 December 1932, during a storm, under the replica of the Icarus de Saint Cloud he had built, after his remains had remained in the São Paulo capital for five months. Physician Walther Haberfield secretly removed his heart during the embalming process and preserved it in formaldehyde. After keeping this a secret for twelve years, he wanted to return it to the Santos-Dumont family, who refused it. The doctor then donated the heart to the Brazilian government after a request from Panair do Brasil. The heart is on display at the Air Force Museum in Campo dos Afonsos, Rio de Janeiro, inside a sphere carried by Icarus, designed by Paulo da Rocha Gomide.

==Legacy and tributes==



On 25 July 1909, Louis Blériot crossed the English Channel, becoming a hero in France. In a letter, Santos-Dumont congratulated Blériot, his friend, with the following words: &quot;This transformation of geography is a victory of air navigation over sea navigation. One day, perhaps, thanks to you, the airplane will cross the Atlantic&quot;. Blériot then replied, &quot;I have done nothing but follow and imitate you. Your name to the aviators is a flag. You are our leader.&quot; Blériot&#x27;s last project was named &quot;Santos-Dumont&quot;. says that the inventor&#x27;s influence was both in his aeronautical development and in advocating the public and personal use of aeronautics, whether through lighter or heavier-than-air.

During his career, Santos-Dumont&#x27;s image was printed on products, his Panama hat and collar were copied, his balloons were modelled as toys, and confectioners made cakes shaped like airships. The European and American media reappropriated him as a French, presenting him as a &quot;French aeronaut&quot; or emphasizing his French ancestry, while the Brazilian media emphasized his Brazilian roots and nationality.

In 1904, renowned French jeweller Louis Cartier debuted the Santos-Dumont, a watch designed for the aviator himself. It was the first wristwatch the Maison made, and the collection retails to this day. 

The Aéro-Club de France honoured him with two monuments: the first, in 1910, erected on the Bagatelle Gamefield, where he had flown with the &quot;Oiseau de Proie&quot;, and the second, in 1913, in Saint-Cloud, to commemorate the flight of airship No. 6 in 1901. On the unveiling of the Saint-Cloud monument – a statue of Icarus – one of his long-time friends, the cartoonist Georges Goursat (aka &quot;Sem&quot;), wrote the following for the magazine &quot;L&#x27;Illustration&quot;:



On 31 July 1932 state decree No. 10,447 changed the name of the town of Palmira, in Minas Gerais, to Santos-Dumont. Law No. 218, of 4 July 1936, declared 23 October to be &quot;aviator&#x27;s day,&quot; celebrating the historic flight on this date in 1906, &quot;so that this commemoration will always have a worthy civic, sporting, and cultural celebration, especially in schools, emphasizing the initiative of the remarkable Brazilian Santos-Dumont&quot;. On 16 October 1936 Rio de Janeiro&#x27;s first airport was named after him.

Law No. 165, dated 5 December 1947, granted him the honorary rank of lieutenant brigadier. Santos-Dumont&#x27;s birthplace in Cabangu, Minas Gerais, was made into the Cabangu Museum by state decree (MG) No. 5,057, on 18 July 1956. Law No. 3636, of 22 September 1959, made him an honorary air marshal.

In 1976, the International Astronomical Union gave Santos-Dumont&#x27;s name to a lunar crater (27.7°N 4.8°E). He is the only South American to be so honoured. Law 7.243, of 4 November 1984, granted him the title of &quot;Patron of the Brazilian Aeronautics&quot;. On 13 October 1997, the then President of the United States, Bill Clinton, visiting Brazil, gave a speech at the Itamaraty Palace, referring to Santos-Dumont as the &quot;father of aviation&quot;.

On 18 October 2005, the Brazilian Space Agency (AEB) and the Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos) signed an agreement to carry out the Missão Centenário, which took Brazilian astronaut Marcos César Pontes to the International Space Station. The mission is a tribute to the centennial of Santos-Dumont&#x27;s flight on the 14-bis, on 23 October 1906. The Soyuz TMA-8 spacecraft launched on 30 March 2006, from the Baikonur Launch Centre (Kazakhstan). On 26 July 2006 his name was included in the Steel Book of National Heroes in the Panteão da Pátria, in Brasília, granting him the status of National Hero.

==Cultural representations==

In 1902 the poet composed the song &quot;&quot; in honour of Santos-Dumont&#x27;s achievements, described by Thomas Skidmore as &#x27;a conspicuous example of &quot;ufanism&quot; during the [Brazilian] belle époque&#x27;, while for the song was &quot;...an effort to insert Afro-Brazilians into cosmopolitan visions of flight.&quot; In 1924 Tarsila do Amaral painted &quot;Carnaval em Madureira&quot;, onde representava a réplica torre com o dirigível construída em Madureira para o carnaval daquele ano, e a presença de afro-brasileiros durante a festa. During the 2004 carnival, the Unidos da Tijuca remembered the aviator, with several scientists – among them Nobel Prize winner Roald Hoffmann – dressed as Santos Dumont.

In 1956, the Brazilian Post Office released a series of stamps commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the first flight of a heavier-than-air aircraft. In 1973, they released a series of stamps to celebrate Santos-Dumont&#x27;s centenary. On 23 October 2006, they launched a commemorative stamp for the centenary of the flight of the 14-bis. In the same month, the Brazilian Central Bank issued a coin commemorating Santos-Dumont&#x27;s invention. He was depicted on the cruzeiro and cruzeiro novo banknotes.

In 2012, Cartier produced a series of watches named after Santos-Dumont, celebrating the partnership between him and the brand; as a publicity piece, an award-winning film was made by France&#x27;s Quad Productions entitled &quot;L&#x27;Odyssée de Cartier&quot;.

In 2015, author Arthur Japin published the historical novel &quot;De gevleugelde&quot; (&quot;O Homem com Asas&quot;, in Brazil), about the aviator&#x27;s life and death, and the extraction of his heart.

During the opening ceremony of the 2016 Summer Olympic Games at the Maracanã Stadium, a replica of Santos-Dumont&#x27;s 14-bis, was built in the stadium and, with the help of steel cables, flew over the runway, &quot;taking off&quot; for a flight over the city of Rio de Janeiro.

Santos-Dumont has been portrayed as a character in film, television, and theatre, played by in Marcel Camus&#x27; &quot;Les faucheurs de marguerites&quot; (1974); by in the miniseries Um Só Coração (2004); by Daniel de Oliveira in the short film (2006); by Ricardo Napoleão in &#x27; play &quot;Mais Pesado que o Ar – Santos Dumont&quot; (1996); and by Henri Lalli in the play &quot;Santos-Dumont&quot; (since 2003). Fernanda Montenegro played a transsexual descendant of Santos-Dumont in the soap opera &quot;Zazá&quot; (1997). TV Brasil produced the programme , with a character named Betinho, depicting Santos-Dumont as a child.

On 10 November 2019, HBO released the miniseries &quot;Santos-Dumont&quot; across Latin America. The production follows the aviator&#x27;s steps from childhood in his family&#x27;s coffee fields Minas Gerais and São Paulo (where the family settled), to the sophisticated salons and aeroclubs in Paris, where Santos-Dumont made his historic flight in the 14-bis in 1906. Actor João Pedro Zappa played the inventor.

==Personal life==
===Sexuality===

Santos-Dumont never married and was rather shy, and his sexuality has long been debated, including by his biographers.

Researcher Henrique Lins de Barros, from the Brazilian Center for Physics Research, rejects the thesis that the Brazilian inventor was homosexual, arguing that he was just a man concerned with his appearance. According to Barros, &quot;The French refinement sounded like homosexual affectation to American journalists, who described him as effeminate. (...) Hoffman did not understand the customs and values of the time and saw everything with the distorted view that was held at that time in the United States.&quot; Also, in his article &quot;Alberto Santos-Dumont: Pioneiro da Aviação,&quot; Barros notes that Santos-Dumont had a media-heralded engagement to Edna Powers, daughter of an American millionaire. Cosme Degenar Drumond, writer of &quot;Alberto Santos-Dumont: Novas Revelações,&quot; says that in France Santos-Dumont has &quot;a reputation as a conqueror&quot;. Santos-Dumont was listed in the list of the &quot;100 VIP homosexuals of Brazil,&quot; formulated by anthropologist Luiz Mott, rekindling the discussion about Santos-Dumont&#x27;s sexuality. Santos-Dumont&#x27;s family has denied that he was homosexual. Santos-Dumont allegedly had a homo-affective affair with Georges Goursat in 1901.

Yolanda Penteado, in her autobiography &quot;Tudo em cor de rosa&quot;, says: &quot;(...) I met Alberto Santos-Dumont, a brother of my uncle Henrique. Seu Alberto, as we called him, came every day for dinner and stayed over, saying it was to see the moon come out. In Flamengo the full moon nights were really beautiful. He was a restless person. I thought it was funny that he gave me so much attention. And Aunt Amalia would say: &quot;Alberto, you are getting dizzy dating this girl&quot;. Alberto, in fact, used to court me, bring me chocolates, flowers, take me for walks. The people who knew him best said that when he saw me he became electric&quot;.

In a 1901 letter a friend, Santos Dumont wrote that he was in love with an American woman: &quot;[M]y heart is already very much with her... and I don&#x27;t know what to do, whether to stop the courtship or to continue.&quot;

===Mental health===
Santos Dumont is traditionally described as having developed multiple sclerosis. However, this diagnosis is disputed by other researchers:

Henrique Lins de Barros questions this diagnosis: &quot;I think it difficult to believe in this hypothesis of multiple sclerosis... How could anyone suffering from a degenerative disease like multiple sclerosis ski in Saint Moritz in the 1910s and play tennis in the 1920s, as he did?&quot; Marcos Villares Filho, great-grandnephew of Santos-Dumont, says that he probably had a profound depression. The documentation of the time does not provide a good deal of information to determine that Santos Dumont suffered from multiple sclerosis.

The original diagnosis came after consulting a doctor due to symptoms such as dizziness and double vision. Later, this diagnosis was challenged by other doctors, who believed that the aviator was already suffering from psychiatric manifestations. The symptoms reported for the original diagnosis would be only two related to multiple sclerosis.

 reports several episodes showing bursts of energy when at times outside his depressive episodes. Santos Dumont reportedly developed depression in 1910, predating the use of the aeroplane in the war, which, according to the cited article, would indicate that his feeling of guilt was a symptom rather than the cause. Cheniaux hypothesizes that Santos Dumont suffered from bipolar disorder or manic syndrome, with his latest bizarre inventions being able to demonstrate the &quot;loss of critical ability&quot;. A letter written in 1931 by a doctor at the Orthez sanatorium to a friend of Santos Dumont describes him as &#x27;suffering from anxious melancholy with delusions of self-blame, from imaginary guilt, and awaiting punishment&#x27;, also identified as neurasthenia, an exhaustion of the central nervous system.

Bipolar disorder is one of the disorders most connected with suicide and Santos Dumont already had precedents in his family, with his mother having taken her own life in 1902 and that the aviator already demonstrated at the end of his life a number of epidemiological risk factors for suicide. It is hard to determine any diagnosis due to the lack of medical documentation.

==Works==
;Books
*
;Articles
*
*
*
*


;Translations of his works
*
*I. R. Belopolsky, ed. (1911). &quot;Как я выиграл приз Дейча де-Ламетра&quot;. Въ мірѣ новыхъ ощущеній. pp. 31–46.
*&quot;Os Meus Balões&quot; (1938). Translated to Portuguese by Arthur de Miranda Bastos.
*
*&quot;O Homem Mecânico&quot;: published in Portuguese in the work &quot;Os Balões de Santos-Dumont&quot;, 2010.
;Non published

* &quot;L&#x27;Homme Mécanique&quot;, typescript from 1929.
*A book of 13 chapters, untitled, addressing aeronautical events of the 18th to 20th centuries.
==See also==
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
;Primary sources

;Secondary sources
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


== External links ==

* Santos-Dumont, &quot;My Airships&quot; (tr. of &quot;Dans l&#x27;air&quot;)
* PBS Nova: Wings of Madness
* U. S. Centennial of Flight Commission Dumont
* Alberto Santos Dumont Article by writer Patricia Nell Warren.
* History of Aviation: Brazil, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
* Aviation Pioneer Santos-Dumont, Technological Institute of Aeronautics (ITA).
* Letter to Brazil, by Neil deGrasse Tyson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="0" end="21" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="40" end="61" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos=Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="108" end="116" title="aeronaut" label="aeronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408137" start="232" end="248" title="lighter-than-air" label="lighter-than-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="253" end="269" title="heavier-than-air" label="heavier-than-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="489" end="496" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="543" end="555" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496602" start="571" end="576" title="Santos-Dumont number 6" label="No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="691" end="698" title="powered flight" label="powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q647341" start="830" end="836" title="Santos-Dumont 14-bis" label="14-bis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419971" start="894" end="913" title="Bagatelle Gamefield" label="Bagatelle Gamefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="1121" end="1139" title="Aeroclub of France" label="Aeroclub of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="1269" end="1307" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206011" start="1389" end="1397" title="Claims to the first powered flight" label="preceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="1402" end="1417" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="1447" end="1456" title="aeroplane" label="aeroplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049869" start="1576" end="1629" title="Tancredo Neves Pantheon of the Fatherland and Freedom" label="Tancredo Neves Pantheon of the Fatherland and Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q337224" start="1654" end="1682" title="Brazilian Academy of Letters" label="Brazilian Academy of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294741" start="1781" end="1796" title="Henrique Dumont" label="Henrique Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754760" start="2164" end="2171" title="Santos Dumont, Minas Gerais" label="Cabangu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370564" start="2263" end="2283" title="Estrada de Ferro Central do Brasil" label="D. Pedro II railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2591" end="2625" title="Teodoro Teotônio da Silva Carolina" label="Teodoro Teotônio da Silva Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005931" start="2670" end="2693" title="Valença, Rio de Janeiro" label="Valença, Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q188892" start="2732" end="2746" title="Ribeirão Preto" label="Ribeirão Preto"/>
<link wikidata="Q216658" start="2826" end="2832" title="bushel" label="bushel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150401" start="2935" end="2958" title="Colégio Culto à Ciência" label="Colégio Culto à Ciência"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574836" start="3526" end="3541" title="Stanley Spencer (aeronaut)" label="Stanley Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="3683" end="3709" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3834" end="3845" title=":wikisource:pt:Concedendo um conto de réis à Santos Dumont" label="Law no. 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q10366257" start="3869" end="3881" title="Brazilian real (old)" label="million réis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="4606" end="4617" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5570" end="5578" title="Midsummer#Brazil" label="St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q583" start="5817" end="5827" title="Mont Blanc" label="Mont Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="6469" end="6511" title="Bristol University" label="Merchant Venturers&amp;#x27; Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q261538" start="7294" end="7325" title="Andrée&amp;#x27;s Arctic balloon expedition" label="Andrée – Au Pôle Nord en ballon"/>
<link wikidata="Q115682559" start="7902" end="7908" title="Brésil (spherical balloon)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="8953" end="8960" title="Airship" label="Airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q709516" start="9043" end="9063" title="Bartolomeu de Gusmão" label="Bartolomeu de Gusmão"/>
<link wikidata="Q193751" start="9095" end="9115" title="Montgolfier Brothers" label="Montgolfier Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q370960" start="9206" end="9219" title="Henri Giffard" label="Henri Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q965907" start="9221" end="9235" title="Charles Renard" label="Charles Renard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865059" start="9240" end="9263" title="Arthur Constantin Krebs" label="Arthur Constantin Krebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="10148" end="10167" title="Aéro-Club de France" label="Aéro-Club de France"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10292" end="10299" title=":s:en:The North American Review/Volume 174/Issue 547/Air-Ships and Flying-Machines" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344093" start="10313" end="10334" title="North American Review" label="North American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q368398" start="10925" end="10940" title="Henri Lachambre" label="Henri Lachambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q209626" start="11245" end="11262" title="Bois de Boulogne" label="Aclimation Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q842311" start="12450" end="12462" title="coal gas" label="lighting gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419971" start="12810" end="12829" title="Bagatelle Gamefield" label="Bagatelle Gamefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542489" start="12864" end="12887" title="Longchamp Racecourse" label="Hippodrome of Longchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="13015" end="13026" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345595" start="13542" end="13569" title="Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe" label="Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="13596" end="13615" title="Aéro-Club de France" label="Aéro-Club de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="15321" end="15340" title="Aero-Club de France" label="Aero-Club de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q464449" start="16034" end="16058" title="Isabel, Princess Imperial of Brazil" label="Princess Imperial Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496602" start="17021" end="17026" title="Santos-Dumont number 6" label="No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q640968" start="17683" end="17701" title="Hôtel de Ville, Paris" label="City Hall of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="18480" end="18501" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q382919" start="18814" end="18826" title="Manuel Ferraz de Campos Sales" label="Campos Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802671" start="18894" end="18908" title="Augusto Severo" label="Augusto Severo"/>
<link wikidata="Q590" start="18969" end="18975" title="Luís Vaz de Camões" label="Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q159646" start="19082" end="19108" title="Albert I, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert I, Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493809" start="19428" end="19437" title="Tom Swift" label="Tom Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="19514" end="19527" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="19909" end="19920" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="19953" end="19971" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115739331" start="20592" end="20606" title="Pax airship disaster" label="fatal accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637918" start="20610" end="20624" title="Augusto Severo de Albuquerque Maranhão" label="Augusto Severo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="20740" end="20758" title="the Crystal Palace" label="the Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574836" start="20872" end="20887" title="Stanley Spencer (aeronaut)" label="Stanley Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="22351" end="22360" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="22593" end="22608" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="23053" end="23077" title="Storming of the Bastille" label="Storming of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q248577" start="23096" end="23121" title="President of the Republic" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827774" start="23696" end="23710" title="Aida de Acosta" label="Aida de Acosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q210722" start="24588" end="24606" title="Sugarloaf Mountain" label="Sugarloaf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176750" start="24741" end="24760" title="President of Brazil" label="President of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q314698" start="24762" end="24777" title="Rodrigues Alves" label="Rodrigues Alves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142766" start="24786" end="24799" title="Catete Palace" label="Catete Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q962352" start="25448" end="25465" title="Ernest Archdeacon" label="Ernest Archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57162" start="26582" end="26597" title="Otto Lilienthal" label="Otto Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q61361" start="26786" end="26803" title="Gustave Whitehead" label="Gustave Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="28095" end="28108" title="George Cayley" label="George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q537074" start="29138" end="29152" title="Gabriel Voisin" label="Gabriel Voisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264958" start="30123" end="30154" title="Eugenio Brunetta d&amp;#x27;Usseaux" label="Eugenio Brunetta d&amp;#x27;Usseaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q82984" start="30162" end="30181" title="Pierre de Coubertin" label="Pierre de Coubertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417866" start="30208" end="30223" title="Olympic Diploma of Merit" label="Olympic Diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="30332" end="30350" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q72292" start="30352" end="30367" title="Fridtjof Nansen" label="Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333887" start="30372" end="30398" title="William Grenfell, 1st Baron Desborough" label="William-Hippolyte Grenfell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068573" start="31774" end="31790" title="Ferdinand Ferber" label="Ferdinand Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q522744" start="32770" end="32787" title="Lawrence Hargrave" label="Lawrence Hargrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211059" start="34318" end="34327" title="La Nature" label="La Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537962" start="34411" end="34429" title="Gordon Bennett Cup (ballooning)" label="Gordon Bennett Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="36018" end="36025" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068573" start="36914" end="36930" title="Ferdinand Ferber" label="Ferdinand Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223800" start="38204" end="38214" title="Santos-Dumont Demoiselle" label="Demoiselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294767" start="38442" end="38465" title="Henrique Lins de Barros" label="Henrique Lins de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274577" start="38978" end="38995" title="Popular Mechanics" label="Popular Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189955" start="39411" end="39450" title="Musée de l&amp;#x27;air et de l&amp;#x27;espace" label="Musée de l&amp;#x27;air et de l&amp;#x27;espace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="39716" end="39734" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115027" start="39862" end="39881" title="Grande Semaine d&amp;#x27;Aviation de la Champagne" label="Great Aviation Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="40312" end="40345" title="Commander of the Legion of Honour" label="Commander of the Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="40562" end="40573" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q216541" start="40677" end="40686" title="chauffeur" label="chauffeur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41463" end="41500" title="11th Pan-American Scientific Congress" label="11th Pan-American Scientific Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q561789" start="42053" end="42065" title="Arthur Japin" label="Arthur Japin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42222" end="42260" title="1st Pan-American Aronautics Conference" label="1st Pan-American Aronautics Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q742315" start="42527" end="42547" title="Iguaçu National Park" label="Iguaçu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42569" end="42599" title=":s:en:What I Saw, What We Will See" label="O Que Eu Vi, O Que Nós Veremos"/>
<link wikidata="Q248577" start="42660" end="42685" title="President of the Republic" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189043" start="43073" end="43083" title="Petrópolis" label="Petrópolis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43748" end="43778" title=":s:en:What I Saw, What We Will See" label="O que eu vi, o que nós veremos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="43899" end="43920" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058741" start="44091" end="44116" title="Cemitério de São João Batista" label="São João Batista Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="44161" end="44172" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q34041" start="44180" end="44186" title="Icarus" label="Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14781867" start="44318" end="44341" title="Anésia Pinheiro Machado" label="Anésia Pinheiro Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548600" start="44394" end="44420" title="Independence of Brazil" label="Brazil&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="44589" end="44594" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666625" start="44611" end="44623" title="Cabangu Museum" label="Cabangu Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515829" start="44762" end="44804" title="Military Order of Saint James of the Sword" label="Military Order of Saint James of the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q48599" start="45182" end="45201" title="Order of Leopold II" label="Order of Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="45289" end="45295" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="45573" end="45590" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="46060" end="46077" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="46102" end="46116" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q688497" start="46188" end="46193" title="Glion" label="Glion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294767" start="46248" end="46271" title="Henrique Lins de Barros" label="Henrique Lins de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="46509" end="46517" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q10356053" start="46633" end="46659" title="1928 Dornier J Santos Dumont crash" label="crashed, with no survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="46915" end="46931" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q132790" start="47137" end="47145" title="Biarritz" label="Biarritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q244248" start="47151" end="47157" title="Orthez" label="Orthez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12703" start="47166" end="47186" title="Pyrénées-Atlantiques" label="Pyrénées-Atlantiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="47262" end="47276" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18469298" start="47287" end="47304" title="Federal District of Brazil (1891–1960)" label="capital of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634783" start="47330" end="47345" title="Brazilian Revolution of 1930" label="1930 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="47444" end="47462" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337224" start="47831" end="47859" title="Academia Brasileira de Letras" label="Brazilian Academy of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q586057" start="47941" end="47946" title="Araxá" label="Araxá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375155" start="48014" end="48034" title="Percival Farquhar" label="Grand Hôtel La Plage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592295" start="48114" end="48142" title="Constitutionalist revolution" label="Constitutionalist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156844" start="48183" end="48197" title="Getúlio Vargas" label="Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10347593" start="48320" end="48335" title="Pedro Manuel de Toledo" label="Pedro de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578866" start="48758" end="48772" title="Campo de Marte Airport" label="Campo de Marte"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="48955" end="48962" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49096" end="49113" title=":wikisource:pt:Certidão de Óbito de Alberto Santos Dumont" label="death certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="49139" end="49151" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294767" start="49252" end="49275" title="Henrique Lins de Barros" label="Henrique Lins de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q10347593" start="49636" end="49651" title="Pedro Manuel de Toledo" label="Pedro de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963679" start="49862" end="49874" title="suicide note" label="suicide note"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058741" start="49922" end="49947" title="Cemitério São João Batista" label="São João Batista Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="50189" end="50194" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="50244" end="50256" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758698" start="50455" end="50471" title="Panair do Brasil" label="Panair do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15207043" start="50524" end="50557" title="Campo dos Afonsos, Rio de Janeiro" label="Campo dos Afonsos, Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396" start="50674" end="50687" title="Louis Blériot" label="Louis Blériot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="50700" end="50715" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930945" start="51177" end="51202" title="Blériot 5190" label="&amp;quot;Santos-Dumont&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q741814" start="51468" end="51478" title="Panama hat" label="Panama hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="52021" end="52040" title="Aéro-Club de France" label="Aéro-Club de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="52215" end="52226" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508923" start="52393" end="52408" title="Sem (artist)" label="Georges Goursat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311350" start="52475" end="52494" title="L&amp;#x27;Illustration" label="L&amp;#x27;Illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q865475" start="52982" end="53017" title="Santos Dumont Airport" label="Rio de Janeiro&amp;#x27;s first airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666625" start="53207" end="53221" title="Cabangu Museum" label="Cabangu Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="53355" end="53387" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223745" start="53424" end="53436" title="Santos-Dumont (crater)" label="lunar crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="53668" end="53680" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020254" start="53720" end="53736" title="Itamaraty Palace" label="Itamaraty Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q853604" start="53829" end="53851" title="Brazilian Space Agency" label="Brazilian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="53866" end="53894" title="Russian Federal Space Agency" label="Russian Federal Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859260" start="53944" end="53961" title="Missão Centenário" label="Missão Centenário"/>
<link wikidata="Q317643" start="53994" end="54013" title="Marcos César Pontes" label="Marcos César Pontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231148" start="54163" end="54174" title="Soyuz TMA-8" label="Soyuz TMA-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049869" start="54341" end="54358" title="Tancredo Neves Pantheon of the Fatherland and Freedom" label="Panteão da Pátria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10382194" start="54555" end="54570" title="Thomas Skidmore" label="Thomas Skidmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16497571" start="54648" end="54660" title="Brazilian Belle Époque" label="belle époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q466627" start="54787" end="54804" title="Tarsila do Amaral" label="Tarsila do Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093394" start="55031" end="55047" title="Unidos da Tijuca" label="Unidos da Tijuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q273279" start="55128" end="55142" title="Roald Hoffmann" label="Roald Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375004" start="55185" end="55206" title="Correios" label="Brazilian Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q806186" start="55539" end="55561" title="Central Bank of Brazil" label="Brazilian Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8351983" start="55645" end="55653" title="Brazilian cruzeiro (1942–1967)" label="cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q44904" start="55658" end="55681" title="Brazilian cruzeiro novo" label="cruzeiro novo banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="55693" end="55700" title="Cartier (jeweler)" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377832" start="56164" end="56180" title="2016 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="56188" end="56213" title="2016 Summer Olympic Games" label="2016 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q155174" start="56221" end="56237" title="Maracanã Stadium" label="Maracanã Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q597230" start="56529" end="56541" title="Marcel Camus" label="Marcel Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q317575" start="56554" end="56582" title="Les Faucheurs de marguerites" label="Les faucheurs de marguerites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880992" start="56618" end="56631" title="Um Só Coração" label="Um Só Coração"/>
<link wikidata="Q929930" start="56643" end="56661" title="Daniel de Oliveira (actor)" label="Daniel de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q335455" start="56851" end="56870" title="Fernanda Montenegro" label="Fernanda Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10394943" start="56944" end="56948" title="Zazá" label="Zazá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788146" start="56963" end="56972" title="TV Brasil" label="TV Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q74689325" start="57122" end="57135" title="Santos Dumont (miniseries)" label="Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="57149" end="57162" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337639" start="57443" end="57459" title="João Pedro Zappa" label="João Pedro Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294767" start="57648" end="57671" title="Henrique Lins de Barros" label="Henrique Lins de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054246" start="57682" end="57719" title="Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas" label="Brazilian Center for Physics Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q520101" start="58630" end="58639" title="Luiz Mott" label="Luiz Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508923" start="58825" end="58840" title="Sem (artist)" label="Georges Goursat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665419" start="58851" end="58867" title="Yolanda Penteado" label="Yolanda Penteado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="59819" end="59837" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294767" start="59898" end="59921" title="Henrique Lins de Barros" label="Henrique Lins de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q510236" start="61545" end="61557" title="neurasthenia" label="neurasthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750553" start="62214" end="62224" title="Brazilian Portuguese" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395770" start="62867" end="62887" title="Patricia Nell Warren" label="Patricia Nell Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q310903" start="63075" end="63094" title="Neil deGrasse Tyson" label="Neil deGrasse Tyson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152688" wikidata="Q156525" url="?curid=152688" title="Musaceae">
<text>Musaceae is a family of flowering plants composed of three genera with about 91 known species, placed in the order Zingiberales. The family is native to the tropics of Africa and Asia. The plants have a large herbaceous growth habit with leaves with overlapping basal sheaths that form a pseudostem making some members appear to be woody trees. In most treatments, the family has three genera, &quot;Musa&quot;, &quot;Musella&quot; and &quot;Ensete&quot;. Cultivated bananas are commercially important members of the family, and many others are grown as ornamental plants.

==Taxonomy==

The family has been practically universally recognized by taxonomists, although with differing circumscriptions. Older circumscriptions of the family commonly included the genera now included in Heliconiaceae and Strelitziaceae.

The APG III system, of 2009 (unchanged from the APG system, 1998), assigns Musaceae to the order Zingiberales in the clade commelinids in the monocots.

The oldest fossil evidence of the family is thought to possibly be the Late Cretaceous palynotaxon &quot;Spirematospermum chandlerae&quot; from North Carolina, unlike most other &quot;Spirematospermum&quot; species which are thought to represent members of Zingiberaceae. In contrast, &quot;Musa&quot; &quot;cardiosperma&quot; from the Maastrichtian Intertrappean Beds of India, formerly considered the earliest record of the genus &quot;Musa&quot;, is now thought to be a member of the Zingiberaceae and has been reclassified into the extinct genus &quot;Momordiocarpon&quot;. The oldest unequivocal fossil of the family is &quot;Ensete oregonense&quot; from the Eocene Clarno Formation of Oregon, although its actual placement within the family is uncertain.

===Genera===

As currently circumscribed the family includes three genera. All genera and species are native to the Old World tropics. The largest and most economically important genus in the family is &quot;Musa&quot;, famous for the banana and plantain. The genus &quot;Musa&quot; was formally established in the first edition of Linnaeus&#x27; &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; in 1753 — the publication that marks the start of the present formal botanical nomenclature. At the time he wrote &quot;Species Plantarum&quot;, Linnaeus had first hand knowledge of only one type of banana, which he personally had the opportunity of seeing growing under glass in the garden of Mr. George Clifford near Haarlem in the Netherlands.

Before 1753, the genus had already been described by the pre-Linnaean botanist Georg Eberhard Rumphius and Linnaeus himself had described the banana he had seen as &quot;Musa cliffortiana&quot; in 1736 (this might be described as a &quot;pre-Linnaean&quot; Linnaean name). The 1753 name &quot;Musa paradisiaca&quot; L. for plantains and &quot;Musa sapientum&quot; L. for dessert bananas are now known to refer to hybrids, rather than natural species. It is known today that most cultivated seedless bananas are hybrids or polyploids of two wild banana species - &quot;Musa acuminata&quot; and &quot;Musa balbisiana&quot;. Linnaeus&#x27; &quot;Musa sapientum&quot; is now identified to be the hybrid Latundan cultivar (&quot;M.&quot; × &quot;paradisiaca&quot; AAB Group &#x27;Silk&#x27;), while his &quot;Musa paradisiaca&quot; are now known to be hybrids belonging generally to the AAB and ABB banana cultivar groups. Hybridization and polyploidy was the cause of much confusion in the taxonomy of the genus &quot;Musa&quot; that was not resolved until the 1940s and 1950s.

In this clearing up of the taxonomy, Ernest Entwistle Cheesman in 1947 revived the genus name &quot;Ensete&quot; which had been published in 1862, by Horaninow, but had not been accepted.

&quot;Musa&quot; section &quot;Musella&quot; Franch. was raised to the rank of genus by H.W. Li in 1978 for the Chinese species &quot;Musella lasiocarpa&quot;, which was originally described in &quot;Musa&quot; in 1889 and transferred to &quot;Ensete&quot; by Cheesman in 1948. The species combines characters like the swollen stems of &quot;Ensete&quot; with the clonal habit of &quot;Musa&quot;. Acceptance of &quot;Musella&quot; has varied; , the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families considers it a synonym of &quot;Ensete&quot;, other sources dispute this view.

==References==
==Bibliography==


==External links==
* &quot;Preliminary analysis of the literature on the distribution of wild Musa species&quot; 
* Musaceae at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website
* Musaceae in the Flora of China
* Musaceae in L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). &quot;The families of flowering plants : descriptions, illustrations, identification, information retrieval.&quot; Version: 27 April 2006. http://delta-intkey.com .
* &quot;Monocot families&quot; (USDA)
* NCBI Taxonomy Browser
* links at CSDL 
* The Musaceae - an annotated list of the species 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156525" start="0" end="8" title="Musaceae" label="Musaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="14" end="20" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="24" end="39" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="109" end="114" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q203779" start="115" end="127" title="Zingiberales" label="Zingiberales"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="332" end="336" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="386" end="392" title="Genus (biology)" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666090" start="400" end="404" title="Musa (genus)" label="Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100760" start="418" end="425" title="Musella (plant)" label="Musella"/>
<link wikidata="Q312321" start="442" end="448" title="Ensete" label="Ensete"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="467" end="473" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="554" end="571" title="ornamental plants" label="ornamental plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q624242" start="783" end="796" title="Heliconiaceae" label="Heliconiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q147867" start="801" end="815" title="Strelitziaceae" label="Strelitziaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="822" end="836" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q433179" start="866" end="876" title="APG system" label="APG system"/>
<link wikidata="Q203779" start="915" end="927" title="Zingiberales" label="Zingiberales"/>
<link wikidata="Q868546" start="941" end="952" title="commelinids" label="commelinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="960" end="968" title="monocots" label="monocots"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="1042" end="1057" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="1058" end="1069" title="palynotaxon" label="palynotaxon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1076" end="1103" title="Spirematospermum chandlerae" label="Spirematospermum chandlerae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1115" end="1129" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="1307" end="1320" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057215" start="1321" end="1339" title="Intertrappean Beds" label="Intertrappean Beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1343" end="1348" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q37021" start="1458" end="1471" title="Zingiberaceae" label="Zingiberaceae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1527" end="1541" title="Momordiocarpon" label="Momordiocarpon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1602" end="1619" title="Ensete oregonense" label="Ensete oregonense"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="1635" end="1641" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q33762" start="1642" end="1658" title="Clarno Formation" label="Clarno Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="1662" end="1668" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1800" end="1806" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="1849" end="1858" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="1968" end="1974" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993249" start="1979" end="1987" title="Plantain (true)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666090" start="1999" end="2015" title="Musa (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Musa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2065" end="2073" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="2086" end="2103" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310776" start="2179" end="2201" title="botanical nomenclature" label="botanical nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="2429" end="2436" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="2528" end="2536" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61439" start="2537" end="2560" title="Georg Eberhard Rumphius" label="Georg Eberhard Rumphius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993249" start="2781" end="2789" title="Plantain (true)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="2837" end="2843" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383946" start="2948" end="2956" title="parthenocarpic" label="seedless"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="2969" end="2976" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="2980" end="2989" title="polyploid" label="polyploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q132970" start="3026" end="3040" title="Musa acuminata" label="Musa acuminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q94643" start="3057" end="3072" title="Musa balbisiana" label="Musa balbisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984252" start="3157" end="3165" title="Latundan Banana" label="Latundan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3340" end="3343" title="List of banana cultivars#AAB Group" label="AAB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3348" end="3351" title="List of banana cultivars#ABB Group" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150646" start="3359" end="3373" title="cultivar group" label="cultivar group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916950" start="3570" end="3595" title="Ernest Entwistle Cheesman" label="Ernest Entwistle Cheesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312321" start="3633" end="3639" title="Ensete" label="Ensete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035497" start="4172" end="4214" title="World Checklist of Selected Plant Families" label="World Checklist of Selected Plant Families"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152689" wikidata="Q687921" url="?curid=152689" title="Beernem">
<text>Beernem (; ) is a rural municipality in the Belgian province of West Flanders, located southeast of Bruges. The municipality comprises the towns of Beernem proper, Oedelem and Sint-Joris. On January 1, 2006 Beernem had a total population of 14,642, mostly in Beernem proper and Oedelem. The total area is 71.68 km² which gives a population density of 204 inhabitants per km².

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q687921" start="0" end="7" title="Beernem" label="Beernem"/>
<link wikidata="Q493522" start="24" end="36" title="Municipalities of Belgium" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="44" end="51" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113" start="64" end="77" title="West Flanders" label="West Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="100" end="106" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023248" start="164" end="171" title="Oedelem" label="Oedelem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181971" start="176" end="186" title="Sint-Joris, Beernem" label="Sint-Joris"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="329" end="347" title="population density" label="population density"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152690" wikidata="Q185757" url="?curid=152690" title="Hovercraft">
<text>A hovercraft (: hovercraft), also known as an air-cushion vehicle or ACV, is an amphibious craft capable of travelling over land, water, mud, ice, and various other surfaces.

Hovercraft use blowers to produce a large volume of air below the hull, or air cushion, that is slightly above atmospheric pressure. The pressure difference between the higher-pressure air below the hull and lower pressure ambient air above it produces lift, which causes the hull to float above the running surface. For stability reasons, the air is typically blown through slots or holes around the outside of a disk- or oval-shaped platform, giving most hovercraft a characteristic rounded-rectangle shape.

The first practical design for hovercraft was derived from a British invention in the 1950s. They are now used throughout the world as specialised transports in disaster relief, coastguard, military and survey applications, as well as for sport or passenger service. Very large versions have been used to transport hundreds of people and vehicles across the English Channel, whilst others have military applications used to transport tanks, soldiers and large equipment in hostile environments and terrain. Decline in public demand meant that , the only year-round public hovercraft service in the world still in operation serves between the Isle of Wight and Southsea in the UK. Oita Hovercraft is planning to resume services in Oita, Japan in 2024.

Although now a generic term for the type of craft, the name &quot;Hovercraft&quot; itself was a trademark owned by Saunders-Roe (later British Hovercraft Corporation (BHC), then Westland), hence other manufacturers&#x27; use of alternative names to describe the vehicles.

==History==
===Early efforts===
There have been many attempts to understand the principles of high air pressure below hulls and wings. Hovercraft are unique in that they can lift themselves while still, differing from ground effect vehicles and hydrofoils that require forward motion to create lift.

The first mention, in the historical record of the concepts behind surface-effect vehicles, to use the term &quot;hovering&quot; was by Swedish scientist Emanuel Swedenborg in 1716.

The shipbuilder John Isaac Thornycroft patented an early design for an air cushion ship / hovercraft in the 1870s, but suitable, powerful, engines were not available until the 20th century.

In 1915, the Austrian Dagobert Müller von Thomamühl (1880–1956) built the world&#x27;s first &quot;air cushion&quot; boat (). Shaped like a section of a large aerofoil (this creates a low-pressure area above the wing much like an aircraft), the craft was propelled by four aero engines driving two submerged marine propellers, with a fifth engine that blew air under the front of the craft to increase the air pressure under it. Only when in motion could the craft trap air under the front, increasing lift. The vessel also required a depth of water to operate and could not transition to land or other surfaces. Designed as a fast torpedo boat, the had a top speed of over . It was thoroughly tested and even armed with torpedoes and machine guns for operation in the Adriatic. It never saw actual combat, however, and as the war progressed it was eventually scrapped due to a lack of interest and perceived need, and its engines returned to the air force.

The theoretical grounds for motion over an air layer were constructed by Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovskii in 1926 and 1927.

In 1929, Andrew Kucher of Ford began experimenting with the &quot;Levapad&quot; concept, metal disks with pressurized air blown through a hole in the centre. Levapads do not offer stability on their own. Several must be used together to support a load above them. Lacking a skirt, the pads had to remain very close to the running surface. He initially imagined these being used in place of casters and wheels in factories and warehouses, where the concrete floors offered the smoothness required for operation. By the 1950s, Ford showed a number of toy models of cars using the system, but mainly proposed its use as a replacement for wheels on trains, with the Levapads running close to the surface of existing rails.

In 1931, Finnish aero engineer Toivo J. Kaario began designing a developed version of a vessel using an air cushion and built a prototype (&#x27;Surface Glider&#x27;), in 1937. His design included the modern features of a lift engine blowing air into a flexible envelope for lift. Kaario&#x27;s efforts were followed closely in the Soviet Union by Vladimir Levkov, who returned to the solid-sided design of the . Levkov designed and built a number of similar craft during the 1930s, and his L-5 fast-attack boat reached in testing. However, the start of World War II put an end to his development work.

During World War II, an American engineer, Charles Fletcher, invented a walled air cushion vehicle, the &quot;Glidemobile&quot;. Because the project was classified by the U.S. government, Fletcher could not file a patent.

In April 1958, Ford engineers demonstrated the Glide-air, a model of a wheel-less vehicle that speeds on a thin film of air only 76.2 μm ( of an inch) above its tabletop roadbed. An article in &quot;Modern Mechanix&quot; quoted Andrew A. Kucher, Ford&#x27;s vice president in charge of Engineering and Research noting &quot;We look upon Glide-air as a new form of high-speed land transportation, probably in the field of rail surface travel, for fast trips of distances of up to about &quot;.

In 1959, Ford displayed a hovercraft concept car, the Ford Levacar Mach I.

In August 1961, &quot;Popular Science&quot; reported on the Aeromobile 35B, an air-cushion vehicle (ACV) that was invented by William R. Bertelsen and was envisioned to revolutionise the transportation system, with personal hovering self-driving cars that could speed up to .

===Christopher Cockerell===

The idea of the modern hovercraft is most often associated with Christopher Cockerell, a British mechanical engineer. Cockerell&#x27;s group was the first to develop the use of a ring of air for maintaining the cushion, the first to develop a successful skirt, and the first to demonstrate a practical vehicle in continued use. A memorial to Cockerell&#x27;s first design stands in the village of Somerleyton.

Cockerell came across the key concept in his design when studying the ring of airflow when high-pressure air was blown into the annular area between two concentric tin cans (one coffee and the other from cat food) and a hairdryer. This produced a ring of airflow, as expected, but he noticed an unexpected benefit as well; the sheet of fast-moving air presented a sort of physical barrier to the air on either side of it. This effect, which he called the &quot;momentum curtain&quot;, could be used to trap high-pressure air in the area inside the curtain, producing a high-pressure plenum that earlier examples had to build up with considerably more airflow. In theory, only a small amount of active airflow would be needed to create lift and much less than a design that relied only on the momentum of the air to provide lift, like a helicopter. In terms of power, a hovercraft would only need between one quarter to one half of the power required by a helicopter.

Cockerell built and tested several models of his hovercraft design in Somerleyton, Suffolk, during the early 1950s. The design featured an engine mounted to blow from the front of the craft into a space below it, combining both lift and propulsion. He demonstrated the model flying over many Whitehall carpets in front of various government experts and ministers, and the design was subsequently put on the secret list. In spite of tireless efforts to arrange funding, no branch of the military was interested, as he later joked, &quot;The Navy said it was a plane not a boat; the RAF said it was a boat not a plane; and the Army were &#x27;plain not interested&#x27;.&quot;

===SR.N1===
This lack of military interest meant that there was no reason to keep the concept secret, and it was declassified. Cockerell was finally able to convince the National Research Development Corporation to fund development of a full-scale model. In 1958, the NRDC placed a contract with Saunders-Roe for the development of what would become the SR.N1, short for &quot;Saunders-Roe, Nautical 1&quot;.

The SR.N1 was powered by a 450 hp Alvis Leonides engine powering a vertical fan in the middle of the craft. In addition to providing the lift air, a portion of the airflow was bled off into two channels on either side of the craft, which could be directed to provide thrust. In normal operation this extra airflow was directed rearward for forward thrust and blew over two large vertical rudders that provided directional control. For low-speed manoeuvrability, the extra thrust could be directed fore or aft, differentially for rotation.

The SR.N1 made its first hover on 11 June 1959, and made its famed successful crossing of the English Channel on 25 July 1959. In December 1959, the Duke of Edinburgh visited Saunders-Roe at East Cowes and persuaded the chief test-pilot, Commander Peter Lamb, to allow him to take over the SR.N1&#x27;s controls. He flew the SR.N1 so fast that he was asked to slow down a little. On examination of the craft afterwards, it was found that she had been dished in the bow due to excessive speed, damage that was never allowed to be repaired, and was from then on affectionately referred to as the &#x27;Royal Dent&#x27;.

===Skirts and other improvements===

Testing quickly demonstrated that the idea of using a single engine to provide air for both the lift curtain and forward flight required too many trade-offs. A Blackburn Marboré turbojet for forward thrust and two large vertical rudders for directional control were added, producing the SR.N1 Mk II. A further upgrade with the Armstrong Siddeley Viper produced the Mk III. Further modifications, especially the addition of pointed nose and stern areas, produced the Mk IV.

Although the SR.N1 was successful as a testbed, the design hovered too close to the surface to be practical; at even small waves would hit the bow. The solution was offered by Cecil Latimer-Needham, following a suggestion made by his business partner Arthur Ord-Hume. In 1958, he suggested the use of two rings of rubber to produce a double-walled extension of the vents in the lower fuselage. When air was blown into the space between the sheets it exited the bottom of the skirt in the same way it formerly exited the bottom of the fuselage, re-creating the same momentum curtain, but this time at some distance from the bottom of the craft.

Latimer-Needham and Cockerell devised a high skirt design, which was fitted to the SR.N1 to produce the Mk V, displaying hugely improved performance, with the ability to climb over obstacles almost as high as the skirt. In October 1961, Latimer-Needham sold his skirt patents to Westland, who had recently taken over Saunders Roe&#x27;s interest in the hovercraft. Experiments with the skirt design demonstrated a problem; it was originally expected that pressure applied to the outside of the skirt would bend it inward, and the now-displaced airflow would cause it to pop back out. What actually happened is that the slight narrowing of the distance between the walls resulted in less airflow, which in turn led to more air loss under that section of the skirt. The fuselage above this area would drop due to the loss of lift at that point, and this led to further pressure on the skirt.

After considerable experimentation, Denys Bliss at Hovercraft Development Ltd. found the solution to this problem. Instead of using two separate rubber sheets to form the skirt, a single sheet of rubber was bent into a U shape to provide both sides, with slots cut into the bottom of the U forming the annular vent. When deforming pressure was applied to the outside of this design, air pressure in the rest of the skirt forced the inner wall to move in as well, keeping the channel open. Although there was some deformation of the curtain, the airflow within the skirt was maintained and the lift remained relatively steady. Over time, this design evolved into individual extensions over the bottom of the slots in the skirt, known as &quot;fingers&quot;.

===Commercialisation===
Through these improvements, the hovercraft became an effective transport system for high-speed service on water and land, leading to widespread developments for military vehicles, search and rescue, and commercial operations. By 1962, many UK aviation and shipbuilding firms were working on hovercraft designs, including Saunders Roe/Westland, Vickers-Armstrong, William Denny, Britten-Norman and Folland. Small-scale ferry service started as early as 1962 with the launch of the Vickers-Armstrong VA-3. With the introduction of the 254 passenger and 30 car carrying SR.N4 cross-channel ferry by Hoverlloyd and Seaspeed in 1968, hovercraft had developed into useful commercial craft.

Another major pioneering effort of the early hovercraft era was carried out by Jean Bertin&#x27;s firm in France. Bertin was an advocate of the &quot;multi-skirt&quot; approach, which used a number of smaller cylindrical skirts instead of one large one in order to avoid the problems noted above. During the early 1960s he developed a series of prototype designs, which he called &quot;terraplanes&quot; if they were aimed for land use, and &quot;naviplanes&quot; for water. The best known of these designs was the N500 Naviplane, built for Seaspeed by the &quot;Société d&#x27;Etude et de Développement des Aéroglisseurs Marins&quot; (SEDAM). The N500 could carry 400 passengers, 55 cars and five buses. It set a speed record between Boulogne and Dover of . It was rejected by its operators, who claimed that it was unreliable.

Another discovery was that the total amount of air needed to lift the craft was a function of the roughness of the surface over which it travelled. On flat surfaces, like pavement, the required air pressure was so low that hovercraft were able to compete in energy terms with conventional systems like steel wheels. However, the hovercraft lift system acted as both a lift and a very effective suspension, and thus it naturally lent itself to high-speed use where conventional suspension systems were considered too complex. This led to a variety of &quot;hovertrain&quot; proposals during the 1960s, including England&#x27;s Tracked Hovercraft and France&#x27;s &quot;Aérotrain&quot;. In the U.S., Rohr Inc. and Garrett both took out licences to develop local versions of the &quot;Aérotrain&quot;. These designs competed with maglev systems in the high-speed arena, where their primary advantage was the very &quot;low tech&quot; tracks they needed. On the downside, the air blowing dirt and trash out from under the trains presented a unique problem in stations, and interest in them waned in the 1970s.

By the early 1970s, the basic concept had been well developed, and the hovercraft had found a number of niche roles where its combination of features were advantageous. Today, they are found primarily in military use for amphibious operations, search-and-rescue vehicles in shallow water, and sporting vehicles.

==Design==
Hovercraft can be powered by one or more engines. Smaller craft, such as the SR.N6, usually have one engine with the drive split through a gearbox. On vehicles with several engines, one usually drives the fan (or impeller), which is responsible for lifting the vehicle by forcing high pressure air under the craft. The air inflates the &quot;skirt&quot; under the vehicle, causing it to rise above the surface. Additional engines provide thrust in order to propel the craft. Some hovercraft use ducting to allow one engine to perform both tasks by directing some of the air to the skirt, the rest of the air passing out of the back to push the craft forward.

==Uses==
===Commercial===
The British aircraft and marine engineering company Saunders-Roe built the first practical human-carrying hovercraft for the National Research Development Corporation, the SR.N1, which carried out several test programmes in 1959 to 1961 (the first public demonstration was in 1959), including a cross-channel test run in July 1959, piloted by Peter &quot;Sheepy&quot; Lamb, an ex-naval test pilot and the chief test pilot at Saunders Roe. Christopher Cockerell was on board, and the flight took place on the 50th anniversary of Louis Blériot&#x27;s first aerial crossing.

The SR.N1 was driven by expelled air, powered by a single piston engine. Demonstrated at the Farnborough Airshow in 1960, it was shown that this simple craft can carry a load of up to 12 marines with their equipment as well as the pilot and co-pilot with only a slight reduction in hover height proportional to the load carried. The SR.N1 did not have any skirt, using instead the peripheral air principle that Cockerell had patented. It was later found that the craft&#x27;s hover height was improved by the addition of a skirt of flexible fabric or rubber around the hovering surface to contain the air. The skirt was an independent invention made by a Royal Navy officer, C.H. Latimer-Needham, who sold his idea to Westland (by then the parent of Saunders-Roe&#x27;s helicopter and hovercraft interests), and who worked with Cockerell to develop the idea further.

The first passenger-carrying hovercraft to enter service was the Vickers VA-3, which, in the summer of 1962, carried passengers regularly along the north Wales coast from Moreton, Merseyside, to Rhyl. It was powered by two turboprop aero-engines and driven by propellers.


During the 1960s, Saunders-Roe developed several larger designs that could carry passengers, including the SR.N2, which operated across the Solent, in 1962, and later the SR.N6, which operated across the Solent from Southsea to Ryde on the Isle of Wight for many years. In 1963 the SR.N2 was used in experimental service between Weston-super-Mare and Penarth under the aegis of P &amp; A Campbell, the paddle steamer operators.

Operations by Hovertravel commenced on 24 July 1965, using the SR.N6, which carried 38 passengers. Two 98 seat AP1-88 hovercraft were introduced on this route in 1983, and in 2007, these were joined by the first 130-seat BHT130 craft. The AP1-88 and the BHT130 were notable as they were largely built by Hoverwork using shipbuilding techniques and materials (i.e. welded aluminium structure and diesel engines) rather than the aircraft techniques used to build the earlier craft built by Saunders-Roe-British Hovercraft Corporation. Over 20 million passengers had used the service as of 2004 – the service is still operating () and is by far the longest, continuously-operated hovercraft service.

In 1966, two cross-channel passenger hovercraft services were inaugurated using SR.N6 hovercraft. Hoverlloyd ran services from Ramsgate Harbour, England, to Calais, France, and Townsend Ferries also started a service to Calais from Dover, which was soon superseded by that of Seaspeed.

As well as Saunders-Roe and Vickers (which combined in 1966 to form the British Hovercraft Corporation (BHC)), other commercial craft were developed during the 1960s in the UK by Cushioncraft (part of the Britten-Norman Group) and Hovermarine based at Woolston (the latter being &quot;sidewall hovercraft&quot;, where the sides of the hull projected down into the water to trap the cushion of air with normal hovercraft skirts at the bow and stern). One of these models, the HM-2, was used by Red Funnel between Southampton (near the Woolston Floating Bridge) and Cowes.

The world&#x27;s first car-carrying hovercraft was made in 1968, the BHC &quot;Mountbatten&quot; class (SR.N4) models, each powered by four Bristol Proteus turboshaft engines. These were both used by rival operators Hoverlloyd and Seaspeed (which joined to form Hoverspeed in 1981) to operate regular car and passenger carrying services across the English Channel. Hoverlloyd operated from Ramsgate, where a special hoverport had been built at Pegwell Bay, to Calais. Seaspeed operated from Dover, England, to Calais and Boulogne in France. The first SR.N4 had a capacity of 254 passengers and 30 cars, and a top speed of . The channel crossing took around 30 minutes and was run like an airline with flight numbers. The later SR.N4 Mk.III had a capacity of 418 passengers and 60 cars. These were later joined by the French-built SEDAM N500 Naviplane with a capacity of 385 passengers and 45 cars; only one entered service and was used intermittently for a few years on the cross-channel service until returned to SNCF in 1983. The service ceased on 1 October 2000 after 32 years, due to competition with traditional ferries, catamarans, the disappearance of duty-free shopping within the EU, the advancing age of the SR.N4 hovercraft, and the opening of the Channel Tunnel.

The commercial success of hovercraft suffered from rapid rises in fuel prices during the late 1960s and 1970s, following conflict in the Middle East. Alternative over-water vehicles, such as wave-piercing catamarans (marketed as the SeaCat in the UK until 2005), use less fuel and can perform most of the hovercraft&#x27;s marine tasks. Although developed elsewhere in the world for both civil and military purposes, except for the Solent Ryde-to-Southsea crossing, hovercraft disappeared from the coastline of Britain until a range of Griffon Hoverwork were bought by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution.

Hovercraft used to ply between the Gateway of India in Mumbai and CBD Belapur and Vashi in Navi Mumbai between 1994 and 1999, but the services were subsequently stopped due to the lack of sufficient water transport infrastructure.

===Civilian non-commercial===
In Finland, small hovercraft are widely used in maritime rescue and during the rasputitsa (&quot;mud season&quot;) as archipelago liaison vehicles. In England, hovercraft of the Burnham-on-Sea Area Rescue Boat (BARB) are used to rescue people from thick mud in Bridgwater Bay. Avon Fire and Rescue Service became the first Local Authority fire service in the UK to operate a hovercraft. It is used to rescue people from thick mud in the Weston-super-Mare area and during times of inland flooding. A Griffon rescue hovercraft has been in use for a number of years with the Airport Fire Service at Dundee Airport in Scotland. It is used in the event of an aircraft ditching in the Tay estuary. Numerous fire departments around the US/Canadian Great Lakes operate hovercraft for water and ice rescues, often of ice fisherman stranded when ice breaks off from shore. The Canadian Coast Guard uses hovercraft to break light ice.

In October 2008, The Red Cross commenced a flood-rescue service hovercraft based in Inverness, Scotland. Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service received two flood-rescue hovercraft donated by Severn Trent Water following the 2007 UK floods.

Since 2006, hovercraft have been used in aid in Madagascar by HoverAid, an international NGO who use the hovercraft to reach the most remote places on the island.

The Scandinavian airline SAS used to charter an AP1-88 hovercraft for regular passengers between Copenhagen Airport, Denmark, and the SAS Hovercraft Terminal in Malmö, Sweden.

In 1998, the US Postal Service began using the British built Hoverwork AP1-88 to haul mail, freight, and passengers from Bethel, Alaska, to and from eight small villages along the Kuskokwim River. Bethel is far removed from the Alaska road system, thus making the hovercraft an attractive alternative to the air based delivery methods used prior to introduction of the hovercraft service. Hovercraft service is suspended for several weeks each year while the river is beginning to freeze to minimize damage to the river ice surface. The hovercraft is able to operate during the freeze-up period; however, this could potentially break the ice and create hazards for villagers using their snowmobiles along the river during the early winter.

In 2006, Kvichak Marine Industries of Seattle, US built, under licence, a cargo/passenger version of the Hoverwork BHT130. Designated &#x27;Suna-X&#x27;, it is used as a high-speed ferry for up to 47 passengers and of freight serving the remote Alaskan villages of King Cove and Cold Bay.

An experimental service was operated in Scotland across the Firth of Forth (between Kirkcaldy and Portobello, Edinburgh), from 16 to 28 July 2007. Marketed as &quot;Forthfast&quot;, the service used a craft chartered from Hovertravel and achieved an 85% passenger load factor. , the possibility of establishing a permanent service is still under consideration.

Since the Channel routes abandoned hovercraft, and pending any reintroduction on the Scottish route, the United Kingdom&#x27;s only public hovercraft service is that operated by Hovertravel between Southsea (Portsmouth) and Ryde on the Isle of Wight.

From the 1960s, several commercial lines were operated in Japan, without much success. In Japan the last commercial line had linked Ōita Airport and central Ōita but was shut down in October 2009. However, the commercial line between Ōita Airport and central Ōita is scheduled to reopen in 2024.
Hovercraft are still manufactured in the UK, near to where they were first conceived and tested, on the Isle of Wight. They can also be chartered for a wide variety of uses including inspections of shallow bed offshore wind farms and VIP or passenger use. A typical vessel would be a Tiger IV or a Griffon. They are light, fast, road transportable and very adaptable with the unique feature of minimising damage to environments.

===Military===
====China====
The People&#x27;s Army Navy of China operates the Jingsah II class LCAC. This troop and equipment carrying hovercraft is roughly the Chinese equivalent of the U.S. Navy LCAC.

====Finland====

The Finnish Navy designed an experimental missile attack hovercraft class, Tuuli class hovercraft, in the late 1990s. The prototype of the class, &quot;Tuuli&quot;, was commissioned in 2000. It proved an extremely successful design for a littoral fast attack craft, but due to fiscal reasons and doctrinal change in the Navy, the hovercraft was soon withdrawn.

====Iran====
The Iranian Navy operates multiple British-made and some Iranian-produced hovercraft. The Tondar or Thunderbolt comes in varieties designed for combat and transportation. Iran has equipped the Tondar with mid-range missiles, machine guns and retrievable reconnaissance drones. Currently they are used for water patrols and combat against drug smugglers.

====Russia====
The Soviet Union had military hovercraft such as the small Czilim-class hovercraft, comparable to the SR.N6, the large &quot;Zubr&quot;-class landing craft and the Bora missile launcher surface effect ship (a hybrid between a hovercraft and a catamaran).

====United Kingdom====
The first application of the hovercraft for military use was by the British Armed Forces, using hovercraft built by Saunders-Roe. In 1961, the United Kingdom set up the Interservice Hovercraft Trials Unit (IHTU) based at RNAS Lee-on-Solent (HMS Daedalus), now the site of the Hovercraft Museum, near Portsmouth. This unit carried out trials on the SR.N1 from Mk1 through Mk5 as well as testing the SR.N2, SR.N3, SR.N5 and SR.N6 craft. The Hovercraft Trials Unit (Far East) was established by the Royal Navy at Singapore in August 1964 with two armed hovercraft; they were deployed later that year to Tawau in Malaysian Borneo and operated on waterways there during the Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation. The hovercraft&#x27;s inventor, Sir Christopher Cockerell, claimed late in his life that the Falklands War could have been won far more easily had the British military shown more commitment to the hovercraft; although earlier trials had been conducted in the Falkland Islands with an SRN-6, the hovercraft unit had been disbanded by the time of the conflict. Currently, the Royal Marines use the Griffonhoverwork 2400TD hovercraft, the replacement for the Griffon 2000 TDX Class ACV, which was deployed operationally by the marines in the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

====United States====

During the 1960s, Bell licensed and sold the Saunders-Roe SR.N5 as the Bell SK-5. They were deployed on trial to the Vietnam War by the United States Navy as &quot;PACV&quot; patrol craft in the Mekong Delta where their mobility and speed was unique. This was used in both the UK SR.N5 curved deck configuration and later with modified flat deck, gun turret and grenade launcher designated the 9255 PACV. The United States Army also experimented with the use of SR.N5 hovercraft in Vietnam. Three hovercraft with the flat deck configuration were deployed to Đồng Tâm in the Mekong Delta region and later to Ben Luc. They saw action primarily in the Plain of Reeds. One was destroyed in early 1970 and another in August of that same year, after which the unit was disbanded. The only remaining U.S. Army SR.N5 hovercraft is currently on display in the Army Transport Museum in Virginia.

Experience led to the proposed Bell SK-10, which was the basis for the LCAC-class air-cushioned landing craft now deployed by the U.S. and Japanese Navy. Developed and tested in the mid-1970s, the LACV-30 was used by the US Army to transport military cargo in logistics-over-the-shore operations from the early 1980s until the mid-1990s.

===Recreational/sport===
Small commercially manufactured, kit or plan-built hovercraft are increasingly being used for recreational purposes, such as inland racing and cruising on inland lakes and rivers, marshy areas, estuaries and inshore coastal waters.

The Hovercraft Cruising Club supports the use of hovercraft for cruising in coastal and inland waterways, lakes and lochs.

The Hovercraft Club of Great Britain, founded in 1966, regularly organizes inland and coastal hovercraft race events at various venues across the United Kingdom. Similar events are also held in Europe and the US.

In August 2010, the Hovercraft Club of Great Britain hosted the World Hovercraft Championships at Towcester Racecourse, followed by the 2016 World Hovercraft Championships at the West Midlands Water Ski Centre in Tamworth.

The World Hovercraft Championships are run under the auspices of the World Hovercraft Federation. So far the World Hovercraft Championships had been hosted by France: 1993 in Verneuil, 1997 in Lucon, 2006 at the Lac de Tolerme; Germany: 1987 in Bad Karlshafen, 2004 in Berlin, 2012 and 2018 in Saalburg; Portugal: 1995 in Peso de la Regua; Sweden: 2008 and 2022 at Flottbro Ski Centre in Huddinge; UK 1991 and 2000 at Weston Parc; US: 1989 in Troy (Ohio), 2002 in Terre Haute. The 2020 World Hovercraft Championships had to be postponed to 2022 due to restriction caused by the Covid-19 outbreak.

Apart from the craft designed as &quot;racing hovercraft&quot;, which are often only suitable for racing, there is another form of small personal hovercraft for leisure use, often referred to as cruising hovercraft, capable of carrying up to four people. Just like their full size counterparts, the ability of these small personal hovercraft to safely cross all types of terrain, (e.g. water, sandbanks, swamps, ice, etc.) and reach places often inaccessible by any other type of craft, makes them suitable for a number of roles, such as survey work and patrol and rescue duties in addition to personal leisure use. Increasingly, these craft are being used as yacht tenders, enabling yacht owners and guests to travel from a waiting yacht to, for example, a secluded beach. In this role, small hovercraft can offer a more entertaining alternative to the usual small boat and can be a rival for the jet-ski. The excitement of a personal hovercraft can now be enjoyed at &quot;experience days&quot;, which are popular with families, friends and those in business, who often see them as team building exercises. This level of interest has naturally led to a hovercraft rental sector and numerous manufacturers of small, ready built designs of personal hovercraft to serve the need.

===Other uses===
====Hoverbarge====
A real benefit of air cushion vehicles in moving heavy loads over difficult terrain, such as swamps, was overlooked by the excitement of the British Government funding to develop high-speed hovercraft. It was not until the early 1970s that the technology was used for moving a modular marine barge with a dragline on board for use over soft reclaimed land.

Mackace (Mackley Air Cushion Equipment), now known as Hovertrans, produced a number of successful Hoverbarges, such as the 250 ton payload &quot;Sea Pearl&quot;, which operated in Abu Dhabi, and the twin 160 ton payload &quot;Yukon Princesses&quot;, which ferried trucks across the Yukon River to aid the pipeline build. Hoverbarges are still in operation today. In 2006, Hovertrans (formed by the original managers of Mackace) launched a 330-ton payload drilling barge in the swamps of Suriname.

The Hoverbarge technology is somewhat different from high-speed hovercraft, which has traditionally been constructed using aircraft technology. The initial concept of the air cushion barge has always been to provide a low-tech amphibious solution for accessing construction sites using typical equipment found in this area, such as diesel engines, ventilating fans, winches and marine equipment. The load to move a 200 ton payload ACV barge at would only be 5 tons. The skirt and air distribution design on high-speed craft again is more complex, as they have to cope with the air cushion being washed out by a wave and wave impact. The slow speed and large mono chamber of the hover barge actually helps reduce the effect of wave action, giving a very smooth ride.

The low pull force enabled a Boeing 107 helicopter to pull a hoverbarge across snow, ice and water in 1982.

====Hovertrains====
Several attempts have been made to adopt air cushion technology for use in fixed track systems, in order to use the lower frictional forces for delivering high speeds. The most advanced example of this was the Aérotrain, an experimental high speed hovertrain built and operated in France between 1965 and 1977. The project was abandoned in 1977 due to lack of funding, the death of its lead engineer and the adoption of the TGV by the French government as its high-speed ground transport solution.

A test track for a tracked hovercraft system was built at Earith near Cambridge, England. It ran southwest from Sutton Gault, sandwiched between the Old Bedford River and the smaller Counter Drain to the west. Careful examination of the site will still reveal traces of the concrete piers used to support the structure. The actual vehicle, RTV31, is preserved at Railworld in Peterborough and can be seen from trains, just south west of Peterborough railway station. The vehicle achieved on 7 February 1973 but the project was cancelled a week later. The project was managed by Tracked Hovercraft Ltd., with Denys Bliss as Director in the early 1970s, then axed by the Aerospace Minister, Michael Heseltine. Records of this project are available from the correspondence and papers of Sir Harry Legge-Bourke, MP at Leeds University Library. Heseltine was accused by Airey Neave and others of misleading the House of Commons when he stated that the government was still considering giving financial support to the Hovertrain, when the decision to pull the plug had already been taken by the Cabinet.

After the Cambridge project was abandoned due to financial constraints, parts of the project were picked up by the engineering firm Alfred McAlpine, and abandoned in the mid-1980s. The Tracked Hovercraft project and Professor Laithwaite&#x27;s Maglev train system were contemporaneous, and there was intense competition between the two prospective British systems for funding and credibility.

At the other end of the speed spectrum, the U-Bahn Serfaus has been in continuous operation since 1985. This is an unusual underground air cushion funicular rapid transit system, situated in the Austrian ski resort of Serfaus. Only long, the line reaches a maximum speed of . A similar system also exists in Narita International Airport near Tokyo, Japan.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the U.S. Department of Transport&#x27;s Urban Mass Transit Administration (UMTA) funded several hovertrain projects, which were known as Tracked Air Cushion Vehicles or TACVs. They were also known as Aerotrains since one of the builders had a licence from Bertin&#x27;s Aerotrain company. Three separate projects were funded. Research and development was carried out by Rohr, Inc., Garrett AiResearch and Grumman. UMTA built an extensive test site in Pueblo, Colorado, with different types of tracks for the different technologies used by the prototype contractors. They managed to build prototypes and do a few test runs before the funding was cut.

====Heavy haulage====
From the 1960s to 1980s, heavy haulers in the UK used an air-cushion system for their hydraulic modular trailers to carry overweight loads over bridges which were not able to bear the weight of the load and the trailer. The Central Electricity Generating Board had to move transformers from one place to another which weighed from 150 tons to 300 tons for which they did not have appropriate equipment; so they hired heavy haulers like Wynns and Pickfords who had specialized equipment like hydraulic modular trailers manufactured by Nicolas and Cometto, and ballast tractors from Scammell which were strong and powerful enough to carry the load. This made the transportation efficient by avoiding bridge reinforcement, in some cases costing .

The transformers were loaded into the girder frame of the hydraulic modular trailer with axle lines in front and behind of the transformer, which made it possible to keep the transformer as low as possible to the ground to negotiate obstacles on the route. Air cushions were mounted under the girder frame&#x27;s surface and were operated by a compressor vehicle which was a customized Commer 16-ton maxiload provided by CEGB. The vehicle was loaded with 4 air compressors powered by a Rolls-Royce engine producing 235 bhp. While negotiating a bridge the air cushions were inflated and that reduced the stress tremendously on the bridge. Without this technology the government would have had to rebuild the bridges which was not feasible just to carry a small number of loads.

====Non-transportation====
The Hoover Constellation was a spherical canister-type vacuum cleaner notable for its lack of wheels. Floating on a cushion of air, it was a domestic hovercraft. They were not especially good as vacuum cleaners as the air escaping from under the cushion blew uncollected dust in all directions, nor as hovercraft as their lack of a skirt meant that they only hovered effectively over a smooth surface. Despite this, original Constellations are sought-after collectibles today.

The Flymo is an air-cushion lawn mower that uses a fan on the cutter blade to provide lift. This allows it to be moved in any direction, and provides double-duty as a mulcher.

The Marylebone Cricket Club owns a &quot;hover cover&quot; that it uses regularly to cover the pitch at Lord&#x27;s Cricket Ground. This device is easy and quick to move, and has no pressure points, making damage to the pitch less likely.

A power trowel is a hovercraft device used for skimming concrete.

==Features==
===Advantages===
* Terrain-independence - crossing beachfronts and slopes up to 40 degrees
* All-season capability - frozen or flowing rivers no object
* Speed
* Flexibility, due to low surface friction

===Disadvantages===
* Engine noise emissions
* Initial costs
* Proneness to contrary winds
* Skirt wear and tear

==Preservation==
The Hovercraft Museum at Lee-on-the-Solent, Hampshire, England, houses the world&#x27;s largest collection of hovercraft designs, including some of the earliest and largest. Much of the collection is housed within the retired SR.N4 hovercraft &quot;Princess Anne&quot;. She is the last of her kind in the world.
There are many hovercraft in the museum but all are non-operational.

, Hovercraft continue in use between Ryde on the Isle of Wight and Southsea on the English mainland. The service, operated by Hovertravel, schedules up to three crossings each hour, and provides the fastest way of getting on or off the island. Large passenger-hovercraft are still manufactured on the Isle of Wight.

==Records==
* World&#x27;s largest civil hovercraft – The BHC SR.N4 Mk.III, at 56.4 m (185 ft) length and 310 metric tons (305 long tons) weight, can accommodate 418 passengers and 60 cars.
* World&#x27;s largest military hovercraft – The Russian Zubr class LCAC at 57.6 metres (188 feet) length and a maximum displacement of 535 tons. This hovercraft can transport three T-80 main battle tanks (MBT), 140 fully equipped troops, or up to 130 tons of cargo. Four have been purchased by the Greek Navy.
* English Channel crossing – 22 minutes by &quot;Princess Anne&quot; Mountbatten class hovercraft SR.N4 Mk.III on 14 September 1995
* World hovercraft speed record – 137.4 km/h (85.38 mph or 74.19 knots). Bob Windt (USA) at World Hovercraft Championships, Rio Douro River, Peso de Regua, Portugal on 18 September 1995.
* Hovercraft land speed record – 56.25 mph (90.53 km/h or 48.88 knots). John Alford (USA) at Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah, USA on 21 September 1988.
* Longest continuous use – The original prototype SR.N6 Mk.I (009) was in service for over 20 years, and logged 22,000 hours of use. It is currently on display at the Hovercraft Museum in Lee-on-the-Solent, Hampshire, England.

==See also==
* Aerofex hover vehicle
* Airboat
* LCAC
* Avrocar
* Coandă effect
* Ekranoplan
* Fluid bearing
* Flymo
* Hoverboard
* Hovercar
* Hovercraft tank
* Hydrofoil
* Pegasus
* Research Test Vehicle 31
* Resonance method of ice destruction
* Saab 401 Swedish air-cushion vehicle prototype
* Ship-to-Shore Connector
* Surface effect ship
==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* Web page on tracked air cushion vehicle research in the U.S.
* Article on tracked air cushion vehicle research in the U.S.

==External links==
* &quot;The Future of Hovercraft&quot;
* Hovercraft Museum at Lee-on-Solent, Gosport, UK
* 1965 film of the Denny D2 hoverbus from the Scottish Screen Archive, National Library of Scotland
* Royal Marines Super Hovercraft
* Simple Potted History of the Hovercraft 
* Hovercraft Club of Great Britain
* Air cushion technology for heavy haulage in 1967.
* US Patent 3066753A - Ground Effect Machine
* US Patent 3150731A - Air cushion vehicle construction including control valves</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="2" end="12" title="Hovercraft" label="hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="46" end="65" title="Hovercraft" label="air-cushion vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="69" end="72" title="Hovercraft" label="ACV"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="80" end="96" title="amphibious craft" label="amphibious craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="242" end="246" title="Hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="287" end="307" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="1045" end="1060" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="1329" end="1342" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q541348" start="1347" end="1355" title="Southsea" label="Southsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q122361314" start="1367" end="1382" title="Oita Hovercraft" label="Oita Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q133924" start="1417" end="1428" title="Oita, Japan" label="Oita, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1535" end="1544" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806984" start="1554" end="1566" title="Saunders-Roe" label="Saunders-Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970083" start="1574" end="1604" title="British Hovercraft Corporation" label="British Hovercraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125008" start="1617" end="1625" title="Westland Helicopters" label="Westland"/>
<link wikidata="Q309398" start="1930" end="1951" title="ground effect vehicle" label="ground effect vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="1957" end="1966" title="hydrofoil" label="hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q185832" start="2167" end="2185" title="Emanuel Swedenborg" label="Emanuel Swedenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346177" start="2212" end="2234" title="John Isaac Thornycroft" label="John Isaac Thornycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804386" start="2409" end="2438" title="Dagobert Müller von Thomamühl" label="Dagobert Müller von Thomamühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="2546" end="2554" title="aerofoil" label="aerofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="3019" end="3031" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="3156" end="3164" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="3419" end="3454" title="Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovskii" label="Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovskii"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="3500" end="3504" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534874" start="3864" end="3870" title="caster" label="caster"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4748" end="4760" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079607" start="4841" end="4857" title="Charles Joseph Fletcher" label="Charles Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="5036" end="5040" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804664" start="5220" end="5235" title="Modern Mechanix" label="Modern Mechanix"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="5524" end="5528" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="5552" end="5563" title="concept car" label="concept car"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378169" start="5569" end="5588" title="Ford Levacar Mach I" label="Ford Levacar Mach I"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="5613" end="5628" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394985" start="5717" end="5737" title="William R. Bertelsen" label="William R. Bertelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="5824" end="5840" title="autonomous car" label="self-driving car"/>
<link wikidata="Q469938" start="5961" end="5982" title="Christopher Cockerell" label="Christopher Cockerell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322168" start="6294" end="6305" title="Somerleyton" label="Somerleyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846150" start="6472" end="6480" title="Steel and tin cans" label="tin cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="7144" end="7154" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="7568" end="7577" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967658" start="8122" end="8163" title="National Research Development Corporation" label="National Research Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806984" start="8248" end="8260" title="Saunders-Roe" label="Saunders-Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392766" start="8306" end="8311" title="SR.N1" label="SR.N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q449389" start="8396" end="8410" title="Alvis Leonides" label="Alvis Leonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="9051" end="9068" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987335" start="9093" end="9103" title="East Cowes" label="East Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064044" start="9718" end="9735" title="Turbomeca Marboré" label="Blackburn Marboré"/>
<link wikidata="Q689349" start="9885" end="9909" title="Armstrong Siddeley Viper" label="Armstrong Siddeley Viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006114" start="10208" end="10229" title="C.H. Latimer-Needham" label="Cecil Latimer-Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125008" start="10956" end="10964" title="Westland Helicopters" label="Westland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11604" end="11615" title="Denys Bliss" label="Denys Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q586346" start="12684" end="12692" title="Westland Aircraft" label="Westland"/>
<link wikidata="Q763052" start="12694" end="12711" title="Vickers-Armstrongs" label="Vickers-Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578470" start="12713" end="12726" title="William Denny and Brothers" label="William Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q920995" start="12728" end="12742" title="Britten-Norman" label="Britten-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q450785" start="12747" end="12754" title="Folland Aircraft" label="Folland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759743" start="12917" end="12922" title="SR.N4" label="SR.N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917098" start="12946" end="12956" title="Hoverlloyd" label="Hoverlloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441955" start="12961" end="12969" title="Seaspeed" label="Seaspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685376" start="13114" end="13125" title="Jean Bertin" label="Jean Bertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089187" start="13550" end="13564" title="N500 Naviplane" label="N500 Naviplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573358" start="14421" end="14431" title="hovertrain" label="hovertrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071362" start="14491" end="14509" title="Tracked Hovercraft" label="Tracked Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q794598" start="14534" end="14543" title="Aérotrain" label="Aérotrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391081" start="14564" end="14573" title="Rohr Inc." label="Rohr Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="14578" end="14585" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="14693" end="14699" title="Maglev (transport)" label="maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679469" start="15374" end="15379" title="SR.N6" label="SR.N6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698700" start="15510" end="15518" title="impeller" label="impeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967658" start="16108" end="16149" title="National Research Development Corporation" label="National Research Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396" start="16511" end="16524" title="Louis Blériot" label="Louis Blériot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396967" start="16649" end="16668" title="Farnborough Airshow" label="Farnborough Airshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="16743" end="16750" title="marines" label="marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="17211" end="17221" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006114" start="17231" end="17251" title="C.H. Latimer-Needham" label="C.H. Latimer-Needham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17489" end="17501" title="Vickers VA-3" label="Vickers VA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020203" start="17619" end="17623" title="Rhyl" label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="17647" end="17656" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="17684" end="17694" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392768" start="17805" end="17810" title="SR.N2" label="SR.N2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="17838" end="17844" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679469" start="17869" end="17874" title="SR.N6" label="SR.N6"/>
<link wikidata="Q541348" start="17914" end="17922" title="Southsea" label="Southsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q776556" start="17926" end="17930" title="Ryde" label="Ryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q845623" start="18027" end="18044" title="Weston-super-Mare" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="18049" end="18056" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q768398" start="18141" end="18152" title="Hovertravel" label="Hovertravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970079" start="18238" end="18244" title="AP1-88" label="AP1-88"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917116" start="18348" end="18354" title="BHT130" label="BHT130"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917098" start="18923" end="18933" title="Hoverlloyd" label="Hoverlloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q736439" start="18952" end="18960" title="Ramsgate" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="18982" end="18988" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518671" start="19002" end="19018" title="European Ferries" label="Townsend Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441955" start="19101" end="19109" title="Seaspeed" label="Seaspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196203" start="19291" end="19303" title="Cushioncraft" label="Cushioncraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q920995" start="19317" end="19331" title="Britten-Norman" label="Britten-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915094" start="19397" end="19416" title="Surface effect ship" label="sidewall hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="19546" end="19549" title="Bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="19554" end="19559" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135976" start="19605" end="19615" title="Red Funnel" label="Red Funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033949" start="19646" end="19670" title="Woolston Floating Bridge" label="Woolston Floating Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="19676" end="19681" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759743" start="19757" end="19786" title="SR.N4" label="&amp;quot;Mountbatten&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q917963" start="19824" end="19839" title="Bristol Proteus" label="Bristol Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q943162" start="19840" end="19850" title="turboshaft" label="turboshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917098" start="19900" end="19910" title="Hoverlloyd" label="Hoverlloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441955" start="19915" end="19923" title="Seaspeed" label="Seaspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631636" start="19946" end="19956" title="Hoverspeed" label="Hoverspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q736439" start="20074" end="20082" title="Ramsgate" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917104" start="20100" end="20109" title="hoverport" label="hoverport"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="20205" end="20213" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089187" start="20520" end="20534" title="N500 Naviplane" label="N500 Naviplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646" start="20698" end="20702" title="SNCF" label="SNCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="20810" end="20819" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="20943" end="20957" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439804" start="21193" end="21199" title="SeaCat" label="SeaCat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="21392" end="21398" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546633" start="21496" end="21513" title="Griffon Hoverwork" label="Griffon Hoverwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="21533" end="21568" title="Royal National Lifeboat Institution" label="Royal National Lifeboat Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708704" start="21571" end="21581" title="Water transport in Mumbai" label="Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q864862" start="21606" end="21622" title="Gateway of India" label="Gateway of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="21626" end="21632" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q297847" start="21637" end="21648" title="CBD Belapur" label="CBD Belapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q297732" start="21653" end="21658" title="Vashi" label="Vashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61445" start="21662" end="21673" title="Navi Mumbai" label="Navi Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764273" start="21770" end="21800" title="water transport infrastructure" label="water transport infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q745709" start="21912" end="21922" title="rasputitsa" label="rasputitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="21951" end="21962" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247822" start="22011" end="22025" title="Burnham-on-Sea" label="Burnham-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966924" start="22094" end="22108" title="Bridgwater Bay" label="Bridgwater Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829193" start="22110" end="22138" title="Avon Fire and Rescue Service" label="Avon Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q845623" start="22270" end="22287" title="Weston-super-Mare" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="22842" end="22851" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572109" start="22863" end="22902" title="Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service" label="Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q503077" start="22951" end="22969" title="Severn Trent" label="Severn Trent Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380859" start="22984" end="22998" title="2007 United Kingdom floods" label="2007 UK floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="23190" end="23193" title="Scandinavian Airlines System" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="23202" end="23209" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q206277" start="23262" end="23280" title="Copenhagen Airport" label="Copenhagen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303352" start="23314" end="23322" title="Ferry terminal" label="Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="23326" end="23331" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970079" start="23403" end="23419" title="Hoverwork AP1-88" label="Hoverwork AP1-88"/>
<link wikidata="Q80022" start="23463" end="23477" title="Bethel, Alaska" label="Bethel, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q60067" start="23522" end="23537" title="Kuskokwim River" label="Kuskokwim River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="24121" end="24128" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917116" start="24198" end="24204" title="BHT130" label="BHT130"/>
<link wikidata="Q80120" start="24348" end="24357" title="King Cove" label="King Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q79523" start="24362" end="24370" title="Cold Bay" label="Cold Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="24433" end="24447" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q691685" start="24457" end="24466" title="Kirkcaldy" label="Kirkcaldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399361" start="24471" end="24492" title="Portobello, Edinburgh" label="Portobello, Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q768398" start="24595" end="24606" title="Hovertravel" label="Hovertravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142594" start="24627" end="24648" title="Load factor (transportation)" label="passenger load factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q768398" start="24913" end="24924" title="Hovertravel" label="Hovertravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q541348" start="24933" end="24941" title="Southsea" label="Southsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="24943" end="24953" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q776556" start="24959" end="24963" title="Ryde" label="Ryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="24971" end="24984" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334587" start="25119" end="25131" title="Ōita Airport" label="Ōita Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q199609" start="25144" end="25148" title="Ōita, Ōita" label="Ōita"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="25773" end="25778" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040014" start="25792" end="25813" title="Jingsah II class LCAC" label="Jingsah II class LCAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q748871" start="25911" end="25915" title="Landing Craft Air Cushion" label="LCAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071948" start="25939" end="25951" title="Finnish Navy" label="Finnish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q655515" start="26010" end="26032" title="Tuuli class hovercraft" label="Tuuli class hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="26173" end="26181" title="littoral" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408298" start="26314" end="26326" title="Iranian Navy" label="Iranian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820791" start="26400" end="26406" title="Tondar (Hovercraft)" label="Tondar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26684" end="26696" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679273" start="26739" end="26762" title="Czilim-class hovercraft" label="Czilim-class hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332500" start="26799" end="26821" title="Zubr-class LCAC" label="&amp;quot;Zubr&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="26822" end="26835" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q631148" start="26844" end="26848" title="Bora-class corvette" label="Bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915094" start="26866" end="26885" title="surface effect ship" label="surface effect ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="26923" end="26932" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="27027" end="27047" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277155" start="27180" end="27213" title="RNAS Lee-on-Solent (HMS Daedalus)" label="RNAS Lee-on-Solent (HMS Daedalus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226086" start="27235" end="27252" title="Hovercraft Museum" label="Hovercraft Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="27259" end="27269" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392768" start="27357" end="27362" title="SR.N2" label="SR.N2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11334770" start="27364" end="27369" title="SR.N3" label="SR.N3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392767" start="27371" end="27376" title="SR.N5" label="SR.N5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679469" start="27381" end="27386" title="SR.N6" label="SR.N6"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="27469" end="27478" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q995163" start="27559" end="27564" title="Tawau" label="Tawau"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="27578" end="27584" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="27628" end="27660" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation"/>
<link wikidata="Q469938" start="27698" end="27719" title="Christopher Cockerell" label="Christopher Cockerell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="27755" end="27768" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="28036" end="28049" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544368" start="28058" end="28081" title="Griffon 2000TD hovercraft" label="Griffonhoverwork 2400TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="28201" end="28222" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q815695" start="28266" end="28270" title="Bell Aircraft" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="28365" end="28376" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="28384" end="28402" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q959939" start="28412" end="28416" title="PACV" label="PACV"/>
<link wikidata="Q331795" start="28423" end="28435" title="patrol craft" label="patrol craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052867" start="28443" end="28455" title="Mekong Delta" label="Mekong Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79782" start="28468" end="28476" title="Motion (physics)" label="mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711325" start="28481" end="28486" title="speed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="28541" end="28545" title="Deck (ship)" label="deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="28595" end="28605" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q184613" start="28610" end="28626" title="grenade launcher" label="grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385848" start="28806" end="28814" title="Đồng Tâm Base Camp" label="Đồng Tâm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079972" start="28897" end="28911" title="Đồng Tháp Mười" label="Plain of Reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077862" start="29099" end="29120" title="Fort Eustis" label="Army Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="29124" end="29132" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748871" start="29206" end="29216" title="Landing Craft Air Cushion" label="LCAC-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956088" start="29217" end="29244" title="air-cushioned landing craft" label="air-cushioned landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q731647" start="29274" end="29287" title="Japanese Navy" label="Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820187" start="29332" end="29339" title="LACV-30" label="LACV-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817024" start="29860" end="29892" title="Hovercraft Club of Great Britain" label="Hovercraft Club of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33860" end="33870" title="Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight#Civilian" label="Boeing 107"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="33871" end="33881" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q794598" start="34170" end="34179" title="Aérotrain" label="Aérotrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573358" start="34208" end="34218" title="hovertrain" label="hovertrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="34241" end="34247" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="34384" end="34387" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622643" start="34517" end="34523" title="Earith" label="Earith"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="34529" end="34538" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="34540" end="34547" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081463" start="34571" end="34583" title="Sutton Gault" label="Sutton Gault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083451" start="34608" end="34625" title="Old Bedford River" label="Old Bedford River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284354" start="34822" end="34831" title="Railworld" label="Railworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q172438" start="34835" end="34847" title="Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="34896" end="34924" title="Peterborough railway station" label="Peterborough railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="35148" end="35165" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529968" start="35243" end="35269" title="Harry Legge-Bourke" label="Sir Harry Legge-Bourke, MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q334302" start="35324" end="35335" title="Airey Neave" label="Airey Neave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576816" start="35690" end="35705" title="Alfred McAlpine" label="Alfred McAlpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125819" start="35774" end="35801" title="Eric Laithwaite" label="Professor Laithwaite&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="35802" end="35814" title="Maglev train" label="Maglev train"/>
<link wikidata="Q701311" start="35996" end="36010" title="U-Bahn Serfaus" label="U-Bahn Serfaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="36099" end="36108" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="36109" end="36122" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="36156" end="36166" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q515835" start="36170" end="36177" title="Serfaus" label="Serfaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965980" start="36230" end="36244" title="Narita Airport Terminal 2 Shuttle System" label="similar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q36454" start="36260" end="36288" title="Narita International Airport" label="Narita International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440472" start="36384" end="36417" title="Federal Transit Administration" label="Urban Mass Transit Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391081" start="36714" end="36724" title="Rohr, Inc." label="Rohr, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="36726" end="36744" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett AiResearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q463261" start="36749" end="36756" title="Grumman" label="Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="36795" end="36811" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="37063" end="37065" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q117312691" start="37103" end="37128" title="hydraulic modular trailer" label="hydraulic modular trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q680421" start="37139" end="37154" title="overweight load" label="overweight load"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061023" start="37241" end="37277" title="Central Electricity Generating Board" label="Central Electricity Generating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="37290" end="37301" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190866" start="37463" end="37472" title="Pickfords" label="Pickfords"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382803" start="37551" end="37558" title="Nicolas Industrie" label="Nicolas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37563" end="37570" title=":fr:Cometto" label="Cometto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216209" start="37576" end="37591" title="ballast tractor" label="ballast tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475924" start="37598" end="37606" title="Scammell" label="Scammell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="38106" end="38116" title="compressor" label="compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q860390" start="38148" end="38154" title="Commer" label="Commer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225665" start="38248" end="38259" title="Rolls-Royce" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38571" end="38591" title="vacuum cleaner#Constellation" label="Hoover Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101674" start="38622" end="38636" title="vacuum cleaner" label="vacuum cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743" start="38708" end="38716" title="Home" label="domestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="39024" end="39036" title="collectibles" label="collectibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463637" start="39049" end="39054" title="Flymo" label="Flymo"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="39073" end="39083" title="lawn mower" label="lawn mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="39226" end="39249" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="Marylebone Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474006" start="39263" end="39274" title="hover cover" label="hover cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="39326" end="39352" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Cricket Ground" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236656" start="39464" end="39476" title="power trowel" label="power trowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143316" start="39845" end="39858" title="wear and tear" label="wear and tear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226086" start="39881" end="39898" title="Hovercraft Museum" label="Hovercraft Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q985587" start="39902" end="39919" title="Lee-on-the-Solent" label="Lee-on-the-Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759743" start="40103" end="40108" title="SR.N4" label="SR.N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q768398" start="40385" end="40396" title="Hovertravel" label="Hovertravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759743" start="40638" end="40643" title="SR.N4" label="SR.N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332500" start="40823" end="40838" title="Zubr class LCAC" label="Zubr class LCAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="40948" end="40952" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="40953" end="40969" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129369" start="41065" end="41075" title="Greek Navy" label="Greek Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="41079" end="41094" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759743" start="41146" end="41174" title="Mountbatten class hovercraft" label="Mountbatten class hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679469" start="41594" end="41604" title="SR.N6" label="SR.N6 Mk.I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226086" start="41711" end="41728" title="Hovercraft Museum" label="Hovercraft Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q985587" start="41732" end="41749" title="Lee-on-the-Solent" label="Lee-on-the-Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="41751" end="41760" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="41762" end="41769" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688253" start="41787" end="41808" title="Aerofex hover vehicle" label="Aerofex hover vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337450" start="41811" end="41818" title="Airboat" label="Airboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956088" start="41821" end="41825" title="Air-cushioned landing craft" label="LCAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q580255" start="41828" end="41835" title="Avrocar" label="Avrocar"/>
<link wikidata="Q605624" start="41838" end="41851" title="Coandă effect" label="Coandă effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q309398" start="41854" end="41864" title="Ekranoplan" label="Ekranoplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192753" start="41867" end="41880" title="Fluid bearing" label="Fluid bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463637" start="41883" end="41888" title="Flymo" label="Flymo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295505" start="41891" end="41901" title="Hoverboard" label="Hoverboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q851979" start="41904" end="41912" title="Hovercar" label="Hovercar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451184" start="41915" end="41930" title="Hovercraft tank" label="Hovercraft tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="41933" end="41942" title="Hydrofoil" label="Hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160552" start="41945" end="41952" title="Pegasus (hovercraft)" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071362" start="41955" end="41979" title="Research Test Vehicle 31" label="Research Test Vehicle 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329654" start="41982" end="42017" title="Resonance method of ice destruction" label="Resonance method of ice destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843279" start="42020" end="42028" title="Saab 401" label="Saab 401"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497910" start="42069" end="42092" title="Ship-to-Shore Connector" label="Ship-to-Shore Connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915094" start="42095" end="42114" title="Surface effect ship" label="Surface effect ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578470" start="42414" end="42419" title="William Denny and Brothers" label="Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018026" start="42441" end="42464" title="Scottish Screen Archive" label="Scottish Screen Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="42466" end="42494" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152692" wikidata="Q39495" url="?curid=152692" title="Tractor">
<text>A tractor is an engineering vehicle specifically designed to deliver a high tractive effort (or torque) at slow speeds, for the purposes of hauling a trailer or machinery such as that used in agriculture, mining or construction. Most commonly, the term is used to describe a farm vehicle that provides the power and traction to mechanize agricultural tasks, especially (and originally) tillage, and now many more. Agricultural implements may be towed behind or mounted on the tractor, and the tractor may also provide a source of power if the implement is mechanised.


== Etymology ==
The word &quot;tractor&quot; was taken from Latin, being the agent noun of &quot;trahere&quot; &quot;to pull&quot;. The first recorded use of the word meaning &quot;an engine or vehicle for pulling wagons or plows&quot; occurred in 1896, from the earlier term &quot;traction motor&quot; (1859).

=== National variations ===
In the UK, Ireland, Australia, India, Spain, Argentina, Slovenia, Serbia, Croatia, the Netherlands, and Germany, the word &quot;tractor&quot; usually means &quot;farm tractor&quot;, and the use of the word &quot;tractor&quot; to mean other types of vehicles is familiar to the vehicle trade, but unfamiliar to much of the general public. In Canada and the US, the word may also refer to the road tractor portion of a tractor trailer truck, but also usually refers to the piece of farm equipment.

== History ==
=== Traction engines ===
The first powered farm implements in the early 19th century were portable engines – steam engines on wheels that could be used to drive mechanical farm machinery by way of a flexible belt. Richard Trevithick designed the first &#x27;semi-portable&#x27; stationary steam engine for agricultural use, known as a &quot;barn engine&quot; in 1812, and it was used to drive a corn threshing machine. The truly portable engine was invented in 1839 by William Tuxford of Boston, Lincolnshire who started manufacture of an engine built around a locomotive-style boiler with horizontal smoke tubes. A large flywheel was mounted on the crankshaft, and a stout leather belt was used to transfer the drive to the equipment being driven. In the 1850s, John Fowler used a Clayton &amp; Shuttleworth portable engine to drive apparatus in the first public demonstrations of the application of cable haulage to cultivation.

In parallel with the early portable engine development, many engineers attempted to make them self-propelled – the fore-runners of the traction engine. In most cases this was achieved by fitting a sprocket on the end of the crankshaft, and running a chain from this to a larger sprocket on the rear axle. These experiments met with mixed success. The first proper traction engine, in the form recognisable today, was developed in 1859 when British engineer Thomas Aveling modified a Clayton &amp; Shuttleworth portable engine, which had to be hauled from job to job by horses, into a self-propelled one. The alteration was made by fitting a long driving chain between the crankshaft and the rear axle.

The first half of the 1860s was a period of great experimentation but by the end of the decade the standard form of the traction engine had evolved and changed little over the next sixty years. It was widely adopted for agricultural use. The first tractors were steam-powered plowing engines. They were used in pairs, placed on either side of a field to haul a plow back and forth between them using a wire cable. In Britain Mann&#x27;s and Garrett developed steam tractors for direct ploughing, but the heavy, wet soil of England meant that these designs were less economical than a team of horses. In the United States, where soil conditions permitted, steam tractors were used to direct-haul plows. Steam-powered agricultural engines remained in use well into the 20th century until reliable internal combustion engines had been developed.

=== Fuel ===
The first gasoline powered tractors were built in Illinois, by John Charter combining single cylinder Otto engines with a Rumley Steam engine chassis, in 1889. In 1892, John Froelich built a gasoline-powered tractor in Clayton County, Iowa, US. A Van Duzen single-cylinder gasoline engine was mounted on a Robinson engine chassis, which could be controlled and propelled by Froelich&#x27;s gear box. After receiving a patent, Froelich started up the Waterloo Gasoline Engine Company and invested all of his assets. The venture was very unsuccessful, and by 1895 all was lost and he went out of business.

Richard Hornsby &amp; Sons are credited with producing and selling the first oil-engined tractor in Britain, invented by Herbert Akroyd Stuart. The Hornsby-Akroyd Patent Safety Oil Traction Engine was made in 1896 with a engine. In 1897, it was bought by Mr. Locke-King, the first recorded British tractor sale. That year, it won a Silver Medal from the Royal Agricultural Society of England. It later returned to the factory for a caterpillar track fitting.

The first commercially successful light-weight petrol-powered general purpose tractor was built by Dan Albone, a British inventor in 1901. He filed for a patent on 15 February 1902 for his tractor design and then formed Ivel Agricultural Motors Limited. The other directors were Selwyn Edge, Charles Jarrott, John Hewitt and Lord Willoughby. He called his machine the Ivel Agricultural Motor; the word &quot;tractor&quot; came into common use after Hart-Parr created it. The Ivel Agricultural Motor was light, powerful and compact. It had one front wheel, with a solid rubber tyre, and two large rear wheels like a modern tractor. The engine used water cooling, utilizing the thermo-syphon effect. It had one forward and one reverse gear. A pulley wheel on the left hand side allowed it to be used as a stationary engine, driving a wide range of agricultural machinery. The 1903 sale price was £300. His tractor won a medal at the Royal Agricultural Show, in 1903 and 1904. About 500 were built, and many were exported all over the world. The original engine was made by Payne &amp; Co. of Coventry. After 1906, French Aster engines were used.

The first successful American tractor was built by Charles W. Hart and Charles H. Parr. They developed a two-cylinder gasoline engine and set up their business in Charles City, Iowa. In 1903, the firm built 15 tractors. Their #3 is the oldest surviving internal combustion engine tractor in the United States, and is on display at the Smithsonian National Museum of American History in Washington, D.C. The two-cylinder engine has a unique hit-and-miss firing cycle that produced at the belt and at the drawbar.

In 1908, the Saunderson Tractor and Implement Co. of Bedford introduced a four-wheel design, and became the largest tractor manufacturer in Britain at the time. While the earlier, heavier tractors were initially very successful, it became increasingly apparent at this time that the weight of a large supporting frame was less efficient than lighter designs. Henry Ford introduced a light-weight, mass-produced design which largely displaced the heavier designs. Some companies halfheartedly followed suit with mediocre designs, as if to disprove the concept, but they were largely unsuccessful in that endeavor.

While unpopular at first, these gasoline-powered machines began to catch on in the 1910s, when they became smaller and more affordable. Henry Ford introduced the Fordson, a wildly popular mass-produced tractor, in 1917. They were built in the U.S., Ireland, England and Russia, and by 1923, Fordson had 77% of the U.S. market. The Fordson dispensed with a frame, using the strength of the engine block to hold the machine together. By the 1920s, tractors with gasoline-powered internal combustion engines had become the norm.

The first three-point hitches were experimented with in 1917. After Harry Ferguson applied for a British patent for his three-point hitch in 1926, they became popular. A three-point attachment of the implement to the tractor is the simplest and the only statically determinate way of joining two bodies in engineering. The Ferguson-Brown Company produced the Model A Ferguson-Brown tractor with a Ferguson-designed hydraulic hitch. In 1938 Ferguson entered into a collaboration with Henry Ford to produce the Ford-Ferguson 9N tractor. The three-point hitch soon became the favorite hitch attachment system among farmers around the world. This tractor model also included a rear Power Take Off (PTO) shaft that could be used to power three point hitch mounted implements such as sickle-bar mowers.

===Electric===

In 1969, General Electric introduced the Elec-Trak, the first commercial, electric tractor (electric-powered garden tractor). The Elec-Trak was manufactured by General Electric until 1975.

Electric tractors are manufactured by a German company, Fendt, and by US companies, Solectrac and Monarch Tractor.

John Deere&#x27;s protoype electric tractor is a plug-in, powered by an electrical cable.

Kubota is prototyping an autonomous electric tractor.

== Design, power and transmission ==

=== Configuration ===
Tractors can be generally classified by number of axles or wheels, with main categories of two-wheel tractors (single-axle tractors) and four-wheel tractors (two-axle tractors); more axles are possible but uncommon. Among four-wheel tractors (two-axle tractors), most are two-wheel drive (usually at the rear); but many are two-wheel drive with front wheel assist, four-wheel drive (often with articulated steering), or track crawler (with steel or rubber tracks).

The classic farm tractor is a simple open vehicle, with two very large driving wheels on an axle below a single seat (the seat and steering wheel consequently are in the center), and the engine in front of the driver, with two steerable wheels below the engine compartment. This basic design has remained unchanged for a number of years after being pioneered by Wallis, but enclosed cabs are fitted on almost all modern models, for operator safety and comfort.

In some localities with heavy or wet soils, notably in the Central Valley of California, the &quot;Caterpillar&quot; or &quot;crawler&quot; type of tracked tractor became popular due to superior traction and flotation. These were usually maneuvered through the use of turning brake pedals and separate track clutches operated by levers rather than a steering wheel.

Four-wheel drive tractors began to appear in the 1960s. Some four-wheel drive tractors have the standard &quot;two large, two small&quot; configuration typical of smaller tractors, while some have four large, powered wheels. The larger tractors are typically an articulated, center-hinged design steered by hydraulic cylinders that move the forward power unit while the trailing unit is not steered separately.
In the early 21st century, articulated or non-articulated, steerable multitrack tractors have largely supplanted the Caterpillar type for farm use. Larger types of modern farm tractors include articulated four-wheel or eight-wheel drive units with one or two power units which are hinged in the middle and steered by hydraulic clutches or pumps. A relatively recent development is the replacement of wheels or steel crawler-type tracks with flexible, steel-reinforced rubber tracks, usually powered by hydrostatic or completely hydraulic driving mechanisms. The configuration of these tractors bears little resemblance to the classic farm tractor design.

=== Engine and fuels ===
The predecessors of modern tractors, traction engines, used steam engines for power.

==== Gasoline and kerosene ====
Since the turn of the 20th century, internal combustion engines have been the power source of choice. Between 1900 and 1960, gasoline was the predominant fuel, with kerosene (the Rumely Oil Pull was the most notable of this kind)being a common alternative. Generally, one engine could burn any of those, although cold starting was easiest on gasoline. Often, a small auxiliary fuel tank was available to hold gasoline for cold starting and warm-up, while the main fuel tank held whatever fuel was most convenient or least expensive for the particular farmer. In the United Kingdom, a gasoline-kerosene engine is known as a petrol-paraffin engine.

==== Diesel ====
Dieselisation gained momentum starting in the 1960s, and modern farm tractors usually employ diesel engines, which range in power output from 18 to 575 horsepower (15 to 480 kW). Size and output are dependent on application, with smaller tractors used for lawn mowing, landscaping, orchard work, and truck farming, and larger tractors for vast fields of wheat, corn, soy, and other bulk crops.

==== Liquefied petroleum gas ====
Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or propane also have been used as tractor fuels, but require special pressurized fuel tanks and filling equipment and produced less power, so are less prevalent in most markets. Most are confined for inside work due to their clean burning.

==== Wood ====
During the second world war, Petrolium based fuel was scarce in many European nations. So they resorted to using wood gasifires on every vehicle, including tractors.

==== Biodiesel ====
In some countries such as Germany, biodiesel is often used. Some other biofuels such as straight vegetable oil are also being used by some farmers.

==== Electric powered ====
Prototype battery powered electric tractors are being developed by a German company, Fendt, and by two US companies, Solectrac and Monarch Tractor. John Deere&#x27;s protoype electric tractor is a plug-in, powered by an electrical cable. Kubota is prototyping an autonomous electric tractor.

=== Transmission ===
Most older farm tractors use a manual transmission with several gear ratios, typically three to six, sometimes multiplied into two or three ranges. This arrangement provides a set of discrete ratios that, combined with the varying of the throttle, allow final-drive speeds from less than one up to about 25 miles per hour (40 km/h), with the lower speeds used for working the land and the highest speed used on the road.

Slow, controllable speeds are necessary for most of the operations performed with a tractor. They help give the farmer a larger degree of control in certain situations, such as field work. When travelling on public roads, the slow operating speeds can cause problems, such as long queues or tailbacks, which can delay or annoy motorists in cars and trucks. These motorists are responsible for being duly careful around farm tractors and sharing the road with them, but many shirk this responsibility, so various ways to minimize the interaction or minimize the speed differential are employed where feasible. Some countries (for example the Netherlands) employ a road sign on some roads that means &quot;no farm tractors&quot;. Some modern tractors, such as the JCB Fastrac, are now capable of much higher road speeds of around 50 mph (80 km/h).
Older tractors usually have unsynchronized transmission designs, which often require the operator to engage the clutch to shift between gears. This mode of use is inherently unsuited to some of the work tractors do, and has been circumvented in various ways over the years. For existing unsynchronized tractors, the methods of circumvention are double clutching or power-shifting, both of which require the operator to rely on skill to speed-match the gears while shifting, and are undesirable from a risk-mitigation standpoint because of what can go wrong if the operator makes a mistake – transmission damage is possible, and loss of vehicle control can occur if the tractor is towing a heavy load either uphill or downhill – something that tractors often do. Therefore, operator&#x27;s manuals for most of these tractors state one must always stop the tractor before shifting.

In newer designs, unsynchronized transmission designs were replaced with synchronization or with continuously variable transmissions (CVTs). Either a synchronized manual transmission with enough available gear ratios (often achieved with dual ranges, high and low) or a CVT allow the engine speed to be matched to the desired final-drive speed, while keeping engine speed within the appropriate speed (as measured in rotations per minute or rpm) range for power generation (the working range) (whereas throttling back to achieve the desired final-drive speed is a trade-off that leaves the working range). The problems, solutions, and developments described here also describe the history of transmission evolution in semi-trailer trucks. The biggest difference is fleet turnover; whereas most of the old road tractors have long since been scrapped, many of the old farm tractors are still in use. Therefore, old transmission design and operation is primarily just of historical interest in trucking, whereas in farming it still often affects daily life.

== Hitches and power applications ==
The power produced by the engine must be transmitted to the implement or equipment to do the actual work intended for the equipment. This may be accomplished via a drawbar or hitch system if the implement is to be towed or otherwise pulled through the tractive power of the engine, or via a pulley or power takeoff system if the implement is stationary, or a combination of the two.

=== Drawbars ===
Plows and other tillage equipment are most commonly connected to the tractor via a drawbar. The classic drawbar is simply a steel bar attached to the tractor (or in some cases, as in the early Fordsons, cast as part of the rear transmission housing) to which the hitch of the implement was attached with a pin or by a loop and clevis. The implement could be readily attached and removed, allowing the tractor to be used for other purposes on a daily basis. If the tractor was equipped with a swinging drawbar, then it could be set at the center or offset from center to allow the tractor to run outside the path of the implement.

The drawbar system necessitated the implement having its own running gear (usually wheels) and in the case of a plow, chisel cultivator or harrow, some sort of lift mechanism to raise it out of the ground at turns or for transport. Drawbars necessarily posed a rollover risk depending on how the tractive torque was applied. The Fordson tractor was prone to roll backward due to an excessively short wheelbase. The linkage between the implement and the tractor usually had some slack which could lead to jerky starts and greater wear and tear on the tractor and the equipment.

Drawbars were appropriate to the dawn of mechanization, because they were very simple in concept and because as the tractor replaced the horse, existing horse-drawn implements usually already had running gear. As the history of mechanization progressed, the advantages of other hitching systems became apparent, leading to new developments (see below). Depending on the function for which a tractor is used, though, the drawbar is still one of the usual means of attaching an implement to a tractor (see photo at left).

=== Fixed mounts ===
Some tractor manufacturers produced matching equipment that could be directly mounted on the tractor. Examples included front-end loaders, belly mowers, row crop cultivators, corn pickers and corn planters. In most cases, these fixed mounts were proprietary and unique to each make of tractor, so an implement produced by John Deere, for example, could not be attached to a Minneapolis Moline tractor. Another disadvantage was mounting usually required some time and labor, resulting in the implement being semi-permanently attached with bolts or other mounting hardware. Usually, it was impractical to remove the implement and reinstall it on a day-to-day basis. As a result, the tractor was unavailable for other uses and dedicated to a single use for an appreciable period of time. An implement was generally mounted at the beginning of its season of use (such as tillage, planting or harvesting) and removed when the season ended.

=== Three-point and quick ===
 
The drawbar system was virtually the exclusive method of attaching implements (other than direct attachment to the tractor) before Harry Ferguson developed the three-point hitch. Equipment attached to the three-point hitch can be raised or lowered hydraulically with a control lever. The equipment attached to the three-point hitch is usually completely supported by the tractor. Another way to attach an implement is via a quick hitch, which is attached to the three-point hitch. This enables a single person to attach an implement quicker and put the person in less danger when attaching the implement.

The three-point hitch revolutionized farm tractors and their implements. While the Ferguson System was still under patent, other manufacturers developed new hitching systems to try to fend off some of Ferguson&#x27;s competitive advantage. For example, International Harvester&#x27;s Farmall tractors gained a two-point &quot;Fast Hitch&quot;, and John Deere had a power lift that was somewhat similar to the more flexible Ferguson invention. Once the patent protection expired on the three-point hitch, it became an industry standard.

Almost every tractor today features Ferguson&#x27;s three-point linkage or a derivative of it. This hitch allows for easy attachment and detachment of implements while allowing the implement to function as a part of the tractor, almost as if it were attached by a fixed mount. Previously, when the implement hit an obstacle, the towing link broke or the tractor flipped over. Ferguson&#x27;s idea was to combine a connection via two lower and one upper lift arms that were connected to a hydraulic lifting ram. The ram was, in turn, connected to the upper of the three links so the increased drag (as when a plough hits a rock) caused the hydraulics to lift the implement until the obstacle was passed.

Recently, Bobcat&#x27;s patent on its front loader connection (inspired by these earlier systems) has expired, and compact tractors are now being outfitted with quick-connect attachments for their front-end loaders.

=== Power take-off systems and hydraulics ===
In addition to towing an implement or supplying tractive power through the wheels, most tractors have a means to transfer power to another machine such as a baler, swather, or mower. Unless it functions solely by pulling it through or over the ground, a towed implement needs its own power source (such as a baler or combine with a separate engine) or else a means of transmitting power from the tractor to the mechanical operations of the equipment.

Early tractors used belts or cables wrapped around the flywheel or a separate belt pulley to power stationary equipment, such as a threshing machine, buzz saw, silage blower, or stationary baler. In most cases, it was impractical for the tractor and equipment to move with a flexible belt or cable between them, so this system required the tractor to remain in one location, with the work brought to the equipment, or the tractor to be relocated at each turn and the power set-up reapplied (as in cable-drawn plowing systems used in early steam tractor operations).

Modern tractors use a power take-off (PTO) shaft to provide rotary power to machinery that may be stationary or pulled. The PTO shaft generally is at the rear of the tractor, and can be connected to an implement that is either towed by a drawbar or a three-point hitch. This eliminates the need for a separate, implement-mounted power source, which is almost never seen in modern farm equipment. It is also optional to get a front PTO as well when buying a new tractor.

Virtually all modern tractors can also provide external hydraulic fluid and electrical power to the equipment they are towing, either by hoses or wires.

== Operation ==
Modern tractors have many electrical switches and levers in the cab for controlling the multitude of different functions available on the tractor.

=== Pedals ===
Some modern farm tractors retain a traditional manual transmission; increasingly they have hydraulically driven powershift transmissions and CVT, which vastly simplify operation.

Those with powershift transmissions have identical pedal arrangements on the floor for the operator to actuate, replacing a clutch pedal on the far left with an inching pedal that cuts off hydraulic flow to the clutches. Twinned brake pedals – one each for left and right side wheels – are placed together on the right side. Some have a pedal for a foot throttle on the far right. Unlike automobiles, throttle speed can also be controlled by a hand-operated lever (&quot;hand throttle&quot;), which may be set to a fixed position. This helps provide a constant speed in field work. It also helps provide continuous power for stationary tractors that are operating an implement by PTO shaft or axle driven belt. The foot throttle gives the operator more automobile-like control over the speed of a mobile tractor in any operation.

Some modern tractors also have (or offer as optional equipment) a button on the gear stick for controlling the clutch, in addition to the standard pedal, allowing for gear changes and the tractor to be brought to a stop without using the foot pedal to engage the clutch. Others have a button for temporarily increasing throttle speed to improve hydraulic flow to implements, such as a front end loader bucket.

Independent left and right brake pedals are provided to allow improved steering (by engaging the side one wishes to turn to, slowing or stopping its wheel) and improved traction in soft and slippery conditions (by transferring rotation to the wheel with better grip). Some users prefer to lock both pedals together, or utilize a partial lock that allows the left pedal to be depressed independently but engages both when the right is applied. This may be in the form of a swinging or sliding bolt that may be readily engaged or disengaged in the field without tools.

Foot pedal throttle control is mostly a returning feature of newer tractors. In the UK, foot pedal use to control engine speed while travelling on the road is mandatory. Some tractors, especially those designed for row-crop work, have a &#x27;de-accelerator&#x27; pedal, which operates in the reverse fashion of an automobile throttle, slowing the engine when applied. This allows control over the speed of a tractor with its throttle set high for work, as when repeatedly slowing to make U-turns at the end of crop rows in fields.

A front-facing foot button is traditionally included just ahead of the driver&#x27;s seat (designed to be pressed by the operator&#x27;s heel) to engage the rear differential lock (diff-lock), which prevents wheel slip. The differential normally allows driving wheels to operate at their own speeds, as required, for example, by the different radius each takes in a turn. This allows the outside wheel to travel faster than the inside wheel, thereby traveling further during a turn. In low-traction conditions on a soft surface, the same mechanism can allow one wheel to slip, wasting its torque and further reducing traction. The differential lock overrides this, forcing both wheels to turn at the same speed, reducing wheel slip and improving traction. Care must be taken to unlock the differential before turning, usually by hitting the pedal a second time, since the tractor with good traction cannot perform a turn with the diff-lock engaged. In many modern tractors, this pedal is replaced with an electrical switch.

=== Levers and switches ===
Many functions once controlled with levers have been replaced with some model of electrical switch with the rise of indirect computer controlling of functions in modern tractors.

Until the late of the 1950s, tractors had a single register of gears, hence one gear stick, often with three to five forward gears and one reverse. Then, group gears were introduced, and another gear stick was added. Later, control of the forward-reverse direction was moved to a special stick attached at the side of the steering wheel, which allowed forward or reverse travel in any gear. Now, with CVTs or other gear types, fewer sticks control the transmission, and some are replaced with electrical switches or are totally computer-controlled.

The three-point hitch was controlled with a lever for adjusting the position, or as with the earliest ones, just the function for raising or lowering the hitch. With modern electrical systems, it is often replaced with a potentiometer for the lower bound position and another one for the upper bound, and a switch allowing automatic adjustment of the hitch between these settings.

The external hydraulics also originally had levers, but now are often replaced with some form of electrical switch; the same is true for the power take-off shaft.

== Safety ==

Agriculture in the United States is one of the most hazardous industries, only surpassed
by mining and construction. No other farm machine is so identified with the hazards of production agriculture as the tractor. Tractor-related injuries account for approximately 32% of the fatalities and 6% of the nonfatal injuries in agriculture. Over 50% is attributed to tractor overturns.

The roll-over protection structure (ROPS) and seat belt, when worn, are the most important safety devices to protect operators from death during tractor s.

Modern tractors have a ROPS to prevent an operator from being crushed when overturning. This is especially important in open-air tractors, where the ROPS is a steel beam that extends above the operator&#x27;s seat. For tractors with operator cabs, the ROPS is part
of the frame of the cab. A ROPS with enclosed cab further reduces the likelihood of serious injury because the operator is protected by the sides and windows of the cab.

These structures were first required by legislation in Sweden in 1959. Before they were required, some farmers died when their tractors rolled on top of them. Row-crop tractors, before ROPS, were particularly dangerous because of their &#x27;tricycle&#x27; design with the two front wheels spaced close together and angled inward toward the ground. Some farmers were killed by rollovers while operating tractors along slopes. Others have been killed while attempting to tow or pull an excessive load from above axle height, or when cold weather caused the tires to freeze to the ground, in both cases causing the tractor to pivot around the rear axle. ROPS were first required in the United States in 1986, non-retroactively. ROPS adoption by farmers is thus incomplete. To treat this problem, CROPS (cost-effective roll-over protection structures) have been developed to encourage farmers to retrofit older tractors.

For the ROPS to work as designed, the operator must stay within its protective frame and wear the seat belt.

In addition to ROPS, U.S. manufacturers add instructional seats on tractors with enclosed cabs. The tractors have a ROPS with seatbelts for both the operator and passenger. This instructional seat is intended to be used for training new tractor operators, but can also be used to diagnose machine problems.
The misuse of an instructional seat increases the likelihood of injury, especially when children are transported. The International Organization for Standardization&#x27;s ISO standard 23205:2014 specifies the minimum design and performance requirements for an instructional seat and states that the instructional seat is neither intended for, nor is it designed for use by children. Despite this, upwards of 40% of farm families give their children rides on tractors, often using these instructional seats.

== Applications and variations ==

=== Farm ===

The most common use of the term &quot;tractor&quot; is for the vehicles used on farms. The farm tractor is used for pulling or pushing agricultural machinery or trailers, for plowing, tilling, disking, harrowing, planting, and similar tasks.

A variety of specialty farm tractors have been developed for particular uses. These include &quot;row crop&quot; tractors with adjustable tread width to allow the tractor to pass down rows of cereals, maize, tomatoes or other crops without crushing the plants, &quot;wheatland&quot; or &quot;standard&quot; tractors with fixed wheels and a lower center of gravity for plowing and other heavy field work for broadcast crops, and &quot;high crop&quot; tractors with adjustable tread and increased ground clearance, often used in the cultivation of cotton and other high-growing row crop plant operations, and &quot;utility tractors&quot;, typically smaller tractors with a low center of gravity and short turning radius, used for general purposes around the farmstead. Many utility tractors are used for nonfarm grading, landscape maintenance and excavation purposes, particularly with loaders, backhoes, pallet forks and similar devices. Small garden or lawn tractors designed for suburban and semirural gardening and landscape maintenance are produced in a variety of configurations, and also find numerous uses on a farmstead.

Some farm-type tractors are found elsewhere than on farms: with large universities&#x27; gardening departments, in public parks, or for highway workman use with blowtorch cylinders strapped to the sides and a pneumatic drill air compressor permanently fastened over the power take-off. These are often fitted with grass (turf) tyres which are less damaging to soft surfaces than agricultural tires.

==== Precision ====
Space technology has been incorporated into agriculture in the form of GPS devices, and robust on-board computers installed as optional features on farm tractors. These technologies are used in modern, precision farming techniques. The spin-offs from the space race have actually facilitated automation in plowing and the use of autosteer systems (drone on tractors that are manned but only steered at the end of a row), the idea being to neither overlap and use more fuel nor leave streaks when performing jobs such as cultivating. Several tractor companies have also been working on producing a driverless tractor.

=== Engineering ===

The durability and engine power of tractors made them very suitable for engineering tasks. Tractors can be fitted with engineering tools such as dozer blades, buckets, hoes, rippers, etc. The most common attachments for the front of a tractor are dozer blades or buckets. When attached to engineering tools, the tractor is called an engineering vehicle.

A bulldozer is a track-type tractor with a blade attached in the front and a rope-winch behind. Bulldozers are very powerful tractors and have excellent ground-hold, as their main tasks are to push or drag.

Bulldozers have been further modified over time to evolve into new machines which are capable of working in ways that the original bulldozer can not. One example is that loader tractors were created by removing the blade and substituting a large volume bucket and hydraulic arms which can raise and lower the bucket, thus making it useful for scooping up earth, rock and similar loose material to load it into trucks.

A front-loader or loader is a tractor with an engineering tool which consists of two hydraulic powered arms on either side of the front engine compartment and a tilting implement. This is usually a wide-open box called a bucket, but other common attachments are a pallet fork and a bale grappler.

Other modifications to the original bulldozer include making the machine smaller to let it operate in small work areas where movement is limited. Also, tiny wheeled loaders, officially called skid-steer loaders, but nicknamed &quot;Bobcat&quot; after the original manufacturer, are particularly suited for small excavation projects in confined areas.

=== Backhoe ===

The most common variation of the classic farm tractor is the backhoe, also called a backhoe-loader. As the name implies, it has a loader assembly on the front and a backhoe on the back. Backhoes attach to a three-point hitch on farm or industrial tractors. Industrial tractors are often heavier in construction, particularly with regards to the use of a steel grill for protection from rocks and the use of construction tires. When the backhoe is permanently attached, the machine usually has a seat that can swivel to the rear to face the hoe controls. Removable backhoe attachments almost always have a separate seat on the attachment.

Backhoe-loaders are very common and can be used for a wide variety of tasks: construction, small demolitions, light transportation of building materials, powering building equipment, digging holes, loading trucks, breaking asphalt and paving roads. Some buckets have retractable bottoms, enabling them to empty their loads more quickly and efficiently. Buckets with retractable bottoms are also often used for grading and scratching off sand. The front assembly may be a removable attachment or permanently mounted. Often the bucket can be replaced with other devices or tools.

Their relatively small frames and precise controls make backhoe-loaders very useful and common in urban engineering projects, such as construction and repairs in areas too small for larger equipment. Their versatility and compact size make them one of the most popular urban construction vehicles.

In the UK and Ireland, the word &quot;JCB&quot; is used colloquially as a genericized trademark for any such type of engineering vehicle. The term JCB now appears in the Oxford English Dictionary, although it is still legally a trademark of J. C. Bamford Ltd. The term &quot;digger&quot; is also commonly used.

=== Compact utility ===
A compact utility tractor (CUT) is a smaller version of an agricultural tractor, but designed primarily for landscaping and estate management tasks, rather than for planting and harvesting on a commercial scale. Typical CUTs range from with available power take-off (PTO) power ranging from . CUTs are often equipped with both a mid-mounted and a standard rear PTO, especially those below . The mid-mount PTO shaft typically rotates at/near 2000 rpm and is typically used to power mid-mount finish mowers, front-mounted snow blowers or front-mounted rotary brooms. The rear PTO is standardized at 540 rpm for the North American markets, but in some parts of the world, a dual 540/1000 rpm PTO is standard, and implements are available for either standard in those markets.


One of the most common attachments for a CUT is the front-end loader or FEL. Like the larger agricultural tractors, a CUT will have an adjustable, hydraulically controlled three-point hitch. Typically, a CUT will have four-wheel drive, or more correctly four-wheel assist. Modern CUTs often feature hydrostatic transmissions, but many variants of gear-drive transmissions are also offered from low priced, simple gear transmissions to synchronized transmissions to advanced glide-shift transmissions. All modern CUTs feature government-mandated roll over protection structures just like agricultural tractors. The most well-known brands in North America include Kubota, John Deere Tractor, New Holland Ag, Case-Farmall and Massey Ferguson. Although less common, compact backhoes are often attached to compact utility tractors.

Compact utility tractors require special, smaller implements than full-sized agricultural tractors. Very common implements include the box blade, the grader blade, the landscape rake, the post hole digger (or post hole auger), the rotary cutter (slasher or a brush hog), a mid- or rear-mount finish mower, a broadcast seeder, a subsoiler and the rototiller (rotary tiller). In northern climates, a rear-mounted snow blower is very common; some smaller CUT models are available with front-mounted snow blowers powered by mid-PTO shafts. Implement brands outnumber tractor brands, so CUT owners have a wide selection of implements.

For small-scale farming or large-scale gardening, some planting and harvesting implements are sized for CUTs. One- and two-row planting units are commonly available, as are cultivators, sprayers and different types of seeders (slit, rotary and drop). One of the first CUTs offered for small farms of three to 30 acres and for small jobs on larger farms was a three-wheeled unit, with the rear wheel being the drive wheel, offered by Sears &amp; Roebuck in 1954 and priced at $598 for the basic model.

An even smaller variant of the compact utility tractor is the &quot;subcompact utility tractor&quot;. Although these tractors are often barely larger than a riding lawn mower, these tractors have all the same features of a compact tractor, such as a three-point hitch, power steering, four-wheel-drive, and front-end loader. These tractors are generally marketed towards homeowners who intend to mostly use them for lawn mowing, with the occasional light landscaping task.

=== Standard ===
The earliest tractors were called &quot;standard&quot; tractors, and were intended almost solely for plowing and harrowing before planting, which were difficult tasks for humans and draft animals. They were characterized by a low, rearward seating position, fixed-width tread, and low ground clearance. These early tractors were cumbersome, and ill-suited to enter a field of planted row crops for weed control. The &quot;standard&quot; tractor definition is no longer in current use. However, tractors with fixed wheel spacing and a low center of gravity are well-suited as loaders, forklifts and backhoes, so that the configuration continues in use without the &quot;standard&quot; nomenclature.

=== Row-crop ===
A general-purpose or row-crop tractor is tailored specifically to the growing of crops grown in rows, and most especially to cultivating these crops. These tractors are universal machines, capable of both primary tillage and cultivation of a crop. 


The row-crop tractor category evolved rather than appearing overnight, but the International Harvester (IH) Farmall is often considered the &quot;first&quot; tractor of the category. Some earlier tractors of the 1910s and 1920s approached the form factor from the heavier side, as did motorized cultivators from the lighter side, but the Farmall brought all of the salient features together into one package, with a capable distribution network to ensure its commercial success. In the new form factor that the Farmall popularized, the cultivator was mounted in the front so it was easily visible. Additionally, the tractor had a narrow front end; the front tires were spaced very closely and angled in toward the bottom. The back wheels straddled two rows with their spacing adjustable depending on row spacing, and the unit could cultivate four rows at once. Where wide front wheels were used, they often could be adjusted as well. Tractors with non-adjustable spacing were called &quot;standard&quot; or &quot;wheatland&quot;, and were chiefly meant for pulling plows or other towed implements, typically with a lower overall tractor height than row-crop models.

From 1924 until 1963, Farmalls were the largest selling row-crop tractors.

To compete, John Deere designed the Model C, which had a wide front and could cultivate three rows at once. Only 112 prototypes were made, as Deere realized it would lose sales to Farmall if its model did less. In 1928, Deere released the Model C anyway, only as the Model GP (General Purpose) to avoid confusion with the Model D when ordered over the then unclear telephone.

Oliver refined its &quot;Row Crop&quot; model early in 1930. Until 1935, the 18–27 was Oliver–Hart-Parr&#x27;s only row-crop tractor.

Many Oliver row-crop models are referred to as &quot;Oliver Row Crop 77&quot;, &quot;Oliver Row Crop 88&quot;, etc.

Many early row-crop tractors had a tricycle design with two closely spaced front tires, and some even had a single front tire. This made it dangerous to operate on the side of a steep hill; as a result, many farmers died from tractor rollovers. Also, early row-crop tractors had no rollover protection system (ROPS), meaning if the tractor flipped back, the operator could be crushed. Sweden was the first country which passed legislation requiring ROPS, in 1959.

Over 50% of tractor related injuries and deaths are attributed to tractor rollover.

Canadian agricultural equipment manufacturer Versatile makes row-crop tractors that are ; powered by an 8.9 liter Cummins Diesel engine.

Case IH and New Holland of CNH Industrial both produce high horsepower front-wheel-assist row crop tractors with available rear tracks. Case IH also has a four-wheel drive track system called Rowtrac.

John Deere has an extensive line of available row crop tractors ranging from .

Modern row crop tractors have rollover protection systems in the form of a reinforced cab or a roll bar.

=== Garden ===
Garden tractors, sometimes called lawn tractors, are small, light tractors designed for use in domestic gardens, lawns, and small estates. Lawn tractors are designed for cutting grass and snow removal, while garden tractors are for small property cultivation. In the U.S., the term riding lawn mower today often is used to refer to mid- or rear-engined machines. Front-engined tractor layout machines designed primarily for cutting grass and light towing are called lawn tractors; heavier-duty tractors of similar size are garden tractors. Garden tractors are capable of mounting a wider array of attachments than lawn tractors. Unlike lawn tractors and rear-engined riding mowers, garden tractors are powered by horizontal-crankshaft engines with a belt-drive to transaxle-type transmissions (usually of four or five speeds, although some may also have two-speed reduction gearboxes, drive-shafts, or hydrostatic or hydraulic drives). Garden tractors from Wheel Horse, Cub Cadet, Economy (Power King), John Deere, Massey Ferguson and Case Ingersoll are built in this manner. The engines are generally one- or two-cylinder petrol (gasoline) engines, although diesel engine models are also available, especially in Europe. Typically, diesel-powered garden tractors are larger and heavier-duty than gasoline-powered units and compare more similarly to compact utility tractors.

Visually, the distinction between a garden tractor and a lawn tractor is often hard to make – generally, garden tractors are more sturdily built, with stronger frames, 12-inch or larger wheels mounted with multiple lugs (most lawn tractors have a single bolt or clip on the hub), heavier transaxles, and ability to accommodate a wide range of front, belly, and rear mounted attachments.

=== Two-wheel ===

Although most people think primarily of four-wheel vehicles when they think of tractors, a tractor may have one or more axles. The key benefit is the power itself, which only takes one axle to provide. Single-axle tractors, more often called two-wheel tractors or walk-behind tractors, have had many users since the introduction of the internal combustion engine tractors. They tend to be small and affordable, this was especially true before the 1960s when a walk-behind tractor could often be more affordable than a two-axle tractor of comparable power. Today&#x27;s compact utility tractors and advanced garden tractors may negate most of that market advantage, but two-wheel tractors still have a following, especially among those who already own one. Countries where two-wheel tractors are especially prevalent today include Thailand, China, Bangladesh, India, and other Southeast Asia countries. Most two-wheel tractors today are specialty tractors made for one purpose, such as snow blowers, push tillers, and self propelled push mowers.

=== Orchard ===
Tractors tailored to use in fruit orchards typically have features suited to passing under tree branches with impunity. These include a lower overall profile; reduced tree-branch-snagging risk (via underslung exhaust pipes rather than smoke-stack-style exhaust, and large sheetmetal cowlings and fairings that allow branches to deflect and slide off rather than catch); spark arrestors on the exhaust tips; and often wire cages to protect the operator from snags.

=== Automobile conversions and other homemade versions===


The ingenuity of farm mechanics, coupled in some cases with OEM or aftermarket assistance, has often resulted in the conversion of automobiles for use as farm tractors. In the United States, this trend was especially strong from the 1910s through 1950s. It began early in the development of vehicles powered by internal combustion engines, with blacksmiths and amateur mechanics tinkering in their shops. Especially during the interwar period, dozens of manufacturers (Montgomery Ward among them) marketed aftermarket kits for converting Ford Model Ts for use as tractors. (These were sometimes called &#x27;Hoover wagons&#x27; during the Great Depression, although this term was usually reserved for automobiles converted to horse-drawn buggy use when gasoline was unavailable or unaffordable. During the same period, another common name was &quot;Doodlebug&quot;, after the popular kit by the same name.) Ford even considered producing an &quot;official&quot; optional kit. Many Model A Fords also were converted for this purpose. In later years, some farm mechanics have been known to convert more modern trucks or cars for use as tractors, more often as curiosities or for recreational purposes (rather than out of the earlier motives of pure necessity or frugality).
During World War II, a shortage of tractors in Sweden led to the development of the so-called &quot;EPA&quot; tractor (EPA was a chain of discount stores and it was often used to signify something lacking in quality). An EPA tractor was simply an automobile, truck or lorry, with the passenger space cut off behind the front seats, equipped with two gearboxes in a row. When done to an older car with a ladder frame, the result was similar to a tractor and could be used as one. After the war it remained popular as a way for young people without a driver&#x27;s license to own something similar to a car. Since it was legally seen as a tractor, it could be driven from 16 years of age and only required a tractor license. Eventually, the legal loophole was closed and no new EPA tractors were allowed to be made, but the remaining ones were still legal, which led to inflated prices and many protests from people who preferred EPA tractors to ordinary cars.

The Swedish government eventually replaced them with the so called &quot;A-tractor&quot; which now had its speed limited to 30 km/h and allowed people aged 16 and older to drive the cars with a moped license.

The German occupation of Italy during World resulted in a severe shortage of mechanized farm equipment. The destruction of tractors was a sort of scorched-earth strategy used to reduce the independence of the conquered. The shortage of tractors in that area of Europe was the origin of Lamborghini. The war was also the inspiration for dual-purpose vehicles such as the Land Rover. Based on the Jeep, the company made a vehicle that combined PTO, tillage, 4wd, and transportation.

In March 1975, a similar type of vehicle was introduced in Sweden, the &quot;A tractor&quot; [from &quot;arbetstraktor&quot; (work tractor)]; the main difference is an A tractor has a top speed of 30 km/h. This is usually done by fitting two gearboxes in a row and only using one. The Volvo Duett was, for a long time, the primary choice for conversion to an EPA or A tractor, but since supplies have dried up, other cars have been used, in most cases another Volvo. The SFRO is a Swedish organization advocating homebuilt and modified vehicles.

Another type of homemade tractors are ones that are fabricated from scratch. The &quot;&quot; description is relative, as often individual components will be repurposed from earlier vehicles or machinery (e.g., engines, gearboxes, axle housings), but the tractor&#x27;s overall chassis is essentially designed and built by the owner (e.g., a frame is welded from bar stockchannel stock, angle stock, flat stock, etc.). As with automobile conversions, the heyday of this type of tractor, at least in developed economies, lies in the past, when there were large populations of blue-collar workers for whom metalworking and farming were prevalent parts of their lives. (For example, many 19th- and 20th-century New England and Midwestern machinists and factory workers had grown up on farms.) Backyard fabrication was a natural activity to them (whereas it might seem daunting to most people today).

=== Nomenclature ===
The term &quot;tractor&quot; (US and Canada) or &quot;tractor unit&quot; (UK) is also applied to:
* Road tractors, tractor units or traction heads, familiar as the front end of an articulated lorry / semi-trailer truck. They are heavy-duty vehicles with large engines and several axles.
** The majority of these tractors are designed to pull long semi-trailers, most often to transport freight over a significant distance, and is connected to the trailer with a fifth wheel coupling. In England, this type of &quot;tractor&quot; is often called an &quot;artic cab&quot; (short for &quot;articulated&quot; cab).
** A minority is the ballast tractor, whose load is hauled from a drawbar.
* Pushback tractors are used on airports to move aircraft on the ground, most commonly pushing aircraft away from their parking stands.
* Locomotive tractors (engines) or rail car movers – the amalgamation of machines, electrical generators, controls and devices that comprise the traction component of railway vehicles
* Artillery tractors – vehicles used to tow artillery pieces of varying weights.
* NASA and other space agencies use very large tractors to move large launch vehicles and Space Shuttles between their hangars and launch pads.
* A pipe-tractor is a device used for conveying advanced instruments into pipes for measurement and data logging, and the purging of well holes, sewer pipes and other inaccessible tubes.
== Nebraska tests ==
 Nebraska tractor tests are tests mandated by the Nebraska Tractor Test Law and administered by the University of Nebraska, that objectively test the performance of all brands of tractors, 40 horsepower or more, sold in Nebraska. In the 1910s and 1920s, an era of snake oil sales and advertising tactics, the Nebraska tests helped farmers throughout North America to see through marketing claims and make informed buying decisions. The tests continue today, making sure tractors fulfill the manufacturer&#x27;s advertised claims.

== Manufacturers ==
Some of the many tractor manufacturers and brands worldwide include:

* Belarus
* Case IH
* Caterpillar
* Claas
* Challenger
* Deutz-Fahr
* Fendt
* ITMCO
* Iseki
* JCB
* John Deere
* Lamborghini
* Landini
* Kubota
* Mahindra Tractors
* Massey Ferguson
* McCormick
* Mercedes-Benz
* New Holland
* SAME
* Steyr
* TAFE
* Ursus
* Valtra
* Zetor
In addition to commercial manufacturers, the Open Source Ecology group has developed several working prototypes of an open source hardware tractor called the LifeTrac as part of its Global Village Construction Set.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==

* Agricultural machinery
* Artillery tractor
* Ballast tractor
* Big Bud 747, the world&#x27;s largest farm tractor
* Driverless tractor
* Heavy equipment
* Lester F. Larsen Tractor Museum
* Non-road engine
* Power take-off
* Railcar mover
* Terminal tractor
* Tractor pulling
* Tractor unit
* Two-wheel tractor
* Unimog 70200
* DT-20
== References ==
== External links ==
=== Tractor information ===

*Purdue University Tractor Safety Article re: ROPS, PTO, etc
*Nebraska Tractor Test Laboratory
*Historical Tractor Test Reports and Manufacturers&#x27; Literature Reports on 400+ models 1903–2006
*A History of Tractors at the Canada Agriculture Museum

=== Tractor safety ===
* EU Working Group on Agricultural Tractors – Work Safety
* EU Directives on tractor design: (Mapped Index), or (Numerical Index)
* Tractor Safety (National Agricultural Safety Database)
* Tractor Safety (National Safety Council)
*Adaptive Tractor Overturn Prediction System
* Tractor Overturn Protection and Prevention
* ACC: Farm safety: Vehicles, machinery and equipment.
*CDC – Agricultural Safety: Cost-effective Rollover Protective Structures – NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="2" end="9" title="Tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="16" end="35" title="engineering vehicle" label="engineering vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969280" start="76" end="91" title="tractive effort" label="tractive effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="96" end="102" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="150" end="157" title="Trailer (vehicle)" label="trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="192" end="203" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="205" end="211" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="215" end="227" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131596" start="275" end="279" title="farm" label="farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160362" start="328" end="337" title="mechanization" label="mechanize"/>
<link wikidata="Q878333" start="386" end="393" title="tillage" label="tillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211548" start="414" end="437" title="List of agricultural machinery" label="Agricultural implements"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="630" end="635" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392648" start="647" end="657" title="Agent (grammar)" label="agent noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="852" end="860" title="traction engine" label="traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="917" end="919" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="921" end="928" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="930" end="939" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="941" end="946" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="948" end="953" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="955" end="964" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="966" end="974" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="976" end="982" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="984" end="991" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="997" end="1008" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1014" end="1021" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1251" end="1257" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1266" end="1268" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="1301" end="1313" title="Tractor unit" label="road tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="1327" end="1342" title="Semi-trailer truck" label="tractor trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="1343" end="1348" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q756263" start="1511" end="1526" title="portable engine" label="portable engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217157" start="1635" end="1653" title="Richard Trevithick" label="Richard Trevithick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604348" start="1699" end="1722" title="stationary steam engine" label="stationary steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1890" end="1905" title="William Tuxford" label="William Tuxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q311975" start="1909" end="1929" title="Boston, Lincolnshire" label="Boston, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="2043" end="2051" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700095" start="2184" end="2195" title="John Fowler (agricultural engineer)" label="John Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="2488" end="2503" title="traction engine" label="traction engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="2717" end="2732" title="traction engine" label="traction engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828000" start="2810" end="2824" title="Aveling and Porter" label="Thomas Aveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130176" start="2836" end="2862" title="Clayton &amp;amp; Shuttleworth" label="Clayton &amp;amp; Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q756263" start="2863" end="2878" title="portable engine" label="portable engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="3332" end="3346" title="ploughing engine" label="plowing engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750660" start="3481" end="3492" title="Mann&amp;#x27;s Patent Steam Cart and Wagon Company" label="Mann&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494441" start="3497" end="3504" title="Richard Garrett &amp;amp; Sons" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q382477" start="3515" end="3528" title="steam tractor" label="steam tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3663" end="3676" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="3772" end="3791" title="agricultural engine" label="agricultural engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124361" start="4082" end="4095" title="John Froelich" label="John Froelich"/>
<link wikidata="Q113815" start="4132" end="4152" title="Clayton County, Iowa" label="Clayton County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091252" start="4363" end="4395" title="Waterloo Gasoline Engine Company" label="Waterloo Gasoline Engine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326545" start="4518" end="4544" title="Richard Hornsby &amp;amp; Sons" label="Richard Hornsby &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q386972" start="4639" end="4660" title="Herbert Akroyd Stuart" label="Herbert Akroyd Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373587" start="4872" end="4909" title="Royal Agricultural Society of England" label="Royal Agricultural Society of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213061" start="5077" end="5087" title="Dan Albone" label="Dan Albone"/>
<link wikidata="Q117041" start="5257" end="5268" title="Selwyn Edge" label="Selwyn Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q951493" start="5270" end="5285" title="Charles Jarrott" label="Charles Jarrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560968" start="5303" end="5318" title="Gilbert Heathcote-Drummond-Willoughby, 2nd Earl of Ancaster" label="Lord Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961308" start="5781" end="5798" title="stationary engine" label="stationary engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374822" start="5909" end="5932" title="Royal Show" label="Royal Agricultural Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="6068" end="6076" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q754109" start="6097" end="6102" title="Aster (auto parts company)" label="Aster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083327" start="6174" end="6189" title="Charles Walter Hart" label="Charles W. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30071278" start="6194" end="6209" title="Charles Henry Parr" label="Charles H. Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q537877" start="6286" end="6304" title="Charles City, Iowa" label="Charles City, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427480" start="6649" end="6685" title="Saunderson Tractor and Implement Co." label="Saunderson Tractor and Implement Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q208257" start="6689" end="6696" title="Bedford" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="7386" end="7396" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003307" start="7412" end="7419" title="Fordson" label="Fordson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="7727" end="7753" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q973564" start="7845" end="7859" title="Harry Ferguson" label="Harry Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258035" start="7897" end="7914" title="three-point hitch" label="three-point hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772892" start="8100" end="8122" title="Ferguson-Brown Company" label="Ferguson-Brown Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="8192" end="8201" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436710" start="8286" end="8310" title="Ford N-Series tractor" label="Ford-Ferguson 9N tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="8455" end="8475" title="Power take-off" label="Power Take Off (PTO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="8600" end="8616" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354485" start="8632" end="8641" title="Elec-Trak" label="Elec-Trak"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461485" start="8665" end="8681" title="electric tractor" label="electric tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q666948" start="8837" end="8842" title="Fendt" label="Fendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463173" start="8865" end="8874" title="Solectrac" label="Solectrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="8897" end="8907" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="8988" end="8994" title="Kubota" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150400" start="9194" end="9211" title="two-wheel tractor" label="two-wheel tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536609" start="9375" end="9390" title="two-wheel drive" label="two-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="9400" end="9411" title="rear wheel drive" label="at the rear"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="9468" end="9484" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="9523" end="9528" title="continuous track" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="9611" end="9618" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18891017" start="9700" end="9708" title="steering" label="steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="10124" end="10147" title="Caterpillar, Inc." label="&amp;quot;Caterpillar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="10151" end="10170" title="crawler tractor" label="&amp;quot;crawler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="11550" end="11562" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="11644" end="11670" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="11733" end="11741" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="11773" end="11781" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379222" start="11787" end="11802" title="Rumely Oil Pull" label="Rumely Oil Pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q12717619" start="12231" end="12253" title="petrol-paraffin engine" label="petrol-paraffin engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275033" start="12273" end="12286" title="Dieselisation" label="Dieselisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="12366" end="12379" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160857" start="12425" end="12435" title="horsepower" label="horsepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="12529" end="12540" title="lawn mower" label="lawn mowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="12573" end="12586" title="truck farming" label="truck farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="12702" end="12725" title="Liquefied petroleum gas" label="Liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="12735" end="12742" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="13210" end="13219" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461485" start="13377" end="13393" title="electric tractor" label="electric tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q666948" start="13436" end="13441" title="Fendt" label="Fendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463173" start="13468" end="13477" title="Solectrac" label="Solectrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="13499" end="13509" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="13589" end="13595" title="Kubota" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="13696" end="13715" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="13729" end="13733" title="gear" label="gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="13734" end="13739" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542117" start="14313" end="14334" title="slow moving vehicle" label="slow operating speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="14728" end="14739" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170285" start="14750" end="14759" title="road sign" label="road sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542317" start="14849" end="14852" title="J. C. Bamford" label="JCB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14961" end="14975" title="Manual transmission#Unsynchronized transmission" label="unsynchronized"/>
<link wikidata="Q244960" start="15278" end="15294" title="Double clutch (technique)" label="double clutching"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15887" end="15902" title="Manual transmission#Synchronized transmission" label="synchronization"/>
<link wikidata="Q863787" start="15911" end="15945" title="continuously variable transmission" label="continuously variable transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="16532" end="16550" title="semi-trailer truck" label="semi-trailer truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="16619" end="16631" title="Tractor unit" label="road tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="17308" end="17313" title="Plows" label="Plows"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17391" end="17398" title="Drawbar (haulage)#Agriculture and horse-drawn vehicles" label="drawbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437301" start="17635" end="17641" title="clevis" label="clevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q973564" start="20158" end="20172" title="Harry Ferguson" label="Harry Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258035" start="20187" end="20204" title="three-point hitch" label="three-point hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="20275" end="20284" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20716" end="20731" title="Three-point hitch#History" label="Ferguson System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066951" start="20917" end="20924" title="Farmall" label="Farmall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061446" start="21884" end="21897" title="Bobcat Company" label="Bobcat&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="22071" end="22088" title="loader (equipment)" label="front-end loaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="22294" end="22299" title="baler" label="baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461556" start="22301" end="22308" title="swather" label="swather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930361" start="22313" end="22318" title="mower" label="mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="22609" end="22614" title="Belt (mechanical)" label="belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="22644" end="22652" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="23178" end="23192" title="power take-off" label="power take-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425059" start="23683" end="23698" title="hydraulic fluid" label="hydraulic fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="23703" end="23711" title="electric" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="24007" end="24026" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="24083" end="24095" title="automatic transmission" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q194302" start="24264" end="24270" title="clutch" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="24369" end="24374" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q961356" start="24494" end="24502" title="throttle" label="throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="24820" end="24823" title="power take-off" label="PTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="26034" end="26036" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847901" start="26645" end="26662" title="locking differential" label="differential lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q863787" start="28117" end="28120" title="Continuously variable transmission" label="CVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="28789" end="28803" title="power take-off" label="power take-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="28991" end="28997" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q333139" start="29212" end="29242" title="roll-over protection structure" label="roll-over protection structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="29637" end="29642" title="Frame (vehicle)" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="30155" end="30161" title="farmer" label="farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="30219" end="30225" title="Grade (slope)" label="slopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="31255" end="31301" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="31758" end="31765" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131596" start="31775" end="31779" title="farm" label="farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="31830" end="31842" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="31856" end="31863" title="Trailer (vehicle)" label="trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="31870" end="31874" title="plow" label="plow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="32130" end="32137" title="cereals" label="cereals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="32139" end="32144" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="32146" end="32154" title="tomatoes" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485105" start="32757" end="32778" title="landscape maintenance" label="landscape maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="32891" end="32903" title="lawn mowers" label="lawn tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445068" start="33228" end="33237" title="blowtorch" label="blowtorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766" start="33276" end="33291" title="Jackhammer" label="pneumatic drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q978234" start="33292" end="33306" title="air compressor" label="air compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="33337" end="33351" title="power take-off" label="power take-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q211485" start="33487" end="33503" title="Space technology" label="Space technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="33531" end="33542" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="33558" end="33561" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="33591" end="33600" title="computers" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q740083" start="33689" end="33706" title="precision farming" label="precision farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589432" start="33723" end="33731" title="Government spin-off" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="33742" end="33752" title="space race" label="space race"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="33779" end="33789" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031473" start="33835" end="33840" title="Unmanned ground vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="34007" end="34018" title="Agriculture" label="cultivating"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087324" start="34084" end="34102" title="driverless tractor" label="driverless tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="34271" end="34282" title="bulldozer" label="dozer blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="34285" end="34291" title="loader (equipment)" label="bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q948917" start="34294" end="34297" title="hoe (equipment)" label="hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="34459" end="34478" title="engineering vehicle" label="engineering vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="34483" end="34492" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="34498" end="34516" title="tractor crawler" label="track-type tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="34859" end="34865" title="Loader (equipment)" label="loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q557067" start="35372" end="35383" title="pallet fork" label="pallet fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470547" start="35598" end="35615" title="skid-steer loader" label="skid-steer loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061446" start="35638" end="35644" title="Bobcat (equipment)" label="Bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q948917" start="35940" end="35947" title="backhoe" label="backhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154" start="36315" end="36318" title="Hoe (tool)" label="hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="36637" end="36644" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="37091" end="37108" title="civil engineering" label="urban engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043452" start="37144" end="37150" title="repair" label="repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="37268" end="37288" title="construction vehicle" label="construction vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542317" start="37330" end="37333" title="J. C. Bamford" label="JCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="37348" end="37358" title="colloquial" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="37366" end="37387" title="genericized trademark" label="genericized trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="37462" end="37487" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="37520" end="37529" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="37879" end="37893" title="power take-off" label="power take-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351693" start="38148" end="38159" title="snow blower" label="snow blower"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="38229" end="38232" title="rpm" label="rpm"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="38455" end="38471" title="front-end loader" label="front-end loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258035" start="38575" end="38592" title="three-point hitch" label="three-point hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q333139" start="38948" end="38978" title="roll over protection structure" label="roll over protection structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="39065" end="39071" title="Kubota Corporation" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575399" start="39073" end="39091" title="John Deere Tractor" label="John Deere Tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423217" start="39093" end="39107" title="New Holland Ag" label="New Holland Ag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951578" start="39366" end="39375" title="box blade" label="box blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q217694" start="39381" end="39387" title="grader" label="grader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142501" start="39450" end="39455" title="auger (drill)" label="auger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234962" start="39539" end="39555" title="broadcast seeder" label="broadcast seeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117737" start="39559" end="39568" title="subsoiler" label="subsoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="39577" end="39587" title="rototiller" label="rototiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="40295" end="40314" title="Sears &amp;amp; Roebuck" label="Sears &amp;amp; Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056621" start="40521" end="40538" title="riding lawn mower" label="riding lawn mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="40956" end="40963" title="plough" label="plowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209042" start="40968" end="40977" title="harrow (tool)" label="harrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q228534" start="41037" end="41050" title="working animal" label="draft animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="41696" end="41707" title="cultivator" label="cultivating"/>
<link wikidata="Q878333" start="41776" end="41791" title="tillage" label="primary tillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q263800" start="41901" end="41924" title="International Harvester" label="International Harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066951" start="41930" end="41937" title="Farmall" label="Farmall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="42358" end="42368" title="cultivator" label="cultivator"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="43077" end="43087" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575399" start="43101" end="43108" title="List of John Deere tractors" label="Model C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575399" start="43332" end="43340" title="Model GP" label="Model GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087526" start="43536" end="43545" title="Hart-Parr" label="Hart-Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q333139" start="43976" end="44002" title="rollover protection system" label="rollover protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531620" start="44233" end="44241" title="Vehicle rollover" label="rollover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010233" start="44289" end="44298" title="Versatile (company)" label="Versatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q173476" start="44358" end="44372" title="Cummins Diesel" label="Cummins Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046997" start="44382" end="44389" title="Case IH" label="Case IH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423217" start="44394" end="44405" title="New Holland Agriculture" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238661" start="44409" end="44423" title="CNH Industrial" label="CNH Industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="44584" end="44594" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141366" start="44759" end="44767" title="roll cage" label="roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="44889" end="44895" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="44963" end="44968" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45067" end="45084" title="Lawn mower#Riding (ride-on) mowers" label="riding lawn mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="45251" end="45264" title="lawn tractors" label="lawn tractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="45535" end="45539" title="Belt (mechanical)" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141173" start="45549" end="45558" title="transaxle" label="transaxle"/>
<link wikidata="Q84115" start="45702" end="45718" title="Hydrokinetic transmission" label="hydraulic drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992001" start="45742" end="45753" title="Wheel Horse" label="Wheel Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191911" start="45755" end="45764" title="Cub Cadet" label="Cub Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45766" end="45786" title="Economy (Power King)" label="Economy (Power King)"/>
<link wikidata="Q579509" start="45800" end="45815" title="Massey Ferguson" label="Massey Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032395" start="45825" end="45834" title="Ingersoll Power Equipment" label="Ingersoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="45944" end="45957" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150400" start="46811" end="46828" title="two-wheel tractor" label="two-wheel tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="46905" end="46931" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="47399" end="47407" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="47409" end="47414" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="47416" end="47426" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="47428" end="47433" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="47445" end="47459" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351693" start="47554" end="47565" title="snow blower" label="snow blower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="47568" end="47580" title="Cultivator" label="push tillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="47586" end="47612" title="Lawn mower" label="self propelled push mowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="47665" end="47672" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138219" start="47914" end="47921" title="cowling" label="cowling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47927" end="47934" title=":wikt:fairing" label="fairing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253401" start="48001" end="48015" title="spark arrestor" label="spark arrestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q267558" start="48216" end="48219" title="original equipment manufacturer" label="OEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q376134" start="48223" end="48234" title="aftermarket (automotive)" label="aftermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="48583" end="48598" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246929" start="48625" end="48640" title="Montgomery Ward" label="Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="48694" end="48706" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="48795" end="48811" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889762" start="48857" end="48903" title="Bennett buggy" label="automobiles converted to horse-drawn buggy use"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104994" start="49005" end="49014" title="Doodlebug tractor" label="Doodlebug"/>
<link wikidata="Q515001" start="49137" end="49150" title="Ford Model A (1927–1931)" label="Model A Fords"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49435" end="49447" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="49475" end="49481" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49547" end="49550" title=":sv:EPA (varuhus)" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="49831" end="49843" title="ladder frame" label="ladder frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="49977" end="49998" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="50744" end="50758" title="scorched earth" label="scorched-earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50884" end="50895" title="History of Lamborghini#Origin" label="Lamborghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q35907" start="50968" end="50978" title="Land Rover" label="Land Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938291" start="51365" end="51376" title="Volvo Duett" label="Volvo Duett"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="51540" end="51545" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389975" start="51551" end="51555" title="SFRO" label="SFRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115400" start="51679" end="51689" title="fabrication (metal)" label="fabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="51905" end="51912" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231940" start="51990" end="51999" title="bar stock" label="bar stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="52231" end="52243" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="52248" end="52255" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="52335" end="52346" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="52351" end="52361" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="52661" end="52673" title="tractor unit" label="tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="52726" end="52743" title="articulated lorry" label="articulated lorry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="52746" end="52764" title="semi-trailer truck" label="semi-trailer truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="52786" end="52793" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="52806" end="52812" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="52826" end="52830" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q944315" start="52893" end="52905" title="semi-trailer" label="semi-trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291617" start="53008" end="53028" title="fifth wheel coupling" label="fifth wheel coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936841" start="53100" end="53109" title="Semi-trailer truck" label="artic cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216209" start="53178" end="53193" title="ballast tractor" label="ballast tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q353648" start="53223" end="53230" title="Drawbar (haulage)" label="drawbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031268" start="53234" end="53251" title="Pushback (aviation)" label="Pushback tractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="53370" end="53380" title="Locomotive" label="Locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="53391" end="53397" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888182" start="53403" end="53417" title="rail car mover" label="rail car mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="53441" end="53448" title="machine" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="53451" end="53471" title="electrical generator" label="electrical generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867951" start="53513" end="53531" title="traction component" label="traction component"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="53535" end="53542" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="53543" end="53550" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016578" start="53554" end="53571" title="Artillery tractor" label="Artillery tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="53596" end="53605" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="53635" end="53639" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22991" start="53644" end="53664" title="list of space agencies" label="other space agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q94712" start="53669" end="53688" title="Crawler-transporter" label="very large tractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q697175" start="53703" end="53717" title="launch vehicle" label="launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="53723" end="53736" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353183" start="53764" end="53774" title="launch pad" label="launch pad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53781" end="53793" title="pipe-tractor" label="pipe-tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108523480" start="53986" end="54008" title="Nebraska Tractor Test Laboratory" label="Nebraska tractor tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="54035" end="54043" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202716" start="54085" end="54107" title="University of Nebraska system" label="University of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q301502" start="54249" end="54258" title="snake oil" label="snake oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q592110" start="54608" end="54615" title="Minsk Tractor Works" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046997" start="54618" end="54625" title="Case IH" label="Case IH"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="54628" end="54639" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q704756" start="54642" end="54647" title="Claas" label="Claas"/>
<link wikidata="Q847195" start="54650" end="54660" title="Challenger Tractor" label="Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q645697" start="54663" end="54673" title="Deutz-Fahr" label="Deutz-Fahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q666948" start="54676" end="54681" title="Fendt" label="Fendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44027" start="54684" end="54689" title="ITMCO" label="ITMCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581562" start="54692" end="54697" title="Iseki" label="Iseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542317" start="54700" end="54703" title="JCB (heavy equipment manufacturer)" label="JCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="54706" end="54716" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362203" start="54719" end="54730" title="Lamborghini Trattori" label="Lamborghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261849" start="54733" end="54740" title="Landini (tractor)" label="Landini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="54743" end="54749" title="Kubota" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734061" start="54752" end="54769" title="Mahindra Tractors" label="Mahindra Tractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q579509" start="54772" end="54787" title="Massey Ferguson" label="Massey Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819177" start="54790" end="54799" title="McCormick Tractors" label="McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="54802" end="54815" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423217" start="54818" end="54829" title="New Holland Agriculture" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813017" start="54832" end="54836" title="SAME Deutz-Fahr" label="SAME"/>
<link wikidata="Q667547" start="54839" end="54844" title="Steyr Tractor" label="Steyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669254" start="54847" end="54851" title="Tractors and Farm Equipment Limited" label="TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143828" start="54854" end="54859" title="Ursus Factory" label="Ursus"/>
<link wikidata="Q385867" start="54862" end="54868" title="Valtra" label="Valtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q196868" start="54871" end="54876" title="Zetor" label="Zetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440496" start="54922" end="54941" title="Open Source Ecology (project)" label="Open Source Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159172" start="54995" end="55015" title="Open-source hardware" label="open source hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440496" start="55059" end="55090" title="Global Village Construction Set" label="Global Village Construction Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="55125" end="55147" title="Agricultural machinery" label="Agricultural machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016578" start="55150" end="55167" title="Artillery tractor" label="Artillery tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216209" start="55170" end="55185" title="Ballast tractor" label="Ballast tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905394" start="55188" end="55199" title="Big Bud 747" label="Big Bud 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087324" start="55241" end="55259" title="Driverless tractor" label="Driverless tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="55262" end="55277" title="Heavy equipment" label="Heavy equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704939" start="55280" end="55311" title="Lester F. Larsen Tractor Museum" label="Lester F. Larsen Tractor Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049017" start="55314" end="55329" title="Non-road engine" label="Non-road engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q952371" start="55332" end="55346" title="Power take-off" label="Power take-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888182" start="55349" end="55362" title="Railcar mover" label="Railcar mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505149" start="55365" end="55381" title="Terminal tractor" label="Terminal tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q977576" start="55384" end="55399" title="Tractor pulling" label="Tractor pulling"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="55402" end="55414" title="Tractor unit" label="Tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150400" start="55417" end="55434" title="Two-wheel tractor" label="Two-wheel tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38831895" start="55437" end="55449" title="Unimog 70200" label="Unimog 70200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153462" start="55452" end="55457" title="DT-20" label="DT-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212098" start="55751" end="55776" title="Canada Agriculture Museum" label="Canada Agriculture Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970232" start="55949" end="55986" title="National Agricultural Safety Database" label="National Agricultural Safety Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978225" start="56006" end="56029" title="National Safety Council" label="National Safety Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152693" wikidata="Q184900" url="?curid=152693" title="Line editor">
<text>In computing, a line editor is a text editor in which each editing command applies to one or more complete lines of text designated by the user. Line editors predate screen-based text editors and originated in an era when a computer operator typically interacted with a teleprinter (essentially a printer with a keyboard), with no video display, and no ability to move a cursor interactively within a document.

Line editors are limited to typewriter keyboard text-oriented input and output methods. Most edits are a line-at-a-time. Typing, editing, and document display do not occur simultaneously. Typically, typing does not enter text directly into the document. Instead, users modify the document text by entering these commands on a text-only terminal. Commands and text, and corresponding output from the editor, will scroll up from the bottom of the screen in the order that they are entered or printed to the screen. Although the commands typically indicate the line(s) they modify, displaying the edited text within the context of larger portions of the document requires a separate command.

Line editors keep a reference to the &quot;current line&quot; to which the entered commands usually are applied. In contrast, modern screen based editors allow the user to interactively and directly navigate, select, and modify portions of the document. Generally line numbers or a search based context (especially when making changes within lines) are used to specify which part of the document is to be edited or displayed.

Early line editors included Expensive Typewriter and QED. Both pre-dated the advent of Unix; the former two ran on DEC PDP-1&#x27;s, while the latter was a Unisys product. Unix systems offer both ed and ex, the latter typically as a specialized mode of a full-screen editor. For the first 10 years of the IBM PC, the only editor provided in DOS was the Edlin line editor.

Line editors are still used non-interactively in shell scripts and when dealing with failing operating systems. Update systems such as patch traditionally used diff data converted into a script of ed commands. They are also used in many MUD systems, though many people edit text on their own computer using MUD&#x27;s download and upload features.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184900" start="16" end="27" title="Line editor" label="line editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="33" end="44" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="270" end="281" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="297" end="304" title="computer printer" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="312" end="320" title="Computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q548712" start="1557" end="1577" title="Expensive Typewriter" label="Expensive Typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055723" start="1582" end="1585" title="QED (text editor)" label="QED"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1616" end="1620" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="1644" end="1647" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="1648" end="1653" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="1685" end="1691" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q283992" start="1725" end="1727" title="ed (text editor)" label="ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q284328" start="1732" end="1734" title="ex (text editor)" label="ex"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="1834" end="1840" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="1870" end="1873" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q648402" start="1882" end="1887" title="Edlin" label="Edlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="1951" end="1963" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q300846" start="2037" end="2042" title="patch (Unix)" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q300901" start="2062" end="2066" title="diff" label="diff"/>
<link wikidata="Q283992" start="2099" end="2101" title="ed (text editor)" label="ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="2139" end="2142" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152700" wikidata="Q3328372" url="?curid=152700" title="Musella">
<text>Musella may refer to:

*&quot;Musella&quot; (plant), a flowering plant genus in the banana and plantain family, considered by some authorities to be a taxonomic synonym of the genus &quot;Ensete&quot; 
*Musella, Georgia, U.S. town in the state of Georgia
*Lino Musella, Italian actor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5100760" start="24" end="51" title="Musella (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Musella&amp;quot; (plant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q312321" start="188" end="194" title="Ensete" label="Ensete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940447" start="203" end="219" title="Musella, Georgia" label="Musella, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106675119" start="256" end="268" title="Lino Musella" label="Lino Musella"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152701" wikidata="Q4384176" url="?curid=152701" title="BESK">
<text>BESK (&quot;Binär Elektronisk SekvensKalkylator&quot;, Swedish for &quot;Binary Electronic Sequence Calculator&quot;) was Sweden&#x27;s first electronic computer, using vacuum tubes instead of relays. It was developed by &quot;Matematikmaskinnämnden&quot; (Swedish Board for Computing Machinery) and for a short time it was the fastest computer in the world. The computer was completed in 1953 and in use until 1966. The technology behind BESK was later continued with the transistorized FACIT EDB and FACIT EDB-3 machines, both software compatible with BESK. Non-compatible machines highly inspired by BESK were SMIL made for the University of Lund, &quot;SAABs räkneautomat&quot; SARA, &quot;SAAB&#x27;s calculating machine&quot;, and DASK made in Denmark.

BESK was developed by the Swedish Board for Computing Machinery (Matematikmaskinnämnden) a few years after the mechanical relay computer BARK (Binär Aritmetisk Relä-Kalkylator, Swedish for &quot;Binary Arithmetic Relay Calculator&quot;). The team was initially led by Conny Palm, who died in December 1951, after which Stig Comét took over. The hardware was developed by Erik Stemme. Gösta Neovius and Olle Karlqvist were responsible for architecture and instruction set. It was closely modeled on the IAS machine for which the design team had retrieved drawings during a scholarship to Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, U.S.

During the development of the BESK magnetic drum memory, Olle Karlqvist discovered a magnetic phenomenon, which has been called the Karlqvist gap.

==Performance==
BESK was a 40-bit machine; it could perform an addition in 56 μs and a multiplication took 350 μs. The electrostatic memory could store 512 words. The instruction length was 20 bits, so each word could store two instructions. BESK contained 2400 &quot;radio tubes&quot; (vacuum tubes) and 400 germanium diodes (so it was partly solid state). The power consumption was 15 kVA.

Initially an average runtime of 5 minutes was achieved before hardware problems appeared. In 1954 the system became more stable. Breakpoints were introduced to allow software to restart after hardware failures.

Originally BESK had a British Williams tube 512 word x 40 bit memory based on 40 cathode tubes, and eight spare tubes. The memory was from the beginning found to be insufficient and Carl-Ivar Bergman was given just a few weeks to build and install a ferrite core memory in 1956. To complete the work before the deadline they hired housewives with knitting experience to make the memory. One of the new memory bits did not work at first, but it was easily cut out and replaced.

==Usage==
BESK was inaugurated on 1 April 1954 and handled weather data for Carl-Gustaf Rossby and the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, statistics for the telecommunications service provider Televerket, wing profiles for the attack aircraft Saab Lansen, and road profiles for the road authority Vägverket. During the nights Swedish National Defence Radio Establishment (FRA) used BESK for cracking encryption of radio messages (by Per-Erik Persson &quot;et al.&quot;). BESK was also used for calculations for the Swedish nuclear energy industry, for example Monte Carlo simulations of neutron spectrum (by Per-Erik Persson &quot;et al.&quot;), and for the Swedish nuclear weapon program, but most of those calculations were done by SMIL. In 1957 Hans Riesel used BESK to discover a Mersenne prime with 969 digits - the largest prime known at the time.

SAAB rented computer time on the BESK to (probably, much was secret) make calculations of the strength of the Saab Lansen attack aircraft. In the fall of 1955 SAAB thought the capacity was insufficient and started working on &quot;SAABs räkneautomat&quot; SARA, &quot;SAAB&#x27;s calculating machine&quot;, which was going to be twice as fast as BESK. Some former SARA employees went to Facit and worked with the FACIT EDB.

In the spring of 1956, eighteen of the BESK developers were hired by office equipment manufacturer Facit and housed in an office at Karlavägen 62 in Stockholm, where they started to build copies of BESK called Facit EDB (models 1, 2, and 3), led by Carl-Ivar Bergman. A total of nine machines were built, of which four were used internally by Facit Electronics and five were sold to customers. On 1 July 1960 Facit Electronics, then with 135 employees, moved to Solna, just north of Stockholm.

In 1960 BESK was used to create an animation of a car driving down a planned highway from the driver&#x27;s perspective. This was one of the earliest computer animations ever made. The short clip was broadcast on Swedish national television on 9 November 1961.

==Trivia==
&quot;Besk&quot; is Swedish for the taste &quot;bitter&quot;. Bäsk is also the name of a traditional bitters made from distilled alcohol seasoned with the herb &quot;Artemisia absinthium L.&quot; local to the province of Skåne, in which Lund is located. Reportedly this was an intentional and unnoticed pun after officials denied usage of the name &quot;CONIAC&quot; (Conny [Palm] Integrator And Calculator, compare Cognac and ENIAC) for the predecessor BARK.

==See also==
*BARK - Binär Aritmetisk Relä-Kalkylator - Sweden&#x27;s first computer.
*Elsa-Karin Boestad-Nilsson, a programmer on BARK and BESK
*SMIL - SifferMaskinen I Lund (The Number Machine in Lund)
*History of computing hardware
*List of vacuum tube computers

==References==
==External links==

* Datorhistoriska nedslag (in Swedish), Google translation
* BESK Binär Elektronisk Sekvens Kalkylator (in Swedish), Google translation
* BESK programmers manual (in Swedish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4384176" start="0" end="4" title="BESK" label="BESK"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="55" end="62" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="122" end="128" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="153" end="161" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="169" end="180" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="193" end="198" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703325" start="227" end="249" title="Matematikmaskinnämnden" label="Matematikmaskinnämnden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703325" start="257" end="294" title="Swedish Board for Computing Machinery" label="Swedish Board for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="473" end="483" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397528" start="488" end="497" title="FACIT EDB" label="FACIT EDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391167" start="613" end="617" title="SMIL (computer)" label="SMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="631" end="649" title="University of Lund" label="University of Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947440" start="682" end="686" title="SARA (computer)" label="SARA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267708" start="737" end="741" title="DASK" label="DASK"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="750" end="757" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703325" start="786" end="823" title="Swedish Board for Computing Machinery" label="Swedish Board for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384247" start="897" end="901" title="BARK (computer)" label="BARK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162082" start="1028" end="1038" title="Conny Palm" label="Conny Palm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1079" end="1089" title="Stig Comét" label="Stig Comét"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1131" end="1142" title="Erik Stemme" label="Erik Stemme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1144" end="1157" title="Gösta Neovius" label="Gösta Neovius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1162" end="1176" title="Olle Karlqvist" label="Olle Karlqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535967" start="1262" end="1273" title="IAS machine" label="IAS machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="1347" end="1381" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study (IAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1386" end="1423" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="1475" end="1486" title="drum memory" label="drum memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1488" end="1502" title="Olle Karlqvist" label="Olle Karlqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372571" start="1563" end="1576" title="Karlqvist gap" label="Karlqvist gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="1698" end="1711" title="electrostatic" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="1866" end="1877" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="1888" end="1897" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="1898" end="1903" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="1923" end="1934" title="Solid state (electronics)" label="solid state"/>
<link wikidata="Q550341" start="1966" end="1969" title="kilovolt-ampere" label="kVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="2214" end="2227" title="Williams tube" label="Williams tube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2366" end="2383" title="Carl-Ivar Bergman" label="Carl-Ivar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="2434" end="2453" title="ferrite core memory" label="ferrite core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q60293" start="2738" end="2756" title="Carl-Gustaf Rossby" label="Carl-Gustaf Rossby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983328" start="2765" end="2814" title="Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute" label="Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q52918" start="2871" end="2881" title="Televerket (Sweden)" label="Televerket"/>
<link wikidata="Q831433" start="2921" end="2932" title="Saab Lansen" label="Saab Lansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918384" start="2975" end="2984" title="Vägverket" label="Vägverket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480245" start="3004" end="3048" title="Swedish National Defence Radio Establishment" label="Swedish National Defence Radio Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q622821" start="3172" end="3183" title="calculation" label="calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622799" start="3193" end="3224" title="Studsvik" label="Swedish nuclear energy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q232207" start="3238" end="3260" title="Monte Carlo simulation" label="Monte Carlo simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="3265" end="3281" title="neutron spectrum" label="neutron spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751132" start="3336" end="3366" title="Swedish nuclear weapon program" label="Swedish nuclear weapon program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391167" start="3412" end="3416" title="Siffermaskinen i Lund" label="SMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q707991" start="3426" end="3437" title="Hans Riesel" label="Hans Riesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186875" start="3462" end="3476" title="Mersenne prime" label="Mersenne prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q219501" start="3533" end="3537" title="Saab Group" label="SAAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q831433" start="3643" end="3654" title="Saab Lansen" label="Saab Lansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947440" start="3789" end="3793" title="SARA (computer)" label="SARA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349735" start="3920" end="3925" title="Facit" label="Facit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397528" start="3946" end="3955" title="FACIT EDB" label="FACIT EDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349735" start="4057" end="4062" title="Facit" label="Facit"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="4420" end="4425" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q406157" start="4788" end="4792" title="Bäsk" label="Bäsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q753069" start="4827" end="4834" title="bitters" label="bitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q25686" start="4892" end="4912" title="Artemisia absinthium" label="Artemisia absinthium"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="4947" end="4952" title="Skåne" label="Skåne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162082" start="5094" end="5105" title="Conny Palm" label="Conny [Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q284" start="5142" end="5148" title="Cognac" label="Cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="5153" end="5158" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384247" start="5201" end="5205" title="BARK (computer)" label="BARK"/>
<link wikidata="Q42393752" start="5274" end="5300" title="Elsa-Karin Boestad-Nilsson" label="Elsa-Karin Boestad-Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391167" start="5333" end="5337" title="SMIL (computer)" label="SMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="5392" end="5421" title="History of computing hardware" label="History of computing hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137429" start="5423" end="5452" title="List of vacuum tube computers" label="List of vacuum tube computers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152702" wikidata="Q4384247" url="?curid=152702" title="BARK (computer)">
<text>BARK () was an early electromechanical computer. BARK was built using standard telephone relays, implementing a 32-bit binary machine. It could perform addition in 150 ms and multiplication in 250 ms. It had a memory with 50 registers and 100 constants. It was later expanded to double the memory. Howard Aiken stated in reference to BARK &quot;This is the first computer I have seen outside Harvard that actually works.&quot;

== History ==
BARK was developed by &quot;Matematikmaskinnämnden&quot; (Swedish Board for Computing Machinery) a few years before BESK. The machine was built with 8,000 standard telephone relays, 80 km of cable and with 175,000 soldering points. Programming was done by plugboard. It was completed in February 1950 at a cost of 400,000 Swedish kronor (less than $100,000), became operational on April 28, 1950, and was taken offline on September 22, 1954. The engineers on the team led by Conny Palm were Harry Freese, Gösta Neovius, Olle Karlqvist, Carl-Erik Fröberg, G. Kellberg, Björn Lind, Arne Lindberger, P. Petersson and Madeline Wallmark.

== See also ==
* BESK - Binär Elektronisk Sekvens-Kalkylator - Sweden&#x27;s second computer.
* Elsa-Karin Boestad-Nilsson, a programmer on BARK and BESK
* SMIL - SifferMaskinen I Lund (The Number Machine in Lund)
* History of computing hardware

== References ==

== External links ==
* Tekn. lic. Olle Karlqvist in memoriam (in Swedish), Google translation, memorial site of one of the engineers behind BARK and BESK. On BARK page there&#x27;s a technical pdf document (in English): &quot;The BARK, A Swedish General Purpose Relay Computer&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4384247" start="0" end="4" title="BARK (computer)" label="BARK"/>
<link wikidata="Q533188" start="21" end="47" title="Electromechanics" label="electromechanical computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="79" end="94" title="relay" label="telephone relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="112" end="118" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351510" start="225" end="234" title="Hardware register" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q299723" start="298" end="310" title="Howard Aiken" label="Howard Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703325" start="470" end="492" title="Matematikmaskinnämnden" label="Matematikmaskinnämnden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703325" start="500" end="537" title="Swedish Board for Computing Machinery" label="Swedish Board for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384176" start="558" end="562" title="BESK" label="BESK"/>
<link wikidata="Q844783" start="698" end="707" title="plugboard" label="plugboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="764" end="778" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish kronor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162082" start="917" end="927" title="Conny Palm" label="Conny Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384176" start="1093" end="1097" title="BESK" label="BESK"/>
<link wikidata="Q42393752" start="1172" end="1198" title="Elsa-Karin Boestad-Nilsson" label="Elsa-Karin Boestad-Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391167" start="1232" end="1236" title="SMIL (computer)" label="SMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="1292" end="1321" title="History of computing hardware" label="History of computing hardware"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152703" wikidata="Q2667025" url="?curid=152703" title="Hilbert's third problem">
<text>The third of Hilbert&#x27;s list of mathematical problems, presented in 1900, was the first to be solved. The problem is related to the following question: given any two polyhedra of equal volume, is it always possible to cut the first into finitely many polyhedral pieces which can be reassembled to yield the second? Based on earlier writings by Carl Friedrich Gauss, David Hilbert conjectured that this is not always possible. This was confirmed within the year by his student Max Dehn, who proved that the answer in general is &quot;no&quot; by producing a counterexample.

The answer for the analogous question about polygons in 2 dimensions is &quot;yes&quot; and had been known for a long time; this is the Wallace–Bolyai–Gerwien theorem.

Unknown to Hilbert and Dehn, Hilbert&#x27;s third problem was also proposed independently by Władysław Kretkowski for a math contest of 1882 by the Academy of Arts and Sciences of Kraków, and was solved by Ludwik Antoni Birkenmajer with a different method than Dehn&#x27;s. Birkenmajer did not publish the result, and the original manuscript containing his solution was rediscovered years later.

==History and motivation==
The formula for the volume of a pyramid, one-third of the product of base area and height, had been known to Euclid. Still, all proofs of it involve some form of limiting process or calculus, notably the method of exhaustion or, in more modern form, Cavalieri&#x27;s principle. Similar formulas in plane geometry can be proven with more elementary means. Gauss regretted this defect in two of his letters to Christian Ludwig Gerling, who proved that two symmetric tetrahedra are equidecomposable.

Gauss&#x27;s letters were the motivation for Hilbert: is it possible to prove the equality of volume using elementary &quot;cut-and-glue&quot; methods? Because if not, then an elementary proof of Euclid&#x27;s result is also impossible.

== Dehn&#x27;s proof ==

Dehn&#x27;s proof is an instance in which abstract algebra is used to prove an impossibility result in geometry. Other examples are doubling the cube and trisecting the angle.

Two polyhedra are called &quot;scissors-congruent&quot; if the first can be cut into finitely many polyhedral pieces that can be reassembled to yield the second. Any two scissors-congruent polyhedra have the same volume. Hilbert asks about the converse.

For every polyhedron formula_1, Dehn defines a value, now known as the Dehn invariant formula_2, with the property that,
if formula_1 is cut into polyhedral pieces formula_4, then
formula_5
In particular, if two polyhedra are scissors-congruent, then they have the same Dehn invariant. He then shows that every cube has Dehn invariant zero while every regular tetrahedron has non-zero Dehn invariant. Therefore, these two shapes cannot be scissors-congruent.

A polyhedron&#x27;s invariant is defined based on the lengths of its edges and the angles between its faces. If a polyhedron is cut into two, some edges are cut into two, and the corresponding contributions to the Dehn invariants should therefore be additive in the edge lengths. Similarly, if a polyhedron is cut along an edge, the corresponding angle is cut into two. Cutting a polyhedron typically also introduces new edges and angles; their contributions must cancel out. The angles introduced when a cut passes through a face add to formula_6, and the angles introduced around an edge interior to the polyhedron add to formula_7. Therefore, the Dehn invariant is defined in such a way that integer multiples of angles of formula_6 give a net contribution of zero.

All of the above requirements can be met by defining formula_2 as an element of the tensor product of the real numbers formula_10 (representing lengths of edges) and the quotient space formula_11 (representing angles, with all rational multiples of formula_6 replaced by zero). For some purposes, this definition can be made using the tensor product of modules over formula_13 (or equivalently of abelian groups), while other aspects of this topic make use of a vector space structure on the invariants, obtained by considering the two factors formula_10 and formula_11 to be vector spaces over formula_16 and taking the tensor product of vector spaces over formula_16. This choice of structure in the definition does not make a difference in whether two Dehn invariants, defined in either way, are equal or unequal.

For any edge formula_18 of a polyhedron formula_1, let formula_20 be its length and let formula_21 denote the dihedral angle of the two faces of formula_1 that meet at formula_18, measured in radians and considered modulo rational multiples of formula_6. The Dehn invariant is then defined as
formula_25
where the sum is taken over all edges formula_18 of the polyhedron formula_1. It is a valuation.

==Further information==
In light of Dehn&#x27;s theorem above, one might ask &quot;which polyhedra are scissors-congruent&quot;? Sydler (1965) showed that two polyhedra are scissors-congruent if and only if they have the same volume and the same Dehn invariant. Børge Jessen later extended Sydler&#x27;s results to four dimensions. In 1990, Dupont and Sah provided a simpler proof of Sydler&#x27;s result by reinterpreting it as a theorem about the homology of certain classical groups.

Debrunner showed in 1980 that the Dehn invariant of any polyhedron with which all of three-dimensional space can be tiled periodically is zero.
Jessen also posed the question of whether the analogue of Jessen&#x27;s results remained true for spherical geometry and hyperbolic geometry. In these geometries, Dehn&#x27;s method continues to work, and shows that when two polyhedra are scissors-congruent, their Dehn invariants are equal. However, it remains an open problem whether pairs of polyhedra with the same volume and the same Dehn invariant, in these geometries, are always scissors-congruent.

==Original question==
Hilbert&#x27;s original question was more complicated: given any two tetrahedra &quot;T&quot;1 and &quot;T&quot;2 with equal base area and equal height (and therefore equal volume), is it always possible to find a finite number of tetrahedra, so that when these tetrahedra are glued in some way to &quot;T&quot;1 and also glued to &quot;T&quot;2, the resulting polyhedra are scissors-congruent?

Dehn&#x27;s invariant can be used to yield a negative answer also to this stronger question.

==See also==
* Hill tetrahedron
* Onorato Nicoletti

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*Proof of Dehn&#x27;s Theorem at Everything2
*Dehn Invariant at Everything2</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273167" start="13" end="57" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s problems" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s list of mathematical problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q172937" start="170" end="179" title="polyhedron" label="polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="189" end="195" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="348" end="368" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="370" end="383" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q61732" start="480" end="488" title="Max Dehn" label="Max Dehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="622" end="629" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q834211" start="714" end="744" title="Wallace–Bolyai–Gerwien theorem" label="Wallace–Bolyai–Gerwien theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="927" end="933" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699443" start="953" end="978" title="Ludwik Birkenmajer" label="Ludwik Antoni Birkenmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358290" start="1203" end="1210" title="pyramid (geometry)" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="1280" end="1286" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q847204" start="1333" end="1349" title="Limit of a sequence" label="limiting process"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="1353" end="1361" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q865019" start="1375" end="1395" title="method of exhaustion" label="method of exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q586686" start="1421" end="1447" title="Cavalieri&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Cavalieri&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q72995" start="1579" end="1603" title="Christian Ludwig Gerling" label="Christian Ludwig Gerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q834211" start="1650" end="1666" title="equidecomposable" label="equidecomposable"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="1974" end="1990" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="2035" end="2043" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213673" start="2064" end="2081" title="doubling the cube" label="doubling the cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q733081" start="2086" end="2106" title="trisecting the angle" label="trisecting the angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375963" start="2353" end="2361" title="Converse (logic)" label="converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587580" start="2435" end="2449" title="Dehn invariant" label="Dehn invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="2675" end="2679" title="cube" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="2724" end="2735" title="tetrahedron" label="tetrahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="3678" end="3692" title="tensor product" label="tensor product"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3700" end="3711" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393796" start="3764" end="3778" title="Quotient space (linear algebra)" label="quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406761" start="3929" end="3954" title="tensor product of modules" label="tensor product of modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="3991" end="4004" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="4056" end="4068" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="4215" end="4246" title="Tensor product" label="tensor product of vector spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q911907" start="4522" end="4536" title="dihedral angle" label="dihedral angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="4604" end="4610" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812715" start="4802" end="4811" title="Valuation (geometry)" label="valuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169961" start="4943" end="4949" title="Jean-Pierre Sydler" label="Sydler"/>
<link wikidata="Q453826" start="5076" end="5088" title="Børge Jessen" label="Børge Jessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144780" start="5263" end="5271" title="homology (mathematics)" label="homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285809" start="5283" end="5298" title="classical group" label="classical group"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="5387" end="5410" title="three-dimensional space" label="three-dimensional space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189295" start="5418" end="5423" title="honeycomb (geometry)" label="tiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q326905" start="5544" end="5562" title="spherical geometry" label="spherical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="5567" end="5586" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321906" start="5761" end="5773" title="open problem" label="open problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="5995" end="6005" title="tetrahedron" label="tetrahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762456" start="6431" end="6447" title="Hill tetrahedron" label="Hill tetrahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16658078" start="6450" end="6467" title="Onorato Nicoletti" label="Onorato Nicoletti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152707" wikidata="Q6149584" url="?curid=152707" title="Jan Narveson">
<text>Jan Narveson (; born 1936) is professor of philosophy emeritus at the University of Waterloo, in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. An anarcho-capitalist and contractarian, Narveson&#x27;s ideology is deeply influenced by the thought of Robert Nozick and David Gauthier.

==Biography==
Narveson was born in Erskine, Minnesota, United States. He studied at the University of Chicago where he obtained a BA in political science and in philosophy; he then spent a year at the University of Oxford on a traveling fellowship before earning a PhD at Harvard University in 1961. His libertarian views have evolved from dissatisfaction with utilitarianism.

A prolific author, Narveson has written hundreds of essays, reviews and articles for publication. A critic of Marxism, he is also known at the University of Waterloo for taking part in many on-campus debates. In 2002 he published &quot;Respecting Persons in Theory and Practice&quot; (2002), a collection of his most influential essays spanning the length of his career. His most recent work is &quot;You and the State: A Short Introduction to Political Philosophy&quot;. Narveson is a long-time member of the Ontario Libertarian Party, and is currently a member of its Ethics Committee.

Apart from his libertarian work, he is the founder/president of the Kitchener-Waterloo Chamber Music Society, a long-running venue for classical chamber music.

In 2003, Narveson was made an Officer of the Order of Canada by past Governor-General of Canada, Adrienne Clarkson.

Narveson was the founding Chairman and President of the Institute for Liberal Studies, and since 2016 has been Chairman Emeritus.

==Criticism of animal rights==

Narveson is a noted opponent of animal rights and one of Tom Regan&#x27;s severe critics. He has defended a contractarian account of morality in which only agents capable of agreeing to obligations and social rules have moral standing, therefore animals cannot have rights. Under contractarian ethics all moral obligations derive from mutual agreement between different parties but as animals can not understand the terms of an agreement nor demand duties from humans then the life and welfare of the animal is only relevant as they matter to human interests.

==Selected publications==

* &quot;Morality and Utility&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967.
* &quot;Moral Issues&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1983.
* &quot;A Case Against Animal Rights&quot;, Moorhead State University, 1986.
* &quot;Political Correctness: For and Against&quot; co-authored with Marilyn Friedman, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1995.
* &quot;Moral Matters&quot;, 2nd ed., Broadview Press, 1999.
* &quot;The Libertarian Idea&quot;, Paperback edition (with new preface). Broadview Press, 2001. (Orig. pub.: Temple University Press, 1988)
* &quot;Respecting Persons in Theory and Practice: Essays on Moral and Political Philosophy&quot;, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2002.
* &quot;You and the State&quot;, 2008.
* &quot;This is Ethical Theory&quot;, Open Court, 2010.
* &quot;Are Liberty and Equality Compatible?&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2010.

==See also==

* List of University of Waterloo people

==Notes==
==External links==
* Homepage of Jan Narveson at the Univ. of Waterloo
* Criticism of Narveson&#x27;s Libertarianism by G. A. Cohen
* An interview with Jan Narveson about the philosophy of Robert Nozick by Peter Jaworski
* A review of Narveson&#x27;s &quot;The Libertarian Idea&quot; and &quot;Respecting Persons in Theory and Practice&quot;
* A debate between Narveson and Gary Francione on Radio Netherlands on the issue of animal rights.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6149584" start="0" end="12" title="Jan Narveson" label="Jan Narveson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="43" end="53" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="70" end="92" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="97" end="114" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="127" end="145" title="anarcho-capitalist" label="anarcho-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="150" end="163" title="contractarian" label="contractarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="229" end="242" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174527" start="247" end="261" title="David Gauthier" label="David Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230909" start="299" end="317" title="Erskine, Minnesota" label="Erskine, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="352" end="373" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="465" end="485" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="536" end="554" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="625" end="639" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="752" end="759" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="785" end="807" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094822" start="1152" end="1177" title="Ontario Libertarian Party" label="Ontario Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="1437" end="1452" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q236482" start="1489" end="1506" title="Adrienne Clarkson" label="Adrienne Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039464" start="1565" end="1594" title="Institute for Liberal Studies" label="Institute for Liberal Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="1704" end="1717" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q314146" start="1729" end="1738" title="Tom Regan" label="Tom Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="1780" end="1793" title="Social contract" label="contractarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14816066" start="2540" end="2556" title="Marilyn Friedman" label="Marilyn Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079758" start="3121" end="3158" title="List of University of Waterloo people" label="List of University of Waterloo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q553987" start="3290" end="3301" title="G. A. Cohen" label="G. A. Cohen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152710" wikidata="Q9286" url="?curid=152710" title="Sculptor (constellation)">
<text>Sculptor is a faint constellation in the southern sky. It represents a sculptor. It was introduced by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in the 18th century. He originally named it Apparatus Sculptoris (the sculptor&#x27;s studio), but the name was later shortened.

==History==
The region to the south of Cetus and Aquarius had been named by Aratus in 270 BC as &quot;The Waters&quot; – an area of scattered faint stars with two brighter stars standing out. Professor of astronomy Bradley Schaefer has proposed that these stars were most likely Alpha and Delta Sculptoris.

The French astronomer Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille first described the constellation in French as &quot;l&#x27;Atelier du Sculpteur&quot; (the sculptor&#x27;s studio) in 1751–52, depicting a three-legged table with a carved head on it, and an artist&#x27;s mallet and two chisels on a block of marble alongside it. Lacaille had observed and catalogued almost 10,000 southern stars during a two-year stay at the Cape of Good Hope, devising fourteen new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe. He named all but one in honour of instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment.

==Characteristics==
Sculptor is a small constellation bordered by Aquarius and Cetus to the north, Fornax to the east, Phoenix to the south, Grus to the southwest, and Piscis Austrinus to the west. The bright star Fomalhaut is nearby. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is &quot;Scl&quot;. The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eugène Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 6 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between and , while the declination coordinates are between −24.80° and −39.37°. The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 50°N.

==Notable features==
===Stars===

No stars brighter than 3rd magnitude are located in Sculptor. This is explained by the fact that Sculptor contains the south galactic pole where stellar density is very low. Overall, there are 56 stars within the constellation&#x27;s borders brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5.

The brightest star is Alpha Sculptoris, an SX Arietis-type variable star with a spectral type B7IIIp and an apparent magnitude of 4.3. It is 780 ± 30 light-years distant from Earth.

Eta Sculptoris is a red giant of spectral type M4III that varies between magnitudes 4.8 and 4.9, pulsating with multiple periods of 22.7, 23.5, 24.6, 47.3, 128.7 and 158.7 days. Estimated to be around 1,082 times as luminous as the Sun, it is 460 ± 20 light-years distant from Earth.

R Sculptoris is a red giant that has been found to be surrounded by spirals of matter likely ejected around 1800 years ago. It is 1,440 ± 90 light-years distant from Earth.

The Astronomical Society of Southern Africa in 2003 reported that observations of the Mira variable stars T, U, V and X Sculptoris were very urgently needed as data on their light curves was incomplete.

===Deep sky objects===
The constellation also contains the Sculptor Dwarf, a dwarf galaxy which is a member of the Local Group, as well as the Sculptor Group, the group of galaxies closest to the Local Group. The Sculptor Galaxy (NGC 253), a barred spiral galaxy and the largest member of the group, lies near the border between Sculptor and Cetus. Another prominent member of the group is the irregular galaxy NGC 55.

One unique galaxy in Sculptor is the Cartwheel Galaxy, at a distance of 500 million light-years. The result of a merger around 300 million years ago, the Cartwheel Galaxy has a core of older, yellow stars, and an outer ring of younger, blue stars, which has a diameter of 100,000 light-years. The smaller galaxy in the collision is now incorporated into the core, after moving from a distance of 250,000 light-years. The shock waves from the collision sparked extensive star formation in the outer ring.

==Namesakes==
&quot;Sculptor&quot; (AK-103) was a United States Navy Crater class cargo ship named after the constellation.

==See also==
* Sculptor (Chinese astronomy)

==References==
Notes
Citations
Sources



== External links ==

* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Sculptor
* The clickable Sculptor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9286" start="0" end="8" title="Sculptor (constellation)" label="Sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="20" end="33" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="71" end="79" title="sculpture" label="sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="102" end="127" title="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille" label="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286" start="172" end="192" title="Sculptor (constellation)" label="Apparatus Sculptoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q180671" start="334" end="340" title="Aratus" label="Aratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923490" start="473" end="489" title="Bradley Schaefer" label="Bradley Schaefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="588" end="613" title="Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille" label="Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="974" end="991" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380815" start="1058" end="1087" title="Southern Celestial Hemisphere" label="Southern Celestial Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="1179" end="1199" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10576" start="1268" end="1276" title="Aquarius (constellation)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="1281" end="1286" title="Cetus" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8913" start="1301" end="1307" title="Fornax" label="Fornax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441" start="1321" end="1328" title="Phoenix (constellation)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10563" start="1343" end="1347" title="Grus (constellation)" label="Grus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10409" start="1370" end="1386" title="Piscis Austrinus" label="Piscis Austrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13169" start="1416" end="1425" title="Fomalhaut" label="Fomalhaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="1508" end="1540" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009" start="1638" end="1653" title="Eugène Joseph Delporte" label="Eugène Delporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q208617" start="1710" end="1738" title="equatorial coordinate system" label="equatorial coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="1744" end="1759" title="right ascension" label="right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="1817" end="1828" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209320" start="1940" end="1944" title="50th parallel north" label="50°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="2004" end="2017" title="apparent magnitude" label="3rd magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q385487" start="2100" end="2119" title="Galactic coordinate system" label="south galactic pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="2249" end="2267" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967315" start="2296" end="2312" title="Alpha Sculptoris" label="Alpha Sculptoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392904" start="2317" end="2332" title="SX Arietis variable" label="SX Arietis-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="2333" end="2346" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177988" start="2457" end="2471" title="Eta Sculptoris" label="Eta Sculptoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="2477" end="2486" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788913" start="2742" end="2754" title="R Sculptoris" label="R Sculptoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811649" start="2920" end="2959" title="Astronomical Society of Southern Africa" label="Astronomical Society of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q744691" start="3002" end="3015" title="Mira variable" label="Mira variable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3022" end="3023" title="T Sculptoris" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3025" end="3026" title="U Sculptoris" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3028" end="3029" title="V Sculptoris" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3034" end="3046" title="X Sculptoris" label="X Sculptoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q32889" start="3179" end="3193" title="Sculptor Dwarf Galaxy" label="Sculptor Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q190438" start="3197" end="3209" title="dwarf galaxy" label="dwarf galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="3235" end="3246" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521081" start="3263" end="3277" title="Sculptor Group" label="Sculptor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q487221" start="3333" end="3348" title="Sculptor Galaxy" label="Sculptor Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="3362" end="3382" title="barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="3462" end="3467" title="Cetus" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190397" start="3514" end="3530" title="irregular galaxy" label="irregular galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50650" start="3531" end="3537" title="NGC 55" label="NGC 55"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208155" start="3577" end="3593" title="Cartwheel Galaxy" label="Cartwheel Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="3624" end="3635" title="light-years" label="light-years"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518150" start="3653" end="3659" title="galaxy merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="4010" end="4024" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873947" start="4059" end="4088" title="USS Sculptor (AK-103)" label="&amp;quot;Sculptor&amp;quot; (AK-103)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4095" end="4113" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182612" start="4114" end="4137" title="Crater class cargo ship" label="Crater class cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439440" start="4185" end="4213" title="Sculptor (Chinese astronomy)" label="Sculptor (Chinese astronomy)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152712" wikidata="Q2827377" url="?curid=152712" title="Agénor Bardoux">
<text>Agénor Bardoux (15 January 1829, Bourges, Cher23 November 1897, Paris) was a French and republican.

==Early life==
A native of Bourges, he was born on 15 January 1829. He was a son of Jacques Bardoux (1795–1871) and the former Thérèse Pignet (1807–1883).

==Career==
Bardoux was established as an advocate in Clermont-Ferrand, and did not hesitate to proclaim his Republican sympathies. In 1871 he was elected deputy of the French National Assembly, and re-elected in 1876 and in 1877. In the chamber he was president of the &quot;Centre gauche&quot; group, standing strongly for the republic but against anti-clericalism, and during the constitutional crisis of May 1877 he was one of the 363 signatories to the vote of no confidence. In the subsequently elected republican chamber he became minister of public instruction (December 1877) and proposed various republican laws, notably on compulsory primary education. He resigned in 1879. He was not re-elected in 1881 but in December 1882 was named senator for life.

==Personal life==
On 15 July 1873, he married Clémence Villa (1847–1939) in Montpellier. She was a daughter of Achille Villa and the former Sophie Bimar. Together, they had at least one son: 

* Jacques Bardoux (1874–1959), the French senator and academic who married Henriette Marie Geneviève Picot.

Bardoux died in Paris on 23 November 1897.

===Descendants===
Through Jacques, he was a great-grandfather of Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing (b. 1926) was president of France from 1974 until 1981.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2827377" start="0" end="14" title="Agénor Bardoux" label="Agénor Bardoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="33" end="40" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286" start="42" end="46" title="Cher (department)" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="64" end="69" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="88" end="98" title="republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="128" end="135" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q380075" start="298" end="306" title="advocate" label="advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42168" start="310" end="326" title="Clermont-Ferrand" label="Clermont-Ferrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="425" end="449" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="606" end="622" title="anti-clericalism" label="anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002758" start="639" end="672" title="16 May 1877 crisis" label="constitutional crisis of May 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572330" start="794" end="824" title="Minister of National Education (France)" label="minister of public instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786200" start="1002" end="1018" title="senator for life" label="senator for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="1097" end="1108" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158191" start="1216" end="1231" title="Jacques Bardoux" label="Jacques Bardoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1339" end="1344" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="1432" end="1461" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="1476" end="1495" title="president of France" label="president of France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152717" wikidata="Q778787" url="?curid=152717" title="James Burke (science historian)">
<text>James Burke (born 22 December 1936) is a broadcaster, science historian, author, and television producer. He was one of the main presenters of the BBC1 science series &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World&quot; from 1965 to 1971 and created and presented the television series &quot;Connections&quot; (1978), and its more philosophical sequel &quot;The Day the Universe Changed&quot; (1985), about the history of science and technology. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; has called him &quot;one of the most intriguing minds in the Western world&quot;.

==Early life==
Burke was born in Derry, Northern Ireland. During World War II he was evacuated to Downhill, County Londonderry where he lived between the ages of 4 and 9. When his father returned home after the war, the family moved to Kent, England, where James Burke attended Maidstone Grammar School. He then served in the Royal Air Force (RAF) from 1955 to 1957 before being accepted at Jesus College, Oxford, where he studied Middle English, obtaining BA and MA degrees.

== Career ==
Upon graduation, he moved to Italy, where at the British School in Bologna, he was lecturer in English and director of studies, 1961–1963. He also lectured at the University of Urbino. Thereafter, he was headmaster of the English School in Rome, 1963–1965. He was involved in the creation of an English–Italian dictionary, and the publication of an art encyclopedia.

Burke&#x27;s entry into television was explained by &quot;People&quot; magazine in 1979: &quot;Television beckoned by chance one day on a Rome bus. Spotting an ad for a reporter for the local bureau of Britain&#x27;s Granada Television, he says, &#x27;I decided if the bus stopped at the next corner I would get off and apply for the job.&#x27; It did, he did, and the next thing he knew &#x27;we went straight off to Sicily to do a series on the Mafia.&#x27;&quot;

In 1966, Burke moved to London and joined the Science and Features Department of the BBC, for which he was host or co-host of several programmes. He also worked as an instructor in English as a foreign language at the Regency Language School in Ramsgate.

Burke established his reputation as a reporter on the BBC1 science series &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World&quot;, and went on to present &quot;The Burke Special&quot;. He was BBC television&#x27;s science anchorman and chief reporter for the Apollo missions, as the main presenter of the BBC&#x27;s coverage of the first Moon landing in 1969.

In collaboration with Mick Jackson, he produced the 10-part documentary series &quot;Connections&quot; (1978), which was broadcast on the BBC, and subsequently on PBS in the United States. &quot;Connections&quot; traced the historical relationships between invention and discovery; each episode chronicled a particular path of technological development. &quot;Connections&quot; was the most-watched PBS television series up to that time. It was followed by the 20-part &quot;Connections2&quot; (1994) and the 10-part &quot;Connections3&quot; (1997). &quot;Connections: An Alternative View of Change&quot; was broadcast in more than 50 countries and the companion book &quot;Connections: An Alternative History of Technology&quot; (1978) sold well. In 1980, Burke created and Jackson produced the six-part BBC series &quot;The Real Thing&quot;, about perception.

In 1985, Burke, with Richard Reisz and John Lynch, produced the 10-part television series &quot;The Day the Universe Changed&quot; (revised 1995), focusing on the philosophical aspects of scientific change in Western culture.

Burke has been a regular writer for &quot;Scientific American&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;, and a consultant to the SETI project.

Burke received the gold and the silver medals of the Royal Television Society. In 1998, he was made an honorary fellow of the Society for Technical Communication.

Burke has contributed to podcasts, such as in 2008, when he appeared on &quot;Hardcore History&quot; with Dan Carlin, and in 2016 on &quot;Common Sense&quot;, again with Carlin, and to newspaper articles including two series for the &quot;Mogollon Connection&quot; by Jesse Horn, one focusing on the nature of morality, the other on the future of our youth.

Burke presented a monologue, &quot;James Burke on the End of Scarcity&quot;, first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 26 December 2017, in which he predicted nanotech manufacturing would revolutionize the world economy and society. 

In a May 2020 interview, Burke said that he was writing a new &quot;Connections&quot; book. In 2023, his new series &quot;Connections with James Burke&quot; premiered on Curiosity Stream.

==&quot;Knowledge Web&quot;==
Burke is the leading figure in the development of the &quot;Knowledge Web&quot;, the planned digital realization of his books and television programmes, which would allow the user to travel through history and create his or her own connections. Eventually, the project may feature immersive virtual-reality historical recreations of people, places, and events.

In 2019, he produced a series of five 15-minute programmes for BBC Radio 4 with the title &quot;James Burke&#x27;s Web of Knowledge&quot;, in each of which he traced the connections between two widely separated people or themes; the first programme connected Mozart to the helicopter.

==Predictions==
In an article for the &quot;Radio Times&quot; in 1973, Burke predicted the widespread use of computers for business decisions, the creation of metadata banks of personal information, and changes in human behaviour, such as greater willingness to reveal personal information to strangers. In an interview on the &quot;PM&quot; programme on BBC Radio 4 on 30 August 2013, Burke discussed his predictions of a post-scarcity economy driven by advances in nanofactories, which he believes may be viable by 2043.

Burke posed at least one of his predictions as a question. In &quot;Connections&quot;, he notes that the increase in connections over time causes the rate of innovation to accelerate, and asks what happens when this rate, or more importantly &quot;change&quot; itself, becomes too much for the average person to handle. He also questions what this would mean for individual power, liberty, and privacy.

In the conclusion of &quot;Connections&quot;, Burke said that computing and communications might be controlled by a computer science élite. Later, he suggested at the conclusion of &quot;The Day the Universe Changed&quot; that a worldwide revolution in communications and computer technology would allow people to instantaneously exchange ideas and opinions.

==Television credits==
Television series and documentaries by Burke:

* &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World&quot; (1966–1971)
* &quot;Paid Off&quot;, a three-part series about employment (1967)
* &quot;Intimate Relations&quot;, a three-part series about doctor-patient relations (1968)
* &quot;The End of the Beginning&quot; (1972), about the end of the Project Apollo space programme 
* &quot;The Burke Special&quot; (1972–1976)
* &quot;Stump the Scientist&quot; (1974), featuring an audience of children who questioned a panel of scientists in the hope of presenting a question they could not answer
* &quot;The Inventing of America&quot; (1976), NBC–BBC co-production for the U.S. Bicentennial, co-hosted by Burke and Raymond Burr
* &quot;Scenario: The Oil Game&quot; (1976), crisis game examining OPEC
* &quot;Scenario: The Peace Game&quot; (1977), crisis game examining NATO
* &quot;Connections&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Men Who Walked on the Moon&quot; (1979), a 10th anniversary review of the flight of Apollo 11
* &quot;The Other Side of the Moon&quot; (1979), a critical examination of the Apollo space programme
* &quot;The Real Thing&quot; (1980), about human perception
* &quot;The Neuron Suite&quot;, about the human brain (1982)
* MacGillivray Freeman&#x27;s &quot;Speed&quot; (IMAX) (1984), as the narrator
* &quot;The Day the Universe Changed&quot; (1985, 1995)
* &quot;After the Warming&quot; (1989), about the greenhouse effect
* &quot;Masters of Illusion&quot; (1993), about Renaissance painting
* &quot;Connections2&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Connections3&quot; (1997)
* &quot;ReConnections&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Connections with James Burke&quot; (2023)

==Books==
* &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World I&quot;, with Raymond Baxter, (BBC 1970) 
* &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s World II&quot;, with Raymond Baxter, (BBC 1973) 
* &quot;Connections: Alternative History of Technology&quot; (Time Warner International/Macmillan 1978) ; published in North America as &quot;Connections&quot; (Little, Brown and Company, 1978) and pbk: .
* &quot;The Day the Universe Changed&quot; (BBC 1985) 
* &quot;Chances&quot; (Virgin Books 1991) 
* &quot;The Axemaker’s Gift&quot;, with Robert Ornstein and illustrated by Ted Dewan (Jeremy P Tarcher 1995) 
* &quot;The Pinball Effect: How Renaissance Water Gardens Made the Carburetor Possible—and Other Journeys Through Knowledge&quot; (Little, Brown &amp; Company 1996) 
* &quot;Circles: Fifty Round Trips Through History, Technology, Science, Culture&quot; (Simon &amp; Schuster 2000) 
* &quot;The Knowledge Web&quot; (Simon &amp; Schuster 2001) 
* &quot;Twin Tracks&quot; (Simon &amp; Schuster 2003) 
* &quot;American Connections: The Founding Fathers. Networked.&quot; (Simon &amp; Schuster 2007) 

==References==
==External links==

* Burke&#x27;s KnowledgeWeb Project&#x27;s Facebook page 
* Stranova Interview with James Burke on &quot;The Knowledge Web&quot; 26 September 2006.
* &quot;Admiral Shovel and the toilet roll&quot; talk by Burke in the dConstruct Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q778787" start="0" end="11" title="James Burke (science historian)" label="James Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="147" end="151" title="BBC One" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820221" start="173" end="194" title="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World" label="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161691" start="273" end="284" title="Connections (British documentary)" label="Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729235" start="339" end="367" title="The Day the Universe Changed" label="The Day the Universe Changed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183341" start="392" end="425" title="history of science and technology" label="history of science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="433" end="452" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="575" end="580" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="582" end="598" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q702677" start="640" end="668" title="Downhill, County Londonderry" label="Downhill, County Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="778" end="782" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735519" start="820" end="844" title="Maidstone Grammar School" label="Maidstone Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="868" end="883" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q81174" start="933" end="954" title="Jesus College, Oxford" label="Jesus College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="973" end="987" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297864" start="1006" end="1008" title="Master of Arts (Oxford, Cambridge, and Dublin)" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="1099" end="1106" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119752" start="1195" end="1215" title="University of Urbino" label="University of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="1452" end="1470" title="People (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="1617" end="1635" title="ITV Granada" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1952" end="1955" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q736439" start="2112" end="2120" title="Ramsgate" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="2177" end="2181" title="BBC One" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820221" start="2203" end="2224" title="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World" label="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720650" start="2261" end="2278" title="The Burke Special" label="The Burke Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="2360" end="2366" title="Project Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971462" start="2406" end="2451" title="British television Apollo 11 coverage" label="BBC&amp;#x27;s coverage of the first Moon landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q703492" start="2484" end="2496" title="Mick Jackson (director)" label="Mick Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161691" start="2547" end="2558" title="Connections (British documentary)" label="Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2625" end="2628" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729235" start="3421" end="3449" title="The Day the Universe Changed" label="The Day the Universe Changed"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="3534" end="3549" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="3594" end="3613" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3630" end="3634" title="Time magazine" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="3666" end="3670" title="SETI" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="3734" end="3758" title="Royal Television Society" label="Royal Television Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552258" start="3807" end="3842" title="Society for Technical Communication" label="Society for Technical Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213232" start="3951" end="3961" title="Dan Carlin" label="Dan Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186430" start="4113" end="4123" title="Jesse Horn" label="Jesse Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4300" end="4311" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="4355" end="4363" title="Nanotechnology" label="nanotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041454" start="4601" end="4617" title="Curiosity Stream" label="Curiosity Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="5271" end="5277" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="5285" end="5295" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="5342" end="5353" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119796" start="5631" end="5633" title="PM (Radio 4)" label="PM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="5721" end="5742" title="post-scarcity economy" label="post-scarcity economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5765" end="5778" title="Molecular assembler#Nanofactories" label="nanofactories"/>
<link wikidata="Q338713" start="5994" end="6004" title="Accelerating change" label="accelerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916554" start="6099" end="6140" title="Future shock" label="too much for the average person to handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="6342" end="6358" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820221" start="6664" end="6685" title="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World" label="Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="6932" end="6946" title="Project Apollo" label="Project Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720650" start="6972" end="6989" title="The Burke Special" label="The Burke Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="7257" end="7274" title="United States Bicentennial" label="U.S. Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q336877" start="7299" end="7311" title="Raymond Burr" label="Raymond Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="7379" end="7383" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="7453" end="7457" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161691" start="7466" end="7477" title="Connections (British TV series)" label="Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="7587" end="7596" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="7748" end="7758" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="7801" end="7812" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575443" start="7850" end="7867" title="Speed (1984 film)" label="&amp;quot;Speed&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729235" start="7907" end="7935" title="The Day the Universe Changed" label="The Day the Universe Changed"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="8005" end="8022" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8071" end="8082" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134071" start="8300" end="8314" title="Raymond Baxter" label="Raymond Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="8317" end="8320" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="8489" end="8498" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138589" start="8684" end="8696" title="Virgin Books" label="Virgin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265586" start="8744" end="8759" title="Robert Ornstein" label="Robert Ornstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693137" start="8779" end="8788" title="Ted Dewan" label="Ted Dewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988020" start="8790" end="8806" title="Jeremy P Tarcher" label="Jeremy P Tarcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="8945" end="8972" title="Little, Brown &amp;amp; Company" label="Little, Brown &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="9129" end="9149" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152726" wikidata="Q708891" url="?curid=152726" title="Bertrand Barère">
<text>Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac (, 10 September 175513 January 1841) was a French politician, freemason, journalist, and one of the most prominent members of the National Convention, representing the Plain (a moderate political faction) during the French Revolution. The Plain was dominated by the radical Montagnards and Barère as one of their leaders supported the foundation of the Committee of Public Safety in April and of a sans-culottes army in September 1793. According to Francois Buzot, Barère was responsible for the Reign of Terror, like Robespierre and Louis de Saint-Just. In spring 1794 and after the Festival of the Supreme Being, he became an opponent of Maximilien Robespierre and joined the coup, leading to his downfall.

==Early life==
Betrand Barère was born in Tarbes, a commune, part of the Gascony region. The name &quot;Barère de Vieuzac&quot;, by which he continued to call himself long after the abolition of feudalism in France, originated from a small fief belonging to his father, Jean Barère, who was a lawyer at Vieuzac (now Argelès-Gazost). Barère&#x27;s mother, Jeanne-Catherine Marrast, was of the old nobility. Barére attended parish school when he was a child, and by the time he was of age, his brother, Jean-Pierre, became a priest.[3] Jean-Pierre would later earn a spot in the Council of Five Hundred alongside the very men who discarded any notion of accepting Bertrand Barére as a member.

After finishing parish school, Barère attended a college before delving into his career in revolutionary politics. In 1770, he began to practice as a lawyer at the Parlement of Toulouse, one of the most celebrated parliaments of the kingdom. Barère practiced as an advocate with considerable success and wrote some small pieces, which he sent to the principal literary societies in the south of France. His fame as an essayist was what led to his election as a member of the Academy of Floral Games of Toulouse in 1788. This body held a yearly meeting of great interest to the whole city, at which flowers of gold and silver were awarded for odes, idyls, and eloquence. Although Barère never received any of these bounties, one of his performances was mentioned with honor. At the Academy of Floral Games of Montauban, he was awarded many prizes, including one for a panegyric on King Louis the XII, and another for a panegyric on Franc de Pompignan. Shortly after, Barère wrote a dissertation on an old stone with three Latin words engraved on it. This earned him a seat in the Toulouse Academy of Sciences, Inscriptions, and Polite Literature.

In 1785, Barère married a young lady of considerable fortune. In one of his works titled &quot;Melancholy Pages&quot;, Barère proclaims that his marriage &quot;was one of the most unhappy of marriages.&quot; In 1789, he was elected deputy by the estates of Bigorre to the Estates-General – he had made his first visit to Paris in the preceding year. Barère de Vieuzac at first belonged to the constitutional party, but he was less known as a speaker in the National Constituent Assembly than as a journalist. According to François Victor Alphonse Aulard, Barère&#x27;s paper, the &quot;Point du Jour&quot;, owed its reputation not so much to its own qualities as to the depiction of Barére in the Tennis Court Oath sketch. The painter Jacques-Louis David illustrated Barère kneeling in the corner and writing a report of the proceedings for posterity.

==Political career (1789–93)==
Barère was elected to the Estates-General in 1789 and elected judge of the Constituent Assembly in 1791.[4]

Soon after the king&#x27;s flight to Varennes (June 1791), Barère joined the republican party and the Feuillants. However, he continued to keep in touch with the Duke of Orléans, whose natural daughter, Pamela, he tutored. After the Constituent Assembly ended its session, he was nominated one of the judges of the newly instituted &quot;Cour de cassation&quot; from October 1791 to September 1792.

In September 1792 he was elected to the National Convention for the &quot;département&quot; of the Hautes-Pyrénées.[5] Barère served as presiding officer in the National Convention and chaired the trial of Louis XVI in December 1792–January 93.[7] He voted with The Mountain for the king&#x27;s execution &quot;without appeal and without delay,&quot; and closed his speech with: &quot;the tree of liberty grows only when watered by the blood of tyrants.&quot;

He was a member of the Constitution Committee that drafted the Girondin constitutional project in February 1793. On 18 March Barère proposed to establish a Committee of Public Safety. On 7 April, Barère was elected to the Committee of Public Safety. A member of &quot;The Plain,&quot; who was unaligned with either The Mountain or the Girondins, he was the first member elected to the Committee of Public Safety and one of two members (with Robert Lindet), who served on it during its entire existence. In this role he utilized his eloquence and popularity within the convention to serve as the voice of the committee. Of 923 orders signed by the Committee of Public Safety in the fall of 1793, Barère was the author or first signatory on 244, the second most behind Carnot, with the majority of his orders dealing with police activities. The majority of the Plain was formed by independents as Barère, Cambon and Carnot but they were dominated by the radical Mountain.

Despite his popularity, Barère was regarded by more extreme revolutionaries as a vacillating politician without true revolutionary ideals. Palmer (1949) analyzed that &#x27;his commitment to the Revolution rather than any distinct faction separated him from other major Revolutionary figures&#x27;. Jean-Paul Marat used the last edition of his paper &quot;Publiciste de la République Française&quot; (no. 242, 14 July 1793) to attack Barère directly:

On 1 August, on a report by Barère, the Convention decreed the systematic destruction of the Vendée. On 5 September 1793 Barère incited the French National Convention with a speech glorifying terror and the founding of revolutionary armies by Sans-culottes:

Barère voiced the Committee of Public Safety&#x27;s support for the measures desired by the assembly. He presented a decree that was passed immediately, establishing a paid armed force of 6,000 men and 1,200 gunners &quot;designed to crush the counter-revolutionaries, to execute wherever the need arises the revolutionary laws and the measures of public safety that are decreed by the National Convention, and to protect provisions.&quot; In a proclamation, Barère said:

On 12 October when Hébert accused Marie-Antoinette of incest with her son, Robespierre had dinner with Barère, Saint-Just and Joachim Vilate. Discussing the matter, Robespierre broke his plate with his fork and called Hébert an &quot;imbécile&quot;.

Barère voted for the death of the 21 Girondists in October 1793. His role as the chief communicator throughout the Reign of Terror, combined with his lyrical eloquence, led to his nickname: &quot;Anacreon Of The Guillotine.&quot; He changed his stance when the Hébertists called for another revolution in March 1794; the voluntary Guards and militant Sans-culottes lost influence quickly. He can be seen as a &quot;weathervane&quot; after changing his opinion on the revolutionary armies. In summer he was one of the leading men in the power struggles between The Mountain and The Plain, involved in the downfall of Robespierre. Barère, an opportunist who cooperated in the tyranny, then described him as &quot;the Terror itself&quot;.

== Ideas, philosophy ==
After January 1793, Barère began publicly speaking of his newfound faith in &quot;la religion de la patrie&quot;. He wanted everyone to have faith in the fatherland and called for the people of the Republic to be virtuous citizens. Barère mainly focused on four aspects about &quot;la religion de la patrie&quot; – the belief that a citizen would be consecrated to the fatherland at birth, the citizen should then come to love the fatherland, the Republic would teach the people virtues, and the fatherland would be the teacher to all. Barère went on to state that &quot;the Republic leaves the guidance of your first years to your parents, but as soon as your intelligence is developed, it proudly claims the rights that it holds over you. You are born for the Republic and not for the pride or the despotism of families.&quot; He also claimed that because citizens were born for the Republic, they should love it above anything else. Barére reasoned that eventually the love for the fatherland would become a passion in everyone and this is how the people of the Republic would be united.[10]

Barère also urged further issues of nationalism and patriotism. He said, &quot;I was a revolutionary. I am a constitutional citizen.&quot; He pushed for freedom of press, speech, and thought. Barère felt that nationalism was founded by immeasurable emotions that could only be awakened by participating in national activities such as public events, festivals, and education. He believed in unity through &quot;diversity and compromise.&quot;

In 1793 and 1794, Barère focused on speaking of his doctrine, which included the teaching of national patriotism through an organized system of universal education, the national widespread of patriotic devotion, and the concept that one owed his nation his services.[12] Barère also stated that one could serve the nation by giving his labor, wealth, counsel, strength, and/or blood. Therefore, all sexes and ages could serve the fatherland. He outlined his new faith in the fatherland, which replaced the national state religion, Catholicism. Barère was trying to make nationalism a religion.
Besides being concerned for the fatherland, Barère believed in universal elementary education. His influence on education is seen in American schools today as they recite the pledge of allegiance, and teach the alphabet and the multiplication table.[9] Barère believed that the fatherland could educate all. On 27 March on the proposal of Barère the &quot;armée revolutionnaire&quot;, for seven months active in Paris and surroundings, was disbanded, except their artillery. During the Festival of the Supreme Being Robespierre was not only criticized by Barère, but also by Vadier, Courtois and Fouché, the other members of the Committee of General Security.

== Conflicts within the government ==

As 1794 progressed, tensions mounted inside the Committee of Public Safety as well as with other committees and the convention&#x27;s representatives on mission.

Some members of the Committee of Public Safety, such as Jean-Marie Collot d&#x27;Herbois and Billaud-Varenne, had pursued aggressive campaigns of Terror. Another clique on the committee, consisting of Robespierre, Couthon, and Saint-Just believed in their own vision of the direction of the Revolution.

In his memoirs written years later about this time, Barère described the Committee of Public Safety of having at least three factions:

* the &quot;experts&quot; consisting of Lazare Carnot, Robert Lindet, and Pierre Louis Prieur;
* the &quot;high-hands&quot; consisting of Robespierre, Couthon, and Saint-Just; and
* the &quot;true revolutionaries&quot; consisting of Billaud-Varenne, Collot, and Barère himself.

At the same time, the Committee of General Security, nominally the police committee of the National Convention, had seen its place superseded by the Law of 22 Prairial, leaving members like Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier and Jean-Pierre-André Amar concerned for their status. These were the laws that led to the streamlining of the Revolutionary Tribunal and the Great Terror, in which there were more executions in the final seven weeks before 9 Thermidor by the Paris tribunal than in the previous fourteen months.

Finally, aggressive representatives on mission, including Joseph Fouche, had been recalled to Paris to face scrutiny for their actions in the countryside and all feared for their safety.

In this atmosphere, Barère attempted to forge a compromise between these splintering factions. On 4 Thermidor, Barère offered to help enforce the Ventose Decrees in exchange for an agreement to not pursue a purge of the National Convention. These decrees, a program of property confiscation that had seen little support in the previous four months, were received with cautious optimism by Couthon and Saint-Just.

However, the following day, at a joint meeting of the Committees, Robespierre once again proclaimed his dedication to purging the Committees of potential, though unnamed, enemies. Saint-Just declared in negotiations with Barère that he was prepared to make concessions on the subordinate position of the Committee of General Security.

==Thermidor crisis (July 1794)==
Robespierre continued down this path until 8 Thermidor when he gave a famous oration alluding to multiple threats within the National Convention. A bitter debate ensued until Barère forced an end to it. However, to his surprise, Robespierre was pushed for more evidence by members of the Committee of General Security. This led to a fierce debate and a lack of support from the deputies of the Plain, both of which Robespierre was not used to.

After being ejected from the Jacobin Club that night, Collot and Billaud-Varenne returned to the Committee of Public Safety to find Saint-Just at work on a speech for the next day. Though Barère had been pushing Saint-Just to give a speech regarding the new unity of the Committees, both Collot and Billaud-Varenne assumed he was working on their final denunciation. This led to the final fracturing of the Committee of Public Safety, and a heated argument ensued, in which Barère allegedly insulted Couthon, Saint-Just, and Robespierre, saying:

:&quot;Who are you then, insolent pygmies, that you want to divide the remains of our country between a cripple, a child and a scoundrel? I wouldn&#x27;t give you a farmyard to govern!&quot;

The final pieces of the plot fell into place that night. Laurent Lecointre was the instigator of the coup, assisted by Barère, Fréron, Barras, Tallien, Thuriot, Courtois, Rovère, Garnier de l’Aube and Guffroy. (Fouché was no longer involved and had hidden.) Each one of them prepared his part in the attack. On 9 Thermidor, as Saint-Just rose to give his planned speech, he was interrupted by Tallien and Billaud-Varenne. After some denunciations of Robespierre, a cry went up for Barère to speak.

A possibly apocryphal tale held that as Barère rose to speak he held two speeches in his pocket: one for Robespierre and one against him. Here Barère played his role in 9 Thermidor, by submitting a bill that would blunt the ability of the Paris Commune to be used as a military force. According to Barère, the committees asked themselves why there still existed a military regime in Paris; why all these permanent commanders, with staffs, and immense armed forces? The committees have thought it best to restore to the National Guard its democratic organization. The day after Robespierre&#x27;s death, Barère described him as the &quot;tyrant&quot; and &quot;the Terror itself&quot;.

==Arrest==
Nevertheless, Barère was still questioned on the grounds of being a terrorist. Before Barère was sentenced to prison, &quot;Carnot defended him on the ground that [Barère] was hardly worse than himself.&quot; However, the defense proved ineffective. On 2nd Germinal of the year III (22 March 1795), the leaders of Thermidor decreed the arrest of Barère and his colleagues in the Reign of Terror, Jean Marie Collot d&#x27;Herbois and Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne.

The Court hearings continued until being interrupted by the Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III (1 April 1795). After the insurrection was dealt with, the Assembly voted the deportation of Collot, Billaud, and Barere to Guiana without further ado. Significant disturbances occurred in Paris on the day of deportation.

Barère was sentenced for his betrayal of Louis XVI (by voting to execute him), for being a traitor to France, and for being a terrorist.

The three prisoners were moved to the island of Oléron in preparation for being transported to French Guiana. Barère&#x27;s increasing depression while in prison led him to write his own epitaph. While the other two prisoners were sent to Guiana, Barère still remained at Oléron.

Meanwhile, the political developments in Paris resulted in the decision to put him on trial again. He was moved to Saintes, Charente-Maritime, where he spent four months awaiting trial. Eventually, the Convention decided without trial to confirm the old sentence of deportation.

==Escape from prison==
When Barère learned about this, his cousin, Hector Barère, and two other people helped him escape prison. Although Barère was reluctant to escape, his friends believed that he should leave at the earliest opportunity.

According to his own later memoirs, the original plan was to escape over the garden walls or from the dormitory with the help of a long rope-ladder. This plan soon proved impossible as it was discovered that the garden was out of Barère&#x27;s reach and that the dormitory was closed.

The escape plan was soon reconfigured, as it was decided that Barère would escape by the cloister and garden of the convent. Barère escaped on 4 Brumaire IV (26 October 1795), with the help also of a local man named Eutrope Vanderkand. He went to Bordeaux, where he lived in hiding for several years.

In early 1798 (while still in hiding), he was elected to the Directory&#x27;s Council of Five Hundred from his native Hautes-Pyrénées, but he was not allowed to take his seat.

In April 1799, the Directory issued an order for his arrest, so he left Bordeaux and hid out in Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine near Paris.

==Amnesty==
On 24 December 1799, Napoleon issued an amnesty for some politicians of both the right and the left, including Barère. Under the First Empire, he was engaged in literary work. It was rumoured that he served as a confidential informant for Napoleon. Starting in 1803, he published an anti-British magazine, &quot;Le Mémorial anti-britannique&quot;, subsidized by the government. This publication continued until 1807.

In February 1814, he moved back to his native region of France.

He became a member of the Chamber of Deputies during the Hundred Days on 1815.

When the final restoration of the Bourbons took place on 8 July 1815, he was banished from France for life &quot;as a regicide&quot;. Barère then withdrew to Brussels, where he lived until 1830.

He returned to France and served Louis Philippe under the July Monarchy until his death on 13 January 1841. The last surviving member of the revolutionary Committee of Public Safety, his memoirs were published posthumously in four volumes by Hippolyte Carnot in 1842 and reviewed for English readers at exhaustive length (80 pages) by Thomas Babington Macaulay.

An English translation was published in 1896: 
* Vol I
* Vol II
* Vol III
* Vol IV

==See also==
* Society of the Friends of Truth

==Notes==
==References==

Attribution:

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708891" start="0" end="26" title="Bertrand Barère" label="Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="89" end="98" title="freemason" label="freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="157" end="176" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q920544" start="191" end="200" title="the Plain" label="the Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="213" end="230" title="political faction" label="political faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="243" end="260" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q820122" start="301" end="312" title="Montagnard (French Revolution)" label="Montagnards"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="380" end="406" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q208412" start="425" end="438" title="sans-culottes" label="sans-culottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450845" start="476" end="490" title="Francois Buzot" label="Francois Buzot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="523" end="538" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q27764" start="561" end="580" title="Louis de Saint-Just" label="Louis de Saint-Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277069" start="611" end="640" title="Festival of the Supreme Being" label="Festival of the Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="667" end="689" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q184023" start="779" end="785" title="Tarbes" label="Tarbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="810" end="817" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622002" start="919" end="951" title="abolition of feudalism in France" label="abolition of feudalism in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="977" end="981" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q644665" start="1040" end="1047" title="Argelès-Gazost" label="Vieuzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q644665" start="1053" end="1067" title="Argelès-Gazost" label="Argelès-Gazost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1267" end="1269" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-3" label="[3"/>
<link wikidata="Q617290" start="1314" end="1337" title="Council of Five Hundred" label="Council of Five Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365529" start="1593" end="1614" title="Parlement of Toulouse" label="Parlement of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249702" start="1915" end="1927" title="Floral Games" label="Floral Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q591055" start="2296" end="2305" title="panegyric" label="panegyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="2309" end="2327" title="Louis XII" label="King Louis the XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393531" start="2360" end="2378" title="Jean-Jacques Lefranc, Marquis de Pompignan" label="Franc de Pompignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q859779" start="2833" end="2840" title="Bigorre" label="Bigorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463941" start="2848" end="2863" title="Estates-General of 1789" label="Estates-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="2969" end="2983" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="3033" end="3062" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="National Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450796" start="3098" end="3129" title="François Victor Alphonse Aulard" label="François Victor Alphonse Aulard"/>
<link wikidata="Q60022" start="3273" end="3290" title="Tennis Court Oath" label="Tennis Court Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="3311" end="3330" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="3486" end="3501" title="Estates General (France)" label="Estates-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="3535" end="3555" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3564" end="3566" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-4" label="[4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192894" start="3596" end="3614" title="flight to Varennes" label="flight to Varennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="3646" end="3656" title="Republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q509825" start="3671" end="3681" title="Feuillant (political group)" label="Feuillants"/>
<link wikidata="Q311637" start="3731" end="3746" title="Louis Philip II, Duke of Orléans" label="Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q901222" start="3783" end="3788" title="tutor" label="tutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138599" start="3907" end="3924" title="Court of Cassation (France)" label="Cour de cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="4009" end="4028" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="4043" end="4054" title="département" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q12700" start="4068" end="4083" title="Hautes-Pyrénées" label="Hautes-Pyrénées"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4084" end="4086" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-Lee 1902.2C p.151-5" label="[5"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="4130" end="4149" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q430135" start="4166" end="4184" title="trial of Louis XVI" label="trial of Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4213" end="4215" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-7" label="[7"/>
<link wikidata="Q820122" start="4231" end="4243" title="The Mountain" label="The Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407260" start="4493" end="4524" title="Girondin constitutional project" label="Girondin constitutional project"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="4652" end="4678" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q820122" start="4745" end="4757" title="The Mountain" label="The Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207776" start="4765" end="4774" title="Girondins" label="Girondins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458685" start="4871" end="4884" title="Robert Lindet" label="Robert Lindet"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="5197" end="5203" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q920544" start="5285" end="5294" title="the Plain" label="the Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q649038" start="5333" end="5339" title="Pierre Joseph Cambon" label="Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122290" start="5700" end="5715" title="Jean-Paul Marat" label="Jean-Paul Marat"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="6000" end="6019" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q208412" start="6096" end="6109" title="Sans-culottes" label="Sans-culottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179508" start="6711" end="6725" title="Joachim Vilate" label="Joachim Vilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="6951" end="6966" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q213484" start="7032" end="7040" title="Anacreon" label="Anacreon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474268" start="7097" end="7107" title="Hébertists" label="Hébertists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7440" end="7463" title="Maximilien Robespierre#Downfall" label="downfall of Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8687" end="8690" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-Gershoy427-10" label="[10"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9402" end="9405" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-12" label="[12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9979" end="9981" title="Bertrand Barère#cite note-Gershoy425-9" label="[9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277069" start="10216" end="10245" title="Festival of the Supreme Being" label="Festival of the Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391619" start="10359" end="10388" title="Committee of General Security" label="Committee of General Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q278020" start="10649" end="10681" title="Jean-Marie Collot d&amp;#x27;Herbois" label="Jean-Marie Collot d&amp;#x27;Herbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q504135" start="10686" end="10701" title="Billaud-Varenne" label="Billaud-Varenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q270668" start="10807" end="10814" title="Couthon" label="Couthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="11073" end="11086" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Lazare Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458685" start="11088" end="11101" title="Robert Lindet" label="Robert Lindet"/>
<link wikidata="Q765725" start="11107" end="11126" title="Pierre Louis Prieur" label="Pierre Louis Prieur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391619" start="11334" end="11363" title="Committee of General Security" label="Committee of General Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361404" start="11461" end="11479" title="Law of 22 Prairial" label="Law of 22 Prairial"/>
<link wikidata="Q276698" start="11502" end="11530" title="Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier" label="Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q516784" start="11535" end="11557" title="Jean-Pierre-André Amar" label="Jean-Pierre-André Amar"/>
<link wikidata="Q248122" start="11642" end="11664" title="Revolutionary Tribunal" label="Revolutionary Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216958" start="11886" end="11899" title="Joseph Fouche" label="Joseph Fouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258411" start="12162" end="12177" title="Ventose Decrees" label="Ventose Decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219342" start="14040" end="14057" title="Laurent Lecointre" label="Laurent Lecointre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385387" start="14110" end="14116" title="Louis-Marie Stanislas Fréron" label="Fréron"/>
<link wikidata="Q333843" start="14118" end="14124" title="Paul Barras" label="Barras"/>
<link wikidata="Q464513" start="14126" end="14133" title="Tallien" label="Tallien"/>
<link wikidata="Q166369" start="14135" end="14142" title="Jacques-Alexis Thuriot de la Rosière" label="Thuriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047676" start="14144" end="14152" title="Edme-Bonaventure Courtois" label="Courtois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496678" start="14154" end="14160" title="Stanislas Joseph François Xavier Rovère" label="Rovère"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854205" start="14162" end="14179" title="Antoine Marie Charles Garnier" label="Garnier de l’Aube"/>
<link wikidata="Q518523" start="14184" end="14191" title="Armand-Joseph Guffroy" label="Guffroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="15303" end="15309" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q278020" start="15575" end="15607" title="Jean Marie Collot d&amp;#x27;Herbois" label="Jean Marie Collot d&amp;#x27;Herbois"/>
<link wikidata="Q504135" start="15612" end="15643" title="Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne" label="Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152958" start="15706" end="15743" title="Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III" label="Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="16008" end="16017" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q292568" start="16153" end="16159" title="Oléron" label="Oléron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="16200" end="16213" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q191126" start="16501" end="16527" title="Saintes, Charente-Maritime" label="Saintes, Charente-Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="17283" end="17291" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="17441" end="17449" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="17557" end="17566" title="French Directory" label="Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q617290" start="17574" end="17597" title="Council of Five Hundred" label="Council of Five Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q12700" start="17614" end="17629" title="Hautes-Pyrénées" label="Hautes-Pyrénées"/>
<link wikidata="Q208889" start="17769" end="17789" title="Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine" label="Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="17836" end="17844" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="17944" end="17956" title="First French Empire" label="First Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q320283" start="18324" end="18343" title="Chamber of Deputies of France" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q199955" start="18355" end="18367" title="Hundred Days" label="Hundred Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="18393" end="18420" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="restoration of the Bourbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475448" start="18496" end="18504" title="regicide" label="regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="18607" end="18621" title="Louis Philippe" label="Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="18632" end="18645" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="18729" end="18755" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q950235" start="18816" end="18832" title="Hippolyte Carnot" label="Hippolyte Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="18909" end="18934" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay" label="Thomas Babington Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080254" start="19036" end="19067" title="Society of the Friends of Truth" label="Society of the Friends of Truth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152734" wikidata="Q140770" url="?curid=152734" title="General number field sieve">
<text>In number theory, the general number field sieve (GNFS) is the most efficient classical algorithm known for factoring integers larger than . Heuristically, its complexity for factoring an integer (consisting of bits) is of the form

:formula_1

in O and L-notations. It is a generalization of the special number field sieve: while the latter can only factor numbers of a certain special form, the general number field sieve can factor any number apart from prime powers (which are trivial to factor by taking roots). 

The principle of the number field sieve (both special and general) can be understood as an improvement to the simpler rational sieve or quadratic sieve. When using such algorithms to factor a large number , it is necessary to search for smooth numbers (i.e. numbers with small prime factors) of order . The size of these values is exponential in the size of (see below). The general number field sieve, on the other hand, manages to search for smooth numbers that are subexponential in the size of . Since these numbers are smaller, they are more likely to be smooth than the numbers inspected in previous algorithms. This is the key to the efficiency of the number field sieve. In order to achieve this speed-up, the number field sieve has to perform computations and factorizations in number fields. This results in many rather complicated aspects of the algorithm, as compared to the simpler rational sieve.

The size of the input to the algorithm is or the number of bits in the binary representation of . Any element of the order for a constant is exponential in . The running time of the number field sieve is super-polynomial but sub-exponential in the size of the input.

== Number fields ==

Suppose is a -degree polynomial over formula_2 (the rational numbers), and is a complex root of . Then, , which can be rearranged to express as a linear combination of powers of less than . This equation can be used to reduce away any powers of with exponent . For example, if and is the imaginary unit , then , or . This allows us to define the complex product:
:formula_3
In general, this leads directly to the algebraic number field formula_4, which can be defined as the set of complex numbers given by:

:formula_5

The product of any two such values can be computed by taking the product as polynomials, then reducing any powers of with exponent as described above, yielding a value in the same form. To ensure that this field is actually -dimensional and does not collapse to an even smaller field, it is sufficient that is an irreducible polynomial over the rationals. Similarly, one may define the ring of integers formula_6 as the subset of formula_4 which are roots of monic polynomials with integer coefficients. In some cases, this ring of integers is equivalent to the ring formula_8. However, there are many exceptions.

== Method ==

Two polynomials &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) and &quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) of small degrees &quot;d&quot; and &quot;e&quot; are chosen, which have integer coefficients, which are irreducible over the rationals, and which, when interpreted mod &quot;n&quot;, have a common integer root &quot;m&quot;. An optimal strategy for choosing these polynomials is not known; one simple method is to pick a degree &quot;d&quot; for a polynomial, consider the expansion of &quot;n&quot; in base &quot;m&quot; (allowing digits between −&quot;m&quot; and &quot;m&quot;) for a number of different &quot;m&quot; of order &quot;n&quot;1/&quot;d&quot;, and pick &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) as the polynomial with the smallest coefficients and &quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) as &quot;x&quot; − &quot;m&quot;.

Consider the number field rings Z[&quot;r&quot;1] and Z[&quot;r&quot;2], where &quot;r&quot;1 and &quot;r&quot;2 are roots of the polynomials &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot;. Since &quot;f&quot; is of degree &quot;d&quot; with integer coefficients, if &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are integers, then so will be &quot;b&quot;&quot;d&quot;·&quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;/&quot;b&quot;), which we call &quot;r&quot;. Similarly, &quot;s&quot; = &quot;b&quot;&quot;e&quot;·&quot;g&quot;(&quot;a&quot;/&quot;b&quot;) is an integer. The goal is to find integer values of &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; that simultaneously make &quot;r&quot; and &quot;s&quot; smooth relative to the chosen basis of primes. If &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; are small, then &quot;r&quot; and &quot;s&quot; will be small too, about the size of &quot;m&quot;, and we have a better chance for them to be smooth at the same time. The current best-known approach for this search is lattice sieving; to get acceptable yields, it is necessary to use a large factor base.

Having enough such pairs, using Gaussian elimination, one can get products of certain &quot;r&quot; and of the corresponding &quot;s&quot; to be squares at the same time. A slightly stronger condition is needed—that they are norms of squares in our number fields, but that condition can be achieved by this method too. Each &quot;r&quot; is a norm of &quot;a&quot; − &quot;r&quot;1&quot;b&quot; and hence that the product of the corresponding factors &quot;a&quot; − &quot;r&quot;1&quot;b&quot; is a square in Z[&quot;r&quot;1], with a &quot;square root&quot; which can be determined (as a product of known factors in Z[&quot;r&quot;1])—it will typically be represented as an irrational algebraic number. Similarly, the product of the factors &quot;a&quot; − &quot;r&quot;2&quot;b&quot; is a square in Z[&quot;r&quot;2], with a &quot;square root&quot; which also can be computed. It should be remarked that the use of Gaussian elimination does not give the optimal run time of the algorithm. Instead, sparse matrix solving algorithms such as Block Lanczos or Block Wiedemann are used. 

Since &quot;m&quot; is a root of both &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; mod &quot;n&quot;, there are homomorphisms from the rings Z[&quot;r&quot;1] and Z[&quot;r&quot;2] to the ring Z/&quot;n&quot;Z (the integers modulo &quot;n&quot;), which map &quot;r&quot;1 and &quot;r&quot;2 to &quot;m&quot;, and these homomorphisms will map each &quot;square root&quot; (typically not represented as a rational number) into its integer representative. Now the product of the factors &quot;a&quot; − &quot;mb&quot; mod &quot;n&quot; can be obtained as a square in two ways—one for each homomorphism. Thus, one can find two numbers &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot;, with &quot;x&quot;2 − &quot;y&quot;2 divisible by &quot;n&quot; and again with probability at least one half we get a factor of &quot;n&quot; by finding the greatest common divisor of &quot;n&quot; and &quot;x&quot; − &quot;y&quot;.

== Improving polynomial choice ==

The choice of polynomial can dramatically affect the time to complete the remainder of the algorithm. The method of choosing polynomials based on the expansion of in base shown above is suboptimal in many practical situations, leading to the development of better methods.

One such method was suggested by Murphy and Brent; they introduce a two-part score for polynomials, based on the presence of roots modulo small primes and on the average value that the polynomial takes over the sieving area.

The best reported results were achieved by the method of Thorsten Kleinjung, which allows , and searches over composed of small prime factors congruent to 1 modulo 2 and over leading coefficients of which are divisible by 60.

== Implementations ==
Some implementations focus on a certain smaller class of numbers. These are known as special number field sieve techniques, such as used in the Cunningham project.
A project called NFSNET ran from 2002 through at least 2007. It used volunteer distributed computing on the Internet.
Paul Leyland of the United Kingdom and Richard Wackerbarth of Texas were involved.

Until 2007, the gold-standard implementation was a suite of software developed and distributed by CWI in the Netherlands, which was available only under a relatively restrictive license. In 2007, Jason Papadopoulos developed a faster implementation of final processing as part of msieve, which is in the public domain. Both implementations feature the ability to be distributed among several nodes in a cluster with a sufficiently fast interconnect.

Polynomial selection is normally performed by GPL software written by Kleinjung, or by msieve, and lattice sieving by GPL software written by Franke and Kleinjung; these are distributed in GGNFS.
* NFS@Home
* GGNFS
* factor by gnfs
* CADO-NFS
* msieve (which contains final-processing code, a polynomial selection optimized for smaller numbers and an implementation of the line sieve)
* kmGNFS

== See also ==
* Special number field sieve

== Notes ==
== References ==

* Arjen K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra, Jr. (eds.). &quot;The development of the number field sieve&quot;. Lecture Notes in Math. (1993) 1554. Springer-Verlag.
* Richard Crandall and Carl Pomerance. Prime Numbers: A Computational Perspective (2001). 2nd edition, Springer. . Section 6.2: Number field sieve, pp. 278–301.

* Matthew E. Briggs: An Introduction to the General Number Field Sieve, 1998</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3" end="16" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q140770" start="22" end="48" title="General number field sieve" label="general number field sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q140770" start="50" end="54" title="General number field sieve" label="GNFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296251" start="68" end="77" title="algorithmic efficiency" label="efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="88" end="97" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="108" end="126" title="integer factorization" label="factoring integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q507" start="139" end="139" title="googol" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="141" end="150" title="Heuristic" label="Heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="160" end="170" title="Computational complexity theory" label="complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="248" end="249" title="Big O notation" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401695" start="254" end="264" title="L-notation" label="L-notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q655079" start="297" end="323" title="special number field sieve" label="special number field sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667469" start="457" end="468" title="prime power" label="prime power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116848" start="637" end="651" title="rational sieve" label="rational sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151850" start="655" end="670" title="quadratic sieve" label="quadratic sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529876" start="756" end="769" title="smooth number" label="smooth number"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="1306" end="1318" title="number field" label="number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q140770" start="1635" end="1671" title="General number field sieve" label="super-polynomial but sub-exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="2133" end="2155" title="algebraic number field" label="algebraic number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="2202" end="2216" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476663" start="2554" end="2576" title="irreducible polynomial" label="irreducible polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358313" start="2627" end="2643" title="ring of integers" label="ring of integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099696" start="2700" end="2717" title="monic polynomial" label="monic polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="2874" end="2884" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473607" start="2957" end="2964" title="degree of a polynomial" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476663" start="3052" end="3063" title="irreducible polynomial" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="3073" end="3082" title="rational number" label="rationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="3112" end="3129" title="modular arithmetic" label="mod &amp;quot;n&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="3153" end="3157" title="root of a function" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="3351" end="3369" title="radix" label="base &amp;quot;m&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529876" start="4316" end="4322" title="smooth number" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079625" start="4617" end="4632" title="lattice sieving" label="lattice sieving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="4737" end="4757" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999258" start="4930" end="4935" title="field norm" label="norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="5392" end="5408" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927153" start="5747" end="5760" title="Block Lanczos algorithm for nullspace of a matrix over a finite field" label="Block Lanczos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927177" start="5764" end="5779" title="Block Wiedemann algorithm" label="Block Wiedemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="5891" end="5903" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="6003" end="6023" title="Modular arithmetic" label="modulo &amp;quot;n&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="6600" end="6623" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7269" end="7287" title="Thorsten Kleinjung" label="Thorsten Kleinjung"/>
<link wikidata="Q655079" start="7546" end="7572" title="special number field sieve" label="special number field sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194348" start="7605" end="7623" title="Cunningham project" label="Cunningham project"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="7733" end="7741" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152032" start="7743" end="7755" title="Paul Leyland" label="Paul Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7763" end="7777" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054410" start="7925" end="7928" title="Centrum Wiskunde &amp;amp; Informatica" label="CWI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8023" end="8041" title="Jason Papadopoulos" label="Jason Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="8324" end="8327" title="GPL" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q655079" start="8690" end="8716" title="Special number field sieve" label="Special number field sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q671213" start="8750" end="8766" title="Arjen Lenstra" label="Arjen K. Lenstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q173783" start="8771" end="8789" title="Hendrik Lenstra" label="H. W. Lenstra, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q761544" start="8929" end="8943" title="Carl Pomerance" label="Carl Pomerance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152735" wikidata="Q42884" url="?curid=152735" title="Germans">
<text>Germans (, ) are the natives or inhabitants of Germany, or sometimes more broadly any people who are of German descent or native speakers of the German language. The constitution of Germany, implemented in 1949 following the end of World War II, defines a German as a German citizen. During the 19th and much of the 20th century, discussions on German identity were dominated by concepts of a common language, culture, descent, and history. Today, the German language is widely seen as the primary, though not exclusive, criterion of German identity. Estimates on the total number of Germans in the world range from 100 to 150 million, most of whom live in Germany.

The history of Germans as an ethnic group began with the separation of a distinct Kingdom of Germany from the eastern part of the Frankish Empire under the Ottonian dynasty in the 10th century, forming the core of the Holy Roman Empire. In subsequent centuries the political power and population of this empire grew considerably. It expanded eastwards, and eventually a substantial number of Germans migrated further eastwards into Eastern Europe. The empire itself was generally decentralized and politically divided between many small princedoms, cities and bishoprics, while the idea of unified German state came later. Following the Reformation in the 16th century, many of these states found themselves in bitter conflict concerning the rise of Protestantism.

In the 19th century, the Holy Roman Empire dissolved, and German nationalism began to grow. At the same time however, the concept of German nationality became more complex. The multiethnic Kingdom of Prussia incorporated most Germans into its German Empire in 1871, and a substantial additional number of German speakers were in the multiethnic kingdom of Austria-Hungary. During this time, a large number of Germans also emigrated to the New World, particularly to the United States. Large numbers also emigrated to Canada and Brazil, and they established sizable communities in New Zealand and Australia. The Russian Empire also included a substantial German population.

Following the end of World War I, Austria-Hungary and the German Empire were partitioned, resulting in many Germans becoming ethnic minorities in newly established countries. In the chaotic years that followed, Adolf Hitler became the dictator of Nazi Germany and embarked on a genocidal campaign to unify all Germans under his leadership. His Nazi movement defined Germans in a very specific way which included Austrians, Luxembourgers, eastern Belgians, and so-called , who were ethnic Germans elsewhere in Europe and globally. However, this Nazi conception expressly excluded German citizens of Jewish or Roma background. Nazi policies of military aggression and its persecution of those deemed non-Germans led to World War II and the Holocaust in which the Nazi regime was defeated by allied powers, including the United States, United Kingdom, and the former Soviet Union. In the aftermath of Germany&#x27;s defeat in the war, the country was occupied and once again partitioned. Millions of Germans were expelled from Central and Eastern Europe. In 1990, West Germany and East Germany were reunified. In modern times, remembrance of the Holocaust, known as (&quot;culture of remembrance&quot;), has become an integral part of German identity.

Owing to their long history of political fragmentation, Germans are culturally diverse and often have strong regional identities. Sixteen &quot;Länder&quot; (states) make up modern Germany. Arts and sciences are an integral part of German culture, and the Germans have been represented by many prominent personalities in a significant number of disciplines, including Nobel prize laureates where Germany is ranked third among countries of the world in the number of total recipients.

==Names==

The English term &quot;Germans&quot; is derived from the ethnonym &quot;Germani&quot;, which was used for Germanic peoples in ancient times. Since the early modern period, it has been the most common name for the Germans in English, being applied to any citizens, natives or inhabitants of Germany, regardless of whether they are considered to have German ethnicity.

In some contexts, people of German descent are also called Germans. In historical discussions the term &quot;Germans&quot; is also occasionally used to refer to the Germanic peoples during the time of the Roman Empire.

The German endonym &quot;Deutsche&quot; is derived from the Old High German term &quot;diutisc&quot;, which means &quot;ethnic&quot; or &quot;relating to the people&quot;. This term was used for speakers of West-Germanic languages in Central Europe since at least the 8th century, after which time a distinct German ethnic identity began to emerge among at least some them living within the Holy Roman Empire. However, variants of the same term were also used in the Low Countries, for the related dialects of what is still called Dutch in English, which is now a national language of the Netherlands and Belgium.

==History==

===Ancient history===
The first information about the peoples living in what is now Germany was provided by the Roman general and dictator Julius Caesar, who gave an account of his conquest of neighbouring Gaul in the 1st century BC. Gaul included parts of what is now Germany, west of the Rhine river. He specifically noted the potential future threat which could come from the related Germanic peoples (&quot;Germani&quot;) east of the river. Archaeological evidence shows that at the time of Caesar&#x27;s invasion, both Gaul and Germanic regions had long been strongly influenced by the celtic La Tène culture. However, the Germanic languages associated with later Germanic peoples were approaching the Rhine area since at least the 2nd century BC. The resulting demographic situation reported by Caesar was that migrating Celts and Germanic peoples were moving into areas which threatened the Alpine regions and the Romans.

The modern German language is a descendant of the Germanic languages which spread during the Iron Age and Roman era. Scholars generally agree that it is possible to speak of Germanic languages existing as early as 500 BCE. These Germanic languages are believed to have dispersed towards the Rhine from the direction of the Jastorf culture, which was itself a Celtic influenced culture that existed in the Pre-Roman Iron Age, in the region near the Elbe river. It is likely that first Germanic consonant shift, which defines the Germanic language family, occurred during this period. The earlier Nordic Bronze Age of southern Scandinavia also shows definite population and material continuities with the Jastorf Culture, but it is unclear whether these indicate ethnic continuity.

Under Caesar&#x27;s successors, the Romans began to conquer and control the entire region between the Rhine and the Elbe which centuries later constituted the largest part of medieval Germany. These efforts were significantly hampered by the victory of a local alliance led by Arminius at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 AD, which is considered a defining moment in German history. While the Romans were nevertheless victorious, rather than installing a Roman administration they controlled the region indirectly for centuries, recruiting soldiers there, and playing the tribes off against each other. The early Germanic peoples were later famously described in more detail in &quot;Germania&quot; by the 1st century Roman historian Tacitus. He described them as a diverse group, dominating a much larger area than Germany, stretching to the Vistula in the east, and Scandinavia in the north.

===Medieval history===

German ethnicity began to emerge in medieval times among the descendants of those Germanic peoples who had lived under heavy Roman influence between the Rhine and Elbe rivers. This included Franks, Frisians, Saxons, Thuringii, Alemanni and Baiuvarii – all of whom spoke related dialects of West Germanic.
These peoples had come under the dominance of the western Franks starting with Clovis I, who established control of the Romanized and Frankish population of Gaul in the 5th century, and began a process of conquering the peoples east of the Rhine. The regions long continued to be divided into &quot;Stem duchies&quot;, corresponding to the old ethnic designations. By the early 9th century AD, large parts of Europe were united under the rule of the Frankish leader Charlemagne, who expanded the Frankish empire in several directions including east of the Rhine, consolidating power over the Saxons and Frisians, and establishing the Carolingian Empire. Charlemagne was crowned emperor by Pope Leo I in 800.

In the generations after Charlemagne the empire was partitioned at the Treaty of Verdun (843), eventually resulting in the long-term separation between the states of West Francia, Middle Francia and East Francia. Beginning with Henry the Fowler, non-Frankish dynasties also ruled the eastern kingdom, and under his son Otto I, East Francia, which was mostly German, constituted the core of the Holy Roman Empire. Also under control of this loosely controlled empire were the previously independent kingdoms of Italy, Burgundy, and Lotharingia. The latter was a Roman and Frankish area which contained some of the oldest and most important old German cities including Aachen, Cologne and Trier, all west of the Rhine, and it became another Duchy within the eastern kingdom. Leaders of the stem duchies which constituted this eastern kingdom — Lotharingia, Bavaria, Franconia, Swabia, Thuringia, and Saxony ― initially wielded considerable power independently of the king. German kings were elected by members of the noble families, who often sought to have weak kings elected in order to preserve their own independence. This prevented an early unification of the Germans.

A warrior nobility dominated the feudal German society of the Middle Ages, while most of the German population consisted of peasants with few political rights. The church played an important role in the Holy Roman Empire in the Middle Ages, and competed with the nobility for power. Between the 11th and 13th centuries, German speakers from the empire actively participated in five Crusades to &quot;liberate&quot; the Holy Land. From the beginnings of the kingdom, its dynasties also participated in a push eastwards into Slavic-speaking regions. At the Saxon Eastern March in the north, the Polabian Slavs east of the Elbe were conquered over generations of often brutal conflict. Under the later control of powerful German dynasties it became an important region within modern Germany, and home to its modern capital, Berlin. German population also moved eastwards from the 11th century, in what is known as the Ostsiedlung. Over time, Slavic and German-speaking populations assimilated, meaning that many modern Germans have substantial Slavic ancestry. From the 12th century, many German speakers settled as merchants and craftsmen in the Kingdom of Poland, where they came to constitute a significant proportion of the population in many urban centers such as Gdańsk. During the 13th century, the Teutonic Knights began conquering the Old Prussians, and established what would eventually become the powerful German state of Prussia.

Further south, Bohemia and Hungary developed as kingdoms with their own non-German speaking elites. The Austrian March on the Middle Danube stopped expanding eastwards towards Hungary in the 11th century. Under Ottokar II, Bohemia (corresponding roughly to modern Czechia) became a kingdom within the empire, and even managed to take control of Austria, which was German-speaking. However, the late 13th century saw the election of Rudolf I of the House of Habsburg to the imperial throne, and he was able to acquire Austria for his own family. The Habsburgs would continue to play an important role in European history for centuries afterwards. Under the leadership of the Habsburgs the Holy Roman Empire itself remained weak, and by the late Middle Ages much of Lotharingia and Burgundy had come under the control of French dynasts, the House of Valois-Burgundy and House of Valois-Anjou. Step by step, Italy, Switzerland, Lorraine, and Savoy were no longer subject to effective imperial control.

Trade increased and there was a specialization of the arts and crafts. In the late Middle Ages the German economy grew under the influence of urban centers, which increased in size and wealth and formed powerful leagues, such as the Hanseatic League and the Swabian League, in order to protect their interests, often through supporting the German kings in their struggles with the nobility. These urban leagues significantly contributed to the development of German commerce and banking. German merchants of Hanseatic cities settled in cities throughout Northern Europe beyond the German lands.

===Modern history===


The Habsburg dynasty managed to maintain their grip upon the imperial throne in the early modern period. While the empire itself continued to be largely de-centralized, the Habsburgs own personal power increased outside of the core German lands. Charles V personally inherited control of the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, the wealthy low countries (roughly modern Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands), the Kingdoms of Castile, Aragon, Sicily, Naples, and Sardinia, and the Dukedom of Milan. Of these, the Bohemian and Hungarian titles remained connected to the imperial throne for centuries, making Austria a powerful multilingual empire in its own right. On the other hand, the low countries went to the Spanish crown and continued to evolve separately from Germany.

The introduction of printing by the German inventor Johannes Gutenberg contributed to the formation of a new understanding of faith and reason. At this time, the German monk Martin Luther pushed for reforms within the Catholic Church. Luther&#x27;s efforts culminated in the Protestant Reformation.

Religious schism was a leading cause of the Thirty Years&#x27; War, a conflict that tore apart the Holy Roman Empire and its neighbours, leading to the death of millions of Germans. The terms of the Peace of Westphalia (1648) ending the war, included a major reduction in the central authority of the Holy Roman Emperor. Among the most powerful German states to emerge in the aftermath was Protestant Prussia, under the rule of the House of Hohenzollern. Charles V and his Habsburg dynasty defended Roman Catholicism.

In the 18th century, German culture was significantly influenced by the Enlightenment.

After centuries of political fragmentation, a sense of German unity began to emerge in the 18th century. The Holy Roman Empire continued to decline until being dissolved altogether by Napoleon in 1806. In central Europe, the Napoleonic wars ushered in great social, political and economic changes, and catalyzed a national awakening among the Germans. By the late 18th century, German intellectuals such as Johann Gottfried Herder articulated the concept of a German identity rooted in language, and this notion helped spark the German nationalist movement, which sought to unify the Germans into a single nation state. Eventually, shared ancestry, culture and language (though not religion) came to define German nationalism. The Napoleonic Wars ended with the Congress of Vienna (1815), and left most of the German states loosely united under the German Confederation. The confederation came to be dominated by the Catholic Austrian Empire, to the dismay of many German nationalists, who saw the German Confederation as an inadequate answer to the German Question.

Throughout the 19th century, Prussia continued to grow in power. In 1848, German revolutionaries set up the temporary Frankfurt Parliament, but failed in their aim of forming a united German homeland. The Prussians proposed an Erfurt Union of the German states, but this effort was torpedoed by the Austrians through the Punctation of Olmütz (1850), recreating the German Confederation. In response, Prussia sought to use the Zollverein customs union to increase its power among the German states. Under the leadership of Otto von Bismarck, Prussia expanded its sphere of influence and together with its German allies defeated Denmark in the Second Schleswig War and soon after Austria in the Austro-Prussian War, subsequently establishing the North German Confederation. In 1871, the Prussian coalition decisively defeated the Second French Empire in the Franco-Prussian War, annexing the German speaking region of Alsace-Lorraine. After taking Paris, Prussia and their allies proclaimed the formation of a united German Empire.

In the years following unification, German society was radically changed by numerous processes, including industrialization, rationalization, secularization and the rise of capitalism. German power increased considerably and numerous overseas colonies were established. During this time, the German population grew considerably, and many emigrated to other countries (mainly North America), contributing to the growth of the German diaspora. Competition for colonies between the Great Powers contributed to the outbreak of World War I, in which the German, Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires formed the Central Powers, an alliance that was ultimately defeated, with none of the empires comprising it surviving the aftermath of the war. Under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires were both dissolved and partitioned, resulting in millions of Germans becoming ethnic minorities in other countries. The monarchical rulers of the German states, including the German emperor Wilhelm II, were overthrown in the November Revolution which led to the establishment of the Weimar Republic. The Germans of the Austrian side of the Dual Monarchy proclaimed the Republic of German-Austria, and sought to be incorporated into the German state, but this was forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles and Treaty of Saint-Germain.

What many Germans saw as the &quot;humiliation of Versailles&quot;, continuing traditions of authoritarian and antisemitic ideologies, and the Great Depression all contributed to the rise of Austrian-born Adolf Hitler and the Nazis, who after coming to power democratically in the early 1930s, abolished the Weimar Republic and formed the totalitarian Third Reich. In his quest to subjugate Europe, six million Jews were murdered in the Holocaust. WWII resulted in widespread destruction and the deaths of tens of millions of soldiers and civilians, while the German state was partitioned. About 12 million Germans had to flee or were expelled from Eastern Europe. Significant damage was also done to the German reputation and identity, which became far less nationalistic than it previously was.

The German states of West Germany and East Germany became focal points of the Cold War, but were reunified in 1990. Although there were fears that the reunified Germany might resume nationalist politics, the country is today widely regarded as a &quot;stablizing actor in the heart of Europe&quot; and a &quot;promoter of democratic integration&quot;.

==Language==

German is the native language of most Germans, and historically many northern Germans spoke the closely related language Low German. The German language is the key marker of German ethnic identity. German and Low German are West Germanic languages closely related to Dutch, Frisian languages (in particular North Frisian and Saterland Frisian), Luxembourgish, and English. Modern Standard German is based on High German and Central German, and is the first or second language of most Germans, but notably not the Volga Germans.

==Geographic distribution==
It is estimated that there are over 100 million Germans today, most of whom live in Germany, where they constitute the majority of the population. There are also sizable populations of Germans in Austria, Switzerland, the United States, Brazil, France, Kazakhstan, Russia, Argentina, Canada, Poland, Italy, Hungary, Australia, South Africa, Chile, Paraguay, and Namibia.

==Culture==
The Germans are marked by great regional diversity, which makes identifying a single German culture quite difficult. The arts and sciences have for centuries been an important part of German identity. The Age of Enlightenment and the Romantic era saw a notable flourishing of German culture. Germans of this period who contributed significantly to the arts and sciences include the writers Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Friedrich Schiller, Johann Gottfried Herder, Friedrich Hölderlin, E. T. A. Hoffmann, Heinrich Heine, Novalis and the Brothers Grimm, the philosopher Immanuel Kant, the architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel, the painter Caspar David Friedrich, and the composers Johann Sebastian Bach, Ludwig van Beethoven, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Joseph Haydn, Johannes Brahms, Franz Schubert, Richard Strauss and Richard Wagner.

Popular German dishes include brown bread and stew. Germans consume a high amount of alcohol, particularly beer, compared to other European peoples. Obesity is relatively widespread among Germans.

Carnival (German: &quot;Karneval&quot;, &quot;Fasching&quot;, or &quot;Fastnacht&quot;) is an important part of German culture, particularly in Southern Germany and the Rhineland. An important German festival is the Oktoberfest.

A steadily shrinking majority of Germans are Christians. About a third are Roman Catholics, while one third adheres to Protestantism. Another third does not profess any religion. Christian holidays such as Christmas and Easter are celebrated by many Germans. The number of Muslims is growing. There is also a notable Jewish community, which was decimated in the Holocaust. Remembering the Holocaust is an important part of German culture.

==Identity==

A German ethnic identity began to emerge during the early medieval period. These peoples came to be referred to by the High German term &quot;diutisc&quot;, which means &quot;ethnic&quot; or &quot;relating to the people&quot;. The German endonym &quot;Deutsche&quot; is derived from this word. In subsequent centuries, the German lands were relatively decentralized, leading to the maintenance of a number of strong regional identities.

The German nationalist movement emerged among German intellectuals in the late 18th century. They saw the Germans as a people united by language and advocated the unification of all Germans into a single nation state, which was partially achieved in 1871. By the late 19th and early 20th century, German identity came to be defined by a shared descent, culture, and history. &quot;Völkisch&quot; elements identified Germanness with &quot;a shared Christian heritage&quot; and &quot;biological essence&quot;, to the exclusion of the notable Jewish minority. After the Holocaust and the downfall of Nazism, &quot;any confident sense of Germanness had become suspect, if not impossible&quot;. East Germany and West Germany both sought to build up an identity on historical or ideological lines, distancing themselves both from the Nazi past and each other. After German reunification in 1990, the political discourse was characterized by the idea of a &quot;shared, ethnoculturally defined Germanness&quot;, and the general climate became increasingly xenophobic during the 1990s. Today, discussion on Germanness may stress various aspects, such as commitment to pluralism and the German constitution (constitutional patriotism), or the notion of a &quot;Kulturnation&quot; (nation sharing a common culture). The German language remains the primary criterion of modern German identity.

==See also==

*Ethnic groups in Europe
*German diaspora
*&quot;Die Deutschen&quot;, ZDF&#x27;s documentary television series
*Anti-German sentiment
*Germanophile
*Persecution of Germans
*Demographics of Germany

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*


==Further reading==
*
*
*


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="0" end="7" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="47" end="54" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="145" end="160" title="German language" label="German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="166" end="189" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="constitution of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="232" end="244" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q100694580" start="268" end="282" title="German nationality law" label="German citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="696" end="708" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="749" end="767" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="777" end="789" title="East Francia" label="eastern part"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="797" end="812" title="Francia" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157106" start="823" end="839" title="Ottonian dynasty" label="Ottonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="885" end="902" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1099" end="1113" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1304" end="1315" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1417" end="1430" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="1491" end="1509" title="German nationalism" label="German nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1622" end="1640" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="1641" end="1653" title="Unification of Germany" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1676" end="1689" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1789" end="1804" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1872" end="1881" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="1903" end="1916" title="German Americans" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030929" start="1950" end="1956" title="German Canadians" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q321090" start="1961" end="1967" title="German Brazilians" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465745" start="2013" end="2024" title="German New Zealanders" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201737" start="2029" end="2038" title="German Australians" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2044" end="2058" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2128" end="2139" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="2232" end="2249" title="Minority group" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2318" end="2330" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2354" end="2366" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q237534" start="2519" end="2528" title="Austrians" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092641" start="2530" end="2543" title="Luxembourgers" label="Luxembourgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377716" start="2553" end="2561" title="Belgians" label="Belgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="2705" end="2711" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="2715" end="2719" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2824" end="2836" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2841" end="2854" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2896" end="2909" title="Allies of World War II" label="allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2925" end="2938" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2940" end="2954" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2971" end="2983" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="3117" end="3125" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3168" end="3180" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3185" end="3197" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="3203" end="3212" title="German reunification" label="reunified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="3501" end="3507" title="States of Germany" label="Länder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979615" start="3589" end="3603" title="Culture of Germany" label="German culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="3725" end="3746" title="List of Nobel laureates" label="Nobel prize laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q218964" start="3771" end="3776" title="List of Nobel laureates by country" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3876" end="3883" title=":wikt:Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="3910" end="3918" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3925" end="3932" title=":wikt:Germani" label="Germani"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="3959" end="3975" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4426" end="4438" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="4452" end="4459" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4466" end="4474" title=":wikt:Deutsche" label="Deutsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="4501" end="4516" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q291495" start="4528" end="4535" title="diutisc" label="diutisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="4908" end="4921" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="4972" end="4977" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5030" end="5041" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="5046" end="5053" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="5208" end="5221" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="5275" end="5279" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="5359" end="5364" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="5456" end="5472" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5660" end="5666" title="Celts" label="celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="5667" end="5674" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143054" start="5675" end="5682" title="material culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="5697" end="5715" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q500099" start="6322" end="6337" title="Jastorf culture" label="Jastorf culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606068" start="6404" end="6422" title="Pre-Roman Iron Age" label="Pre-Roman Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="6477" end="6507" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="first Germanic consonant shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q605601" start="6594" end="6611" title="Nordic Bronze Age" label="Nordic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="7057" end="7065" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="7073" end="7103" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q428114" start="7471" end="7479" title="Germania (book)" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="7521" end="7528" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="7630" end="7637" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="7655" end="7666" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="7788" end="7804" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="7896" end="7902" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="7904" end="7912" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="7914" end="7920" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q160892" start="7922" end="7931" title="Thuringii" label="Thuringii"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="7933" end="7941" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q156740" start="7946" end="7955" title="Baiuvarii" label="Baiuvarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="7996" end="8009" title="West Germanic" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="8090" end="8098" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q617347" start="8310" end="8322" title="Stem duchies" label="Stem duchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="8477" end="8488" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="8507" end="8522" title="Frankish empire" label="Frankish empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="8603" end="8609" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="8614" end="8622" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="8645" end="8663" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="8700" end="8710" title="Pope Leo I" label="Pope Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q134840" start="8791" end="8807" title="Treaty of Verdun" label="Treaty of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="8886" end="8898" title="West Francia" label="West Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q468902" start="8900" end="8914" title="Middle Francia" label="Middle Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="8919" end="8931" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="8948" end="8964" title="Henry the Fowler" label="Henry the Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="9039" end="9045" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="9114" end="9131" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="9230" end="9235" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9237" end="9245" title="Kingdom of Burgundy#Kingdom of Arles within the Holy Roman Empire (after 1033)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="9251" end="9262" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="9387" end="9393" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="9395" end="9402" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="9407" end="9412" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="9575" end="9582" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="9584" end="9593" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="9595" end="9601" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311389" start="9603" end="9612" title="Duchy of Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="9618" end="9624" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="9926" end="9932" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="10275" end="10283" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="10312" end="10321" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q703390" start="10448" end="10467" title="Saxon Eastern March" label="Saxon Eastern March"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="10486" end="10500" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170346" start="10808" end="10819" title="Ostsiedlung" label="Ostsiedlung"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="11037" end="11054" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="11159" end="11165" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="11196" end="11212" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="11234" end="11247" title="Old Prussians" label="Old Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="11323" end="11330" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="11348" end="11355" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="11360" end="11367" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q283627" start="11437" end="11451" title="Margraviate of Austria" label="Austrian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="11459" end="11472" title="Middle Danube" label="Middle Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q150320" start="11544" end="11554" title="Ottokar II of Bohemia" label="Ottokar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="11765" end="11773" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="11781" end="11798" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q59027" start="12172" end="12196" title="House of Valois-Burgundy" label="House of Valois-Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716871" start="12201" end="12222" title="House of Valois-Anjou" label="House of Valois-Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="12258" end="12266" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="12272" end="12277" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="12566" end="12582" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q687124" start="12591" end="12605" title="Swabian League" label="Swabian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="13036" end="13055" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="13198" end="13207" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="13638" end="13651" title="low countries" label="low countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="13780" end="13798" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Johannes Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="13902" end="13915" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="14003" end="14025" title="Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="14072" end="14094" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="14227" end="14246" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="14429" end="14436" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="14460" end="14481" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="14619" end="14632" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902208" start="14795" end="14804" title="Dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="14819" end="14827" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979676" start="14949" end="14967" title="national revival" label="national awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="15042" end="15065" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="15164" end="15182" title="German nationalism" label="German nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="15241" end="15253" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="15366" end="15381" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="15397" end="15415" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="15484" end="15504" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="15561" end="15576" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522713" start="15685" end="15700" title="German Question" label="German Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="15768" end="15775" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="In 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q157638" start="15821" end="15841" title="Frankfurt Parliament" label="Frankfurt Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q327179" start="15930" end="15942" title="Erfurt Union" label="Erfurt Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q708601" start="16024" end="16044" title="Punctation of Olmütz" label="Punctation of Olmütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155707" start="16129" end="16139" title="Zollverein" label="Zollverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="16225" end="16242" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="16330" end="16337" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="16345" end="16365" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="16381" end="16388" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="16396" end="16415" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150981" start="16447" end="16473" title="North German Confederation" label="North German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="16531" end="16551" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="16559" end="16578" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="16619" end="16634" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354157" start="16681" end="16691" title="Proclamation of the German Empire" label="proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="16718" end="16731" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q561041" start="17159" end="17174" title="German diaspora" label="German diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17257" end="17268" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="17312" end="17326" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="17339" end="17353" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="17748" end="17758" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="17783" end="17802" title="November Revolution of 1918" label="November Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="17841" end="17856" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="17877" end="17885" title="Cisleithania" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="17898" end="17911" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Dual Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="17927" end="17953" title="Republic of German-Austria" label="Republic of German-Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="18038" end="18058" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="18063" end="18086" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="18200" end="18211" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="18232" end="18248" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="18294" end="18306" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="18441" end="18452" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="18500" end="18504" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="18522" end="18535" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="18704" end="18732" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="had to flee or were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="18908" end="18920" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="18925" end="18937" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="18965" end="18973" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="18984" end="18993" title="German reunification" label="reunified"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="19254" end="19260" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="19375" end="19385" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="19478" end="19491" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="19521" end="19526" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325" start="19528" end="19545" title="Frisian languages" label="Frisian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224" start="19561" end="19574" title="North Frisian language" label="North Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27154" start="19579" end="19596" title="Saterland Frisian language" label="Saterland Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="19599" end="19612" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="19618" end="19625" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="19634" end="19649" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q52040" start="19662" end="19673" title="High German languages" label="High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q704841" start="19678" end="19692" title="Central German" label="Central German"/>
<link wikidata="Q312574" start="19767" end="19780" title="Volga Germans" label="Volga Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="20400" end="20420" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="20429" end="20441" title="Romantic era" label="Romantic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="20585" end="20611" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="20613" end="20631" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="20633" end="20656" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="20658" end="20677" title="Friedrich Hölderlin" label="Friedrich Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150471" start="20679" end="20696" title="E. T. A. Hoffmann" label="E. T. A. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="20698" end="20712" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684" start="20714" end="20721" title="Novalis" label="Novalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="20730" end="20744" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="20762" end="20775" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q151759" start="20791" end="20814" title="Karl Friedrich Schinkel" label="Karl Friedrich Schinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104884" start="20828" end="20850" title="Caspar David Friedrich" label="Caspar David Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="20870" end="20891" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="20893" end="20913" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="20915" end="20938" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="20940" end="20952" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="20954" end="20969" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="20971" end="20985" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="20987" end="21002" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="21007" end="21021" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q940999" start="21054" end="21065" title="brown bread" label="brown bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="21070" end="21074" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="21109" end="21116" title="Alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="21222" end="21230" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q46519" start="21366" end="21382" title="Southern Germany" label="Southern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="21391" end="21400" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="21438" end="21449" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="21497" end="21507" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21527" end="21542" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="21571" end="21584" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="21658" end="21667" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="21672" end="21678" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="21725" end="21731" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="21769" end="21775" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="21810" end="21823" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="21958" end="21979" title="Early Middle Ages" label="early medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22158" end="22166" title=":wikt:Deutsche" label="Deutsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="22725" end="22733" title="Völkisch" label="Völkisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q492354" start="23543" end="23568" title="constitutional patriotism" label="constitutional patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="23743" end="23766" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="Ethnic groups in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q561041" start="23768" end="23783" title="German diaspora" label="German diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211952" start="23791" end="23804" title="Die Deutschen" label="Die Deutschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="23854" end="23875" title="Anti-German sentiment" label="Anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q670152" start="23877" end="23889" title="Germanophile" label="Germanophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="23891" end="23913" title="Persecution of Germans" label="Persecution of Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q327213" start="23915" end="23938" title="Demographics of Germany" label="Demographics of Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152736" wikidata="Q3142565" url="?curid=152736" title="Index of linguistics articles">
<text>Linguisticsis the scientific study of human language. Someone who engages in this study is called a linguist. &quot;See also the Outline of linguistics, the List of phonetics topics, the List of linguists, and the List of cognitive science topics.&quot; Articles related to linguistics include:

== A ==
Abbreviation -
Abessive case -
Ablaut -
Absolutive case -
Abugida -
Accusative case -
Acute accent -
Accent (phonetics) -
Accent (sociolinguistics) -
Acronym -
Adessive case -
Adjective -
Adjunct -
Adposition -
Adpositional phrase -
Adverb -
Adverbial -
Adverbial phrase -
Affix -
Affricate consonant -
Agglutination -
Agglutinative language -
Allative case -
Allomorph -
Allophone -
Alphabet -
Analytic language -
Anaphora -
Animacy -
Anthropological linguistics -
Alveolar consonant -
Antonym -
Aorist -
Applied linguistics -
Approximant -
Areal feature -
Article -
Articulatory gestures -
Articulatory phonetics -
Aspect -
Asterisk -
Attrition -
Attraction -
Augment (Bantu languages) -
Augment (Indo-European) -
Auxiliary verb

== B ==
Back-formation -
Backronym -
Bilabial consonant -
Breathy voice -
Breve

== C ==
Calque -
Capitalization -
Capitonym -
Cardinal vowel -
Case -
Case in tiers -
Cedilla -
Chiasmus -
Circumfix -
Circumflex -
Clefting -
Click consonant -
Closed-class word -
Cognate -
Cognitive science -
Coherence -
Colloquialism -
Comitative case -
Comparative -
Comparative linguistics -
Comparative method -
Compound noun and adjective -
Compound verb -
Computer-assisted language learning -
Computational linguistics -
Conjugation -
Conjunct -
Conjunction -
Consonant -
Constructed language -
Context -
Contrastive analysis -
Contrastive linguistics -
Conversation analysis -
Copula -
Corpus linguistics -
Cranberry morpheme -
Creaky voice -
Creole language -
Cryptanalysis -
Cuneiform

== D ==
Dangling modifier -
Dative case -
Decipherment -
Declension -
Defective verb -
Descriptive linguistics -
Dental consonant -
Derivation -
Determiner -
Diacritic -
Diaeresis -
Dialect -
Dictionary -
Diphthong -
Diplomatics -
Discourse -
Disjunct -
Dislocation -
Double acute accent -
Dual grammatical number

== E ==
Eggcorn -
Ecolinguistics -
Elative case -
Endangered language -
English pronunciation -
Entailment -
Ergative case -
Error -
Essive case -
Ethnologue -
Etymology -
Etymologist -
Eurolinguistics -
Evolution of languages -
Evolutionary linguistics -
Example-based machine translation -
Exegesis -
Expletive -
Expletive attributive

== F ==
False cognate -
False friend -
Figleaf-
Formal language -
Fricative consonant -
Function word -
Fusional language -
Future perfect -
Future tense

== G ==
Gender -
General semantics -
Genitive case -
Germanic umlaut -
Gerund -
Glottal consonant -
Glottal stop -
Glottochronology -
Government -
Grammar -
Grammatical gender -
Grammatical mood -
Grammatical number -
Grammatical voice -
Grave accent -
Great consonant shift -
Great Vowel Shift -
Grimm&#x27;s law -
Guttural consonant

== H ==
Hacek -
Heaps&#x27; law -
Hermeneutics -
Hiatus (linguistics) -
High rising terminal -
Historical-comparative linguistics -
Historical linguistics -
History of linguistics -
Homonym -
Hypernym -
Hyponym

== I ==
I-mutation -
Ideogram -
Idiolect -
Idiom -
Illative case -
Impersonal pronoun -
Impersonal verb -
Implication (pragmatics) -
Indo-European languages -
Inessive case -
Infinitive -
Infix -
Inflected language -
Inflection -
Initialism -
Initial-stress-derived noun -
Instructive case -
Interjection -
Interactional linguistics -
International Phonetic Alphabet -
IPA chart for English -
Irregular verb

== J ==

== K ==

== L ==
Labiodental consonant -
Langue and parole -
Language -
Language acquisition -
Language attrition -
Language education -
Language families and languages -
Language game -
The Language Instinct -
Language isolate -
Laryngeal theory -
Lateral consonant -
Lemma -
Lexeme -
Lexical semantics -
Lexicography -
Lexicology -
Lexicon -
Linguist -
Linguistic anthropology -
Linguistic ecology -
Linguistic layers -
Linguistic relativity -
Linguistics -
Linguistics basic topics -
Liquid consonant -
List of linguists -
Loanword -
Locative case

== M ==
Machine translation -
macron -
Manner of articulation - Mass noun -
Meaning -
Meronymy -
Metathesis -
Minimal pair -
Mispronunciation -
Modality -
Mood -
Mora -
Morpheme -
Morphology -
Mutual intelligibility

== N ==
Nasal consonant -
Nasal stop -
Natural language -
Natural language processing -
Natural language understanding -
Negative raising -
Neologism -
Neurolinguistics -
Nomenclature -
Nominative case -
Noun -
Noun phrase -
Null morpheme

== O ==
Onomasiology -
Onomatopoeia -
Open class word -
Optimality theory -
Origin of language -
Orthography -
Object–subject–verb -
Object–verb–subject -
Oxytone

== P ==
Palatal consonant -
Paradigm -
Paroxytone -
Part of speech -
Participle -
Particle -
Partitive case -
Past tense -
Perfect (grammar) -
Persuasion -
Pharyngeal consonant -
Philology -
Philosophy of language -
Phonation -
Phone -
Phonetics -
Phonetic complement -
Phonetic transcription -
Phonology -
Phoneme -
Phonemics -
Phrase -
Phrase structure rules -
Pidgin -
Place of articulation -
Pleonasm -
Pluperfect -
Polysemy -
Polysynthetic language -
Portmanteau -
Possessive case -
Postalveolar consonant -
Postposition -
Pragmatics -
Prefix -
Preposition -
Prepositional phrase -
Prescription and description -
Present tense -
Presupposition -
Preterite -
Principles of interpretation -
Profanity -
Prolative case -
Pronoun -
Pronunciation -
Prosody (linguistics) -
Proparoxytone -
Pseudo-acronym -
Pseudo-Anglicism -
Psycholinguistics -
Punctuation

== Q ==
Quirky subject

== R ==
Radical -
Retroflex consonant -
Retronym -
Rhetoric - 
Rhotics -
Romanization -
Rounded vowel

== S ==
SAMPA -
Schwa -
Second language -
Semantics -
Semantic class -
Semantic feature -
Semantic property -
Semiotics -
Semivowel -
Sentence -
Sentence function -
Shall -
Sign -
Sign language -
Sociolinguistics -
Sociolect -
Sociophonetics -
Slack voice -
Slang -
Sound change -
Sound pattern of English -
SOV -
Speaker recognition -
Specialised lexicography -
Speech communication -
Speech act -
Speech disorder -
Speech processing -
Speech recognition -
Speech synthesis -
Speech therapy -
Spiritus asper -
Split infinitive -
Standard language -
Stop consonant -
Stratificational linguistics -
String grammar -
Structuralism -
Stylistics -
Subcategorization-
Superlative -
Suppletion -
Subject -
SVO -
Supine -
Syllabary -
Syllable -
Synonym -
Syntactic ambiguity -
Syntactic categories -
Syntax -
Synthetic language

== T ==
Tagmemics -
Telicity -
Tense -
Tense–aspect–mood -
Terminology -
Text linguistics -
Text types -
Thematic role -
Theoretical linguistics -
Thesaurus -
Thou -
Time–manner–place -
Tonal language -
Tone (linguistics) -
Tongue-twister -
Transcription -
Transformational-generative grammar -
Translation -
Translative case -
Truth condition -
T–V distinction -
Typology

== U ==
Uninflected word -
Universal grammar -
Uvular consonant

== V ==
V2 word order -
Variety -
Velar consonant -
Verb -
Verb–object–subject -
Verb phrase -
Verb–subject–object -
Verbal noun -
Verner&#x27;s law -
Vocative case -
Vowel -
Vowel harmony -
Vowel stems -

== W ==
Weak suppletion -
Will (verb) -
Word -
Word-sense disambiguation -
Writing -
Writing systems -
Wug test

== X ==
X-bar theory

== Y ==

== Z ==
Zipf&#x27;s law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="0" end="11" title="Linguistics" label="Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112675" start="11" end="11" title="List of linguistic topics" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="18" end="28" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="44" end="52" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="100" end="108" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112675" start="129" end="151" title="Outline of linguistics" label="Outline of linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156280" start="157" end="181" title="List of phonetics topics" label="List of phonetics topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296534" start="187" end="204" title="List of linguists" label="List of linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018845" start="214" end="246" title="List of cognitive science topics" label="List of cognitive science topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="304" end="316" title="Abbreviation" label="Abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319822" start="319" end="332" title="Abessive case" label="Abessive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125709" start="335" end="341" title="Ablaut" label="Ablaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q332734" start="344" end="359" title="Absolutive case" label="Absolutive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q335806" start="362" end="369" title="Abugida" label="Abugida"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="372" end="387" title="Accusative case" label="Accusative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q216042" start="390" end="402" title="Acute accent" label="Acute accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="405" end="423" title="Accent (phonetics)" label="Accent (phonetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="426" end="451" title="Accent (sociolinguistics)" label="Accent (sociolinguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="454" end="461" title="Acronym" label="Acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q281954" start="464" end="477" title="Adessive case" label="Adessive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="480" end="489" title="Adjective" label="Adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975444" start="492" end="499" title="Adjunct (grammar)" label="Adjunct"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="502" end="512" title="Adposition" label="Adposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816188" start="515" end="534" title="Adpositional phrase" label="Adpositional phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="537" end="543" title="Adverb" label="Adverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q380012" start="546" end="555" title="Adverbial" label="Adverbial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734650" start="558" end="574" title="Adverbial phrase" label="Adverbial phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="577" end="582" title="Affix" label="Affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="585" end="604" title="Affricate consonant" label="Affricate consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="607" end="620" title="Agglutination" label="Agglutination"/>
<link wikidata="Q171263" start="623" end="645" title="Agglutinative language" label="Agglutinative language"/>
<link wikidata="Q655020" start="648" end="661" title="Allative case" label="Allative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124301" start="664" end="673" title="Allomorph" label="Allomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="676" end="685" title="Allophone" label="Allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="688" end="696" title="Alphabet" label="Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q209544" start="699" end="716" title="Analytic language" label="Analytic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q156751" start="719" end="727" title="Anaphora (linguistics)" label="Anaphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250335" start="730" end="737" title="Animacy" label="Animacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29407" start="740" end="767" title="Anthropological linguistics" label="Anthropological linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49749" start="770" end="788" title="Alveolar consonant" label="Alveolar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131779" start="791" end="798" title="Antonym" label="Antonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="801" end="807" title="Aorist" label="Aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q321249" start="810" end="829" title="Applied linguistics" label="Applied linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="832" end="843" title="Approximant" label="Approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q640624" start="846" end="859" title="Areal feature (linguistics)" label="Areal feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="862" end="869" title="Article (grammar)" label="Article"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070264" start="872" end="893" title="Articulatory gestures" label="Articulatory gestures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200775" start="896" end="918" title="Articulatory phonetics" label="Articulatory phonetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="921" end="927" title="Grammatical aspect" label="Aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190212" start="930" end="938" title="Asterisk" label="Asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="941" end="950" title="Language attrition" label="Attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247133" start="953" end="963" title="Attraction (grammar)" label="Attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601272" start="966" end="991" title="Augment (Bantu languages)" label="Augment (Bantu languages)"/>
<link wikidata="Q760437" start="994" end="1017" title="Augment (Indo-European)" label="Augment (Indo-European)"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="1020" end="1034" title="Auxiliary verb" label="Auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q989162" start="1044" end="1058" title="Back-formation" label="Back-formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="1061" end="1070" title="Backronym" label="Backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q146878" start="1073" end="1091" title="Bilabial consonant" label="Bilabial consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328163" start="1094" end="1107" title="Breathy voice" label="Breathy voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q911277" start="1110" end="1115" title="Breve" label="Breve"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="1125" end="1131" title="Calque" label="Calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q425951" start="1134" end="1148" title="Capitalization" label="Capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487950" start="1151" end="1160" title="Capitonym" label="Capitonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q893304" start="1163" end="1177" title="Cardinal vowel" label="Cardinal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="1180" end="1184" title="Grammatical case" label="Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048335" start="1187" end="1200" title="Case in tiers" label="Case in tiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q245421" start="1203" end="1210" title="Cedilla" label="Cedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q528728" start="1213" end="1221" title="Chiasmus" label="Chiasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124939" start="1224" end="1233" title="Circumfix" label="Circumfix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175" start="1236" end="1246" title="Circumflex" label="Circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q489763" start="1249" end="1257" title="Clefting" label="Clefting"/>
<link wikidata="Q427013" start="1260" end="1275" title="Click consonant" label="Click consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="1278" end="1295" title="Closed-class word" label="Closed-class word"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1298" end="1305" title="Cognate" label="Cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="1308" end="1325" title="Cognitive science" label="Cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q749389" start="1328" end="1337" title="Coherence (linguistics)" label="Coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="1340" end="1353" title="Colloquialism" label="Colloquialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q838581" start="1356" end="1371" title="Comitative case" label="Comitative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169499" start="1374" end="1385" title="Comparative" label="Comparative"/>
<link wikidata="Q878226" start="1388" end="1411" title="Comparative linguistics" label="Comparative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="1414" end="1432" title="Comparative method" label="Comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="1435" end="1462" title="Compound noun and adjective" label="Compound noun and adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156935" start="1465" end="1478" title="Compound verb" label="Compound verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194674" start="1481" end="1516" title="Computer-assisted language learning" label="Computer-assisted language learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="1519" end="1544" title="Computational linguistics" label="Computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="1547" end="1558" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="Conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161167" start="1561" end="1569" title="Conjunct" label="Conjunct"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="1572" end="1583" title="Grammatical conjunction" label="Conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="1586" end="1595" title="Consonant" label="Consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33215" start="1598" end="1618" title="Constructed language" label="Constructed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q196626" start="1621" end="1628" title="Context (language use)" label="Context"/>
<link wikidata="Q614959" start="1631" end="1651" title="Contrastive analysis" label="Contrastive analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758140" start="1654" end="1677" title="Contrastive linguistics" label="Contrastive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624720" start="1680" end="1701" title="Conversation analysis" label="Conversation analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="1704" end="1710" title="copula (linguistics)" label="Copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="1713" end="1731" title="Corpus linguistics" label="Corpus linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q639512" start="1734" end="1752" title="Cranberry morpheme" label="Cranberry morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084827" start="1755" end="1767" title="Creaky voice" label="Creaky voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="1770" end="1785" title="Creole language" label="Creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="1788" end="1801" title="Cryptanalysis" label="Cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="1804" end="1813" title="Cuneiform (script)" label="Cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135518" start="1823" end="1840" title="Dangling modifier" label="Dangling modifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="1843" end="1854" title="Dative case" label="Dative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345443" start="1857" end="1869" title="Decipherment" label="Decipherment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="1872" end="1882" title="Declension" label="Declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721259" start="1885" end="1899" title="Defective verb" label="Defective verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="1902" end="1925" title="Descriptive linguistics" label="Descriptive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q120443" start="1928" end="1944" title="Dental consonant" label="Dental consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="1947" end="1957" title="Derivation (linguistics)" label="Derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q576271" start="1960" end="1970" title="Determiner (linguistics)" label="Determiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="1973" end="1982" title="Diacritic" label="Diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q415832" start="1985" end="1994" title="Diaeresis (disambiguation)" label="Diaeresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="1997" end="2004" title="Dialect" label="Dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="2007" end="2017" title="Dictionary" label="Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="2020" end="2029" title="Diphthong" label="Diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q378426" start="2032" end="2043" title="Diplomatics" label="Diplomatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="2046" end="2055" title="Discourse" label="Discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q898602" start="2058" end="2066" title="Disjunct (linguistics)" label="Disjunct"/>
<link wikidata="Q657495" start="2069" end="2080" title="Dislocation (syntax)" label="Dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q545280" start="2083" end="2102" title="Double acute accent" label="Double acute accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q110022" start="2105" end="2128" title="Dual grammatical number" label="Dual grammatical number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297397" start="2138" end="2145" title="Eggcorn" label="Eggcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q294936" start="2148" end="2162" title="Ecolinguistics" label="Ecolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q394253" start="2165" end="2177" title="Elative case" label="Elative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="2180" end="2199" title="Endangered language" label="Endangered language"/>
<link wikidata="Q780522" start="2202" end="2223" title="English pronunciation" label="English pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="2226" end="2236" title="Entailment" label="Entailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="2239" end="2252" title="Ergative case" label="Ergative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q29485" start="2255" end="2260" title="Error" label="Error"/>
<link wikidata="Q148465" start="2263" end="2274" title="Essive case" label="Essive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="2277" end="2287" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="2290" end="2299" title="Etymology" label="Etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="2302" end="2313" title="Etymologist" label="Etymologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940965" start="2316" end="2331" title="Eurolinguistics" label="Eurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377510" start="2334" end="2356" title="Evolution of languages" label="Evolution of languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313085" start="2359" end="2383" title="Evolutionary linguistics" label="Evolutionary linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753284" start="2386" end="2419" title="Example-based machine translation" label="Example-based machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="2422" end="2430" title="Exegesis" label="Exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790458" start="2433" end="2442" title="Expletive (linguistics)" label="Expletive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421253" start="2445" end="2466" title="Expletive attributive" label="Expletive attributive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285656" start="2476" end="2489" title="False cognate" label="False cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q202961" start="2492" end="2504" title="False friend" label="False friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q123050539" start="2507" end="2514" title="Figleaf (linguistics)" label="Figleaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="2516" end="2531" title="Formal language" label="Formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="2534" end="2553" title="Fricative consonant" label="Fricative consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120608" start="2556" end="2569" title="Function word" label="Function word"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="2572" end="2589" title="Fusional language" label="Fusional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234617" start="2592" end="2606" title="Future perfect" label="Future perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="2609" end="2621" title="Future tense" label="Future tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="2631" end="2637" title="Grammatical gender" label="Gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621039" start="2640" end="2657" title="General semantics" label="General semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="2660" end="2673" title="Genitive case" label="Genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621167" start="2676" end="2691" title="Germanic umlaut" label="Germanic umlaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="2694" end="2700" title="Gerund" label="Gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q234538" start="2703" end="2720" title="Glottal consonant" label="Glottal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="2723" end="2735" title="Glottal stop" label="Glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q942552" start="2738" end="2754" title="Glottochronology" label="Glottochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732820" start="2757" end="2767" title="Government (linguistics)" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="2770" end="2777" title="Grammar" label="Grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="2780" end="2798" title="Grammatical gender" label="Grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="2801" end="2817" title="Grammatical mood" label="Grammatical mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="2820" end="2838" title="Grammatical number" label="Grammatical number"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="2841" end="2858" title="Grammatical voice" label="Grammatical voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q627319" start="2861" end="2873" title="Grave accent" label="Grave accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="2876" end="2897" title="Great consonant shift" label="Great consonant shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q268206" start="2900" end="2917" title="Great Vowel Shift" label="Great Vowel Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="2920" end="2936" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534578" start="2939" end="2957" title="Guttural consonant" label="Guttural consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26948" start="2967" end="2972" title="Hacek" label="Hacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691531" start="2975" end="2990" title="Heaps&amp;#x27; law" label="Heaps&amp;#x27; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="2993" end="3005" title="Hermeneutics" label="Hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q750663" start="3008" end="3028" title="Hiatus (linguistics)" label="Hiatus (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757681" start="3031" end="3051" title="High rising terminal" label="High rising terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="3054" end="3088" title="Historical-comparative linguistics" label="Historical-comparative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="3091" end="3113" title="Historical linguistics" label="Historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478235" start="3116" end="3138" title="History of linguistics" label="History of linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160843" start="3141" end="3148" title="Homonym" label="Homonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="3151" end="3159" title="Hypernym" label="Hypernym"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="3162" end="3169" title="Hyponym" label="Hyponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q310554" start="3179" end="3189" title="I-mutation" label="I-mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="3192" end="3200" title="Ideogram" label="Ideogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q257716" start="3203" end="3211" title="Idiolect" label="Idiolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="3214" end="3219" title="Idiom" label="Idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q474668" start="3222" end="3235" title="Illative case" label="Illative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352140" start="3238" end="3256" title="Impersonal pronoun" label="Impersonal pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509829" start="3259" end="3274" title="Impersonal verb" label="Impersonal verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q571227" start="3277" end="3301" title="Implication (pragmatics)" label="Implication (pragmatics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3304" end="3327" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q282031" start="3330" end="3343" title="Inessive case" label="Inessive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="3346" end="3356" title="Infinitive" label="Infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q201322" start="3359" end="3364" title="Infix" label="Infix"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="3367" end="3385" title="Inflected language" label="Inflected language"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3388" end="3398" title="Inflection" label="Inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="3401" end="3411" title="Initialism" label="Initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081108" start="3414" end="3441" title="Initial-stress-derived noun" label="Initial-stress-derived noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665275" start="3444" end="3460" title="Instructive case" label="Instructive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="3463" end="3475" title="Interjection" label="Interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045214" start="3478" end="3503" title="Interactional linguistics" label="Interactional linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="3506" end="3537" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q780522" start="3540" end="3561" title="IPA chart for English" label="IPA chart for English"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955536" start="3564" end="3578" title="Irregular verb" label="Irregular verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q208751" start="3606" end="3627" title="Labiodental consonant" label="Labiodental consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="3630" end="3647" title="Langue and parole" label="Langue and parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="3650" end="3658" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="3661" end="3681" title="Language acquisition" label="Language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="3684" end="3702" title="Language attrition" label="Language attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455196" start="3705" end="3723" title="Language education" label="Language education"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="3726" end="3757" title="Language families and languages" label="Language families and languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q186427" start="3760" end="3773" title="Language game" label="Language game"/>
<link wikidata="Q470501" start="3776" end="3797" title="The Language Instinct" label="The Language Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="3800" end="3816" title="Language isolate" label="Language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049350" start="3819" end="3835" title="Laryngeal theory" label="Laryngeal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q223714" start="3838" end="3855" title="Lateral consonant" label="Lateral consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="3858" end="3863" title="Lemma (morphology)" label="Lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q111352" start="3866" end="3872" title="Lexeme" label="Lexeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759657" start="3875" end="3892" title="Lexical semantics" label="Lexical semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="3895" end="3907" title="Lexicography" label="Lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q178433" start="3910" end="3920" title="Lexicology" label="Lexicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="3923" end="3930" title="Lexicon" label="Lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3933" end="3941" title="Linguist" label="Linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29407" start="3944" end="3967" title="Anthropological linguistics" label="Linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3970" end="3988" title="Ecolinguistics#Linguistic ecology" label="Linguistic ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3991" end="4008" title="Linguistic layers" label="Linguistic layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="4011" end="4032" title="Linguistic relativity" label="Linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="4035" end="4046" title="Linguistics" label="Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112675" start="4049" end="4073" title="Linguistics basic topics" label="Linguistics basic topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q908751" start="4076" end="4092" title="Liquid consonant" label="Liquid consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296534" start="4095" end="4112" title="List of linguists" label="List of linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="4115" end="4123" title="Loanword" label="Loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="4126" end="4139" title="Locative case" label="Locative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="4149" end="4168" title="Machine translation" label="Machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q627627" start="4171" end="4177" title="Macron (diacritic)" label="macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q210847" start="4180" end="4202" title="Manner of articulation" label="Manner of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="4205" end="4214" title="Mass noun" label="Mass noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="4217" end="4224" title="Meaning (linguistic)" label="Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q43242614" start="4227" end="4235" title="Meronymy" label="Meronymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191090" start="4238" end="4248" title="Metathesis (linguistics)" label="Metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="4251" end="4263" title="Minimal pair" label="Minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868766" start="4266" end="4282" title="Mispronunciation" label="Mispronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q345621" start="4285" end="4293" title="Modality (disambiguation)" label="Modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="4296" end="4300" title="Grammatical mood" label="Mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="4303" end="4307" title="Mora (linguistics)" label="Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="4310" end="4318" title="Morpheme" label="Morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="4321" end="4331" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="Morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="4334" end="4356" title="Mutual intelligibility" label="Mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="4366" end="4381" title="Nasal consonant" label="Nasal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="4384" end="4394" title="Nasal stop" label="Nasal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="4397" end="4413" title="Natural language" label="Natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="4416" end="4443" title="Natural language processing" label="Natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078276" start="4446" end="4476" title="Natural-language understanding" label="Natural language understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788156" start="4479" end="4495" title="Negative raising" label="Negative raising"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="4498" end="4507" title="Neologism" label="Neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215948" start="4510" end="4526" title="Neurolinguistics" label="Neurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q863247" start="4529" end="4541" title="Nomenclature" label="Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="4544" end="4559" title="Nominative case" label="Nominative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="4562" end="4566" title="Noun" label="Noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="4569" end="4580" title="Noun phrase" label="Noun phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789027" start="4583" end="4596" title="Null morpheme" label="Null morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129340" start="4606" end="4618" title="Onomasiology" label="Onomasiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="4621" end="4633" title="Onomatopoeia" label="Onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="4636" end="4651" title="Open class word" label="Open class word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207598" start="4654" end="4671" title="Optimality theory" label="Optimality theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="4674" end="4692" title="Origin of language" label="Origin of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="4695" end="4706" title="Orthography" label="Orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417850" start="4709" end="4728" title="Object–subject–verb" label="Object–subject–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q989463" start="4731" end="4750" title="Object–verb–subject" label="Object–verb–subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621458" start="4753" end="4760" title="Oxytone" label="Oxytone"/>
<link wikidata="Q231978" start="4770" end="4787" title="Palatal consonant" label="Palatal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="4790" end="4798" title="Paradigm" label="Paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423672" start="4801" end="4811" title="Paroxytone" label="Paroxytone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="4814" end="4828" title="Part of speech" label="Part of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="4831" end="4841" title="Participle" label="Participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="4844" end="4852" title="Grammatical particle" label="Particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q857325" start="4855" end="4869" title="Partitive case" label="Partitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="4872" end="4882" title="Past tense" label="Past tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="4885" end="4902" title="Perfect (grammar)" label="Perfect (grammar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231428" start="4905" end="4915" title="Persuasion" label="Persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q252321" start="4918" end="4938" title="Pharyngeal consonant" label="Pharyngeal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="4941" end="4950" title="Philology" label="Philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="4953" end="4975" title="Philosophy of language" label="Philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q678132" start="4978" end="4987" title="Phonation" label="Phonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202064" start="4990" end="4995" title="Phone (phonetics)" label="Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="4998" end="5007" title="Phonetics" label="Phonetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11267894" start="5010" end="5029" title="Phonetic complement" label="Phonetic complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q743569" start="5032" end="5054" title="Phonetic transcription" label="Phonetic transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="5057" end="5066" title="Phonology" label="Phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="5069" end="5076" title="Phoneme" label="Phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="5079" end="5088" title="Phonemics" label="Phonemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="5091" end="5097" title="Phrase" label="Phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188074" start="5100" end="5122" title="Phrase structure rules" label="Phrase structure rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="5125" end="5131" title="Pidgin" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214090" start="5134" end="5155" title="Place of articulation" label="Place of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188741" start="5158" end="5166" title="Pleonasm" label="Pleonasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="5169" end="5179" title="Pluperfect" label="Pluperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q191928" start="5182" end="5190" title="Polysemy" label="Polysemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48641" start="5193" end="5215" title="Polysynthetic language" label="Polysynthetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="5218" end="5229" title="Portmanteau" label="Portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105891" start="5232" end="5247" title="Possessive case" label="Possessive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q49748" start="5250" end="5272" title="Postalveolar consonant" label="Postalveolar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="5275" end="5287" title="Postposition" label="Postposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="5290" end="5300" title="Pragmatics" label="Pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="5303" end="5309" title="Prefix (linguistics)" label="Prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="5312" end="5323" title="Preposition" label="Preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816188" start="5326" end="5346" title="Prepositional phrase" label="Prepositional phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="5349" end="5377" title="Prescription and description" label="Prescription and description"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="5380" end="5393" title="Present tense" label="Present tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076131" start="5396" end="5410" title="Presupposition" label="Presupposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="5413" end="5422" title="Preterite" label="Preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112703" start="5425" end="5453" title="Principles of interpretation" label="Principles of interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="5456" end="5465" title="Profanity" label="Profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q952933" start="5468" end="5482" title="Prolative case" label="Prolative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="5485" end="5492" title="Pronoun" label="Pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="5495" end="5508" title="Pronunciation" label="Pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="5511" end="5532" title="Prosody (linguistics)" label="Prosody (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q742995" start="5535" end="5548" title="Proparoxytone" label="Proparoxytone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="5551" end="5565" title="Pseudo-acronym" label="Pseudo-acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q496537" start="5568" end="5584" title="Pseudo-Anglicism" label="Pseudo-Anglicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="5587" end="5604" title="Psycholinguistics" label="Psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="5607" end="5618" title="Punctuation" label="Punctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822296" start="5628" end="5642" title="Quirky subject" label="Quirky subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q849778" start="5652" end="5659" title="Radical (Chinese character)" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q267753" start="5662" end="5681" title="Retroflex consonant" label="Retroflex consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="5684" end="5692" title="Retronym" label="Retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="5695" end="5703" title="Rhetoric" label="Rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076155" start="5707" end="5714" title="Rhotics" label="Rhotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="5717" end="5729" title="Romanization" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425556" start="5732" end="5745" title="Rounded vowel" label="Rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q588064" start="5755" end="5760" title="SAMPA" label="SAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="5763" end="5768" title="Schwa" label="Schwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="5771" end="5786" title="Second language" label="Second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="5789" end="5798" title="Semantics" label="Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947106" start="5801" end="5815" title="Semantic class" label="Semantic class"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928266" start="5818" end="5834" title="Semantic feature" label="Semantic feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q496618" start="5837" end="5854" title="Semantic property" label="Semantic property"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="5857" end="5866" title="Semiotics" label="Semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="5869" end="5878" title="Semivowel" label="Semivowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796" start="5881" end="5889" title="Sentence (linguistics)" label="Sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451193" start="5892" end="5909" title="Sentence function" label="Sentence function"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397625" start="5912" end="5917" title="Shall" label="Shall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="5920" end="5924" title="Sign (linguistics)" label="Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="5927" end="5940" title="Sign language" label="Sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="5943" end="5959" title="Sociolinguistics" label="Sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207101" start="5962" end="5971" title="Sociolect" label="Sociolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790442" start="5974" end="5988" title="Sociophonetics" label="Sociophonetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112654" start="5991" end="6002" title="Slack voice" label="Slack voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="6005" end="6010" title="Slang" label="Slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="6013" end="6025" title="Sound change" label="Sound change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074959" start="6028" end="6052" title="The sound pattern of English" label="Sound pattern of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="6055" end="6058" title="Subject–object–verb" label="SOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145189" start="6061" end="6080" title="Speaker recognition" label="Speaker recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574886" start="6083" end="6107" title="Specialised lexicography" label="Specialised lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="6110" end="6130" title="Speech communication" label="Speech communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="6133" end="6143" title="Speech act" label="Speech act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282114" start="6146" end="6161" title="Speech disorder" label="Speech disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358061" start="6164" end="6181" title="Speech processing" label="Speech processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="6184" end="6202" title="Speech recognition" label="Speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="6205" end="6221" title="Speech synthesis" label="Speech synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="6224" end="6238" title="Speech therapy" label="Speech therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413616" start="6241" end="6255" title="Spiritus asper" label="Spiritus asper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460703" start="6258" end="6274" title="Split infinitive" label="Split infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="6277" end="6294" title="Standard language" label="Standard language"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="6297" end="6311" title="Stop consonant" label="Stop consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8964867" start="6314" end="6342" title="Stratificational linguistics" label="Stratificational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623977" start="6345" end="6359" title="String grammar" label="String grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="6362" end="6375" title="Structuralism" label="Structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856" start="6378" end="6388" title="Stylistics (linguistics)" label="Stylistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980760" start="6391" end="6408" title="Subcategorization" label="Subcategorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q577714" start="6410" end="6421" title="Superlative" label="Superlative"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="6424" end="6434" title="Suppletion" label="Suppletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="6437" end="6444" title="subject (grammar)" label="Subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="6447" end="6450" title="Subject–verb–object" label="SVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q548470" start="6453" end="6459" title="Supine" label="Supine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="6462" end="6471" title="Syllabary" label="Syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="6474" end="6482" title="Syllable" label="Syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="6485" end="6492" title="Synonym" label="Synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456276" start="6495" end="6514" title="Syntactic ambiguity" label="Syntactic ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253026" start="6517" end="6537" title="Syntactic categories" label="Syntactic categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="6540" end="6546" title="Syntax" label="Syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q48612" start="6549" end="6567" title="Synthetic language" label="Synthetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q10377818" start="6577" end="6586" title="Tagmemics" label="Tagmemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336024" start="6589" end="6597" title="Telicity" label="Telicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="6600" end="6605" title="Grammatical tense" label="Tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="6608" end="6625" title="Tense–aspect–mood" label="Tense–aspect–mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725664" start="6628" end="6639" title="Terminology" label="Terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206895" start="6642" end="6658" title="Text linguistics" label="Text linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298050" start="6661" end="6671" title="Text types" label="Text types"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717002" start="6674" end="6687" title="Thematic role (disambiguation)" label="Thematic role"/>
<link wikidata="Q351625" start="6690" end="6713" title="Theoretical linguistics" label="Theoretical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179797" start="6716" end="6725" title="Thesaurus" label="Thesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022000" start="6728" end="6732" title="Thou" label="Thou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806656" start="6735" end="6752" title="Time–manner–place" label="Time–manner–place"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="6755" end="6769" title="Tonal language" label="Tonal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="6772" end="6790" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="Tone (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q230052" start="6793" end="6807" title="Tongue-twister" label="Tongue-twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q207714" start="6810" end="6823" title="Transcription (linguistics)" label="Transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411840" start="6826" end="6861" title="Transformational-generative grammar" label="Transformational-generative grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="6864" end="6875" title="Translation" label="Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q950170" start="6878" end="6894" title="Translative case" label="Translative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891657" start="6897" end="6912" title="Truth condition" label="Truth condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="6915" end="6930" title="T–V distinction" label="T–V distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="6933" end="6941" title="Linguistic typology" label="Typology"/>
<link wikidata="Q228503" start="6951" end="6967" title="Uninflected word" label="Uninflected word"/>
<link wikidata="Q728252" start="6970" end="6987" title="Universal grammar" label="Universal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q623772" start="6990" end="7006" title="Uvular consonant" label="Uvular consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516105" start="7016" end="7029" title="V2 word order" label="V2 word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="7032" end="7039" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="7042" end="7057" title="Velar consonant" label="Velar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="7060" end="7064" title="Verb" label="Verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q568140" start="7067" end="7086" title="Verb–object–subject" label="Verb–object–subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778442" start="7089" end="7100" title="Verb phrase" label="Verb phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q166097" start="7103" end="7122" title="Verb–subject–object" label="Verb–subject–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350145" start="7125" end="7136" title="Verbal noun" label="Verbal noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q840690" start="7139" end="7156" title="Verner&amp;#x27;s law" label="Verner&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="7159" end="7172" title="Vocative case" label="Vocative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="7175" end="7180" title="Vowel" label="Vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="7183" end="7196" title="Vowel harmony" label="Vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322476" start="7199" end="7210" title="Vowel stems" label="Vowel stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="7222" end="7237" title="Weak suppletion" label="Weak suppletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397625" start="7240" end="7251" title="Will (verb)" label="Will (verb)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="7254" end="7258" title="Word" label="Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q48522" start="7261" end="7286" title="Word-sense disambiguation" label="Word-sense disambiguation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="7289" end="7296" title="Writing" label="Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="7299" end="7314" title="Writing systems" label="Writing systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350253" start="7317" end="7325" title="Wug test" label="Wug test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861110" start="7335" end="7347" title="X-bar theory" label="X-bar theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205472" start="7366" end="7381" title="Zipf&amp;#x27;s law" label="Zipf&amp;#x27;s law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152737" wikidata="Q208815" url="?curid=152737" title="Buenaventura Durruti">
<text>José Buenaventura Durruti Dumange (14 July 1896 – 20 November 1936) was a Spanish anarchist revolutionary involved with the CNT and the FAI in the periods before and during the Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939. Durruti played an influential role during the Spanish Revolution of 1936 and is remembered as a hero in and by the anarchist movement.

==Early life==
===Childhood and education===
José Buenaventura Durruti Dumange was born on 14 July 1896, in the Santa Ana neighbourhood of León; he was the second of eight children, born to Santiago Durruti and Anastasia Dumange. Durruti came into the world at a time when the Spanish colonial empire was collapsing, while the country itself was experiencing peasant revolts in Andalusia and a wave of industrial actions in Asturias, the Basque Country and Catalonia.

Durruti began his primary education at the age of five; his teacher described him as a mischievous but good-natured child. Durruti later remarked that he had been made into a rebel at an early age. At the age of six, in 1903, he witnessed the arrest of his father during a tanners&#x27; strike. Led by his uncle Ignacio, the strike lasted for nine months before it was finally defeated by the employers. Durruti&#x27;s family was left destitute afterwards, as many of its members were boycotted or blacklisted for supporting the strike. Despite their limited means, Durruti&#x27;s parents endeavoured to provide him and his siblings with an education. During his secondary education, although his teacher had seen intellectual potential in him, Durruti proved to be a below-average student. His grandfather Pedro had hoped he would continue his studies at the University of Valladolid, but at the age of fourteen, Durruti decided to train as a mechanic and move into the workforce.

===Trade union activism===

In 1910, Durruti began his apprenticeship under the tutelage of Melchor Martínez, a master mechanic and a local leader of the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSOE). Martínez oversaw Durruti&#x27;s development as both a mechanic and as a socialist; during this period, Durruti stopped attending church and other religious events, which earned him a bad reputation among the city&#x27;s Catholic population. After two years, Martínez informed Durruti that he had nothing left to teach him and pressed him to move on. He spent the subsequent year at a workshop that assembled machines for mineral processing, after which he qualified as a lathe operator. In April 1913, Durruti joined the Metalworkers&#x27; Union of the Unión General de Trabajadores (UGT) and became a prominent local union organiser. Like other workers in his union, Durruti came under the tutelage of the Leonese socialist theoretician Iglesias Munís, but before long became impatient and dissilusioned with the socialist party leadership. Durruti came to reject electoral politics in favour of revolutionary socialism, which caused tension between him and the party leadership; during this time, he would often remark that &quot;socialism is either active or isn&#x27;t socialism&quot;. 

Following the outbreak of World War I, Spanish neutrality enabled the country to experience an economic boom. As his workshop was unable to keep up with demand, Durruti was dispatched to Matallana, where he would oversee the installation of mineral processors on-site. A few days after arriving, the Asturian miners went on strike in protest against workplace bullying by one of the engineers, demanding he be dismissed. Durruti led his team of mechanics in a solidarity action, refusing to assemble any machinery until the miners&#x27; demands were met. This forced the management to concede to the workers demands. Impressed by his conduct, Durruti&#x27;s name quickly spread among miners in Asturias, who referred to him as the &quot;big one&quot;. After he finished his job and returned to León, he was reprimanded for joining the strike by both his boss and his union leaders; Martínez urged him to leave León or else face persecution by the Civil Guard. His father secured him a new job as a mechanic for the Northern Railway Company (CCHNE). Following a nationwide general strike by the UGT in August 1917, the CCHNE fired its entire workforce, breaking the power of the railroad workers&#x27; union. In an attempt to regain its position, the UGT expelled many of its more revolutionary young members, including Durruti, who was finally forced to leave León. Wanted for conscription evasion, Durruti fled to Xixón, where sympathetic Asturian miners facilitated his escape to France in December 1917.
Throughout 1918, Durruti kept moving between the cities of Occitania, while keeping in touch with family and friends in León. During this time, he came into contact with the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT), an anarcho-syndicalist trade union. Through the CNT, he adopted the political philosophy of anarchism, which he identified with his own revolutionary approach to socialism. In January 1919, he returned to Xixón and exchanged information about the CNT&#x27;s activities in France with local activists that had overseen its growth in Asturias. He officially joined the CNT while working as a mechanic in La Felguera, before heading to La Robla, where Asturian mineworkers were on strike. He then attempted to meet up with some old Leonese friends in Santiago de Compostela, but was arrested by the Civil Guard, who discovered he had evaded conscription. He was brought before a Court Martial in Donostia, but with help from friends and his sister Rosa, he managed to escape back to France. By June 1919, he was working as a mechanic in Paris, while keeping up correspondence with Leonese anarchists. His friends kept him up to date with the development and growth of the CNT in Spain, prompting him to return to the country in early 1920.

==Militant activism==
===&quot;Los Justicieros&quot;===

When Durruti arrived back in Donostia, he found the local branch of the CNT, run by Manuel Buenacasa, which helped him find work as a mechanic in Errenteria. He frequented the union&#x27;s branch office after he finished work, although he rarely took part in meetings and mostly sat by himself reading newspapers. Durruti and other metalworkers affiliated with the CNT formed an opposition group within the local branch of the UGT; Durruti&#x27;s prominence within the organisation worried its socialist leadership, although he refused to accept any leadership positions that he was nominated for, as he considered rank-and-file militance more important. He also became close friends with the CNT leader Buenacasa, who introduced him to several of the union&#x27;s militants. Durruti and a number of these new acquaintances formed a new anarchist group, &quot;Los Justicieros&quot;. In reaction to intensifying state terrorism against the trade union movement, the group decided to attempt to assassinate King Alfonso XIII; the group began constructing a tunnel under the location the King was expected to attend, while Durruti was set the task of acquiring explosives. However, before they could carry out their plan, it was uncovered by the police. Durruti, Marcelino del Campo and Gregorio Suberviola were publicly named by the media as the plotters. With the aid of sympathetic railway workers, Buenacasa arranged their escape from Donostia to Zaragoza by freight train.

Upon arriving in Zaragoza, the three went to the local self-managed social centre, where they were updated on the activities of the movement in Aragón; Durruti was immediately struck by how large and comprehensive the centre was, compared with the smaller centres he had been to in Donostia and Xixón. They then found refuge at the house of Inocencio Pina, who informed them of the repression against the local movement&#x27;s activists and gave them a choice to remain in Zaragoza and join their struggle; Durruti, known to the group as the &quot;young Asturian&quot;, agreed to stay. Despite the repression against the organised labour movement, Durruti was able to find work as a mechanic.

In February 1921, Durruti was delegated by a conference of Aragonese anarchist groups to travel around the country and contact other anarchist groups, with the intention of establishing an Iberian Anarchist Federation. He managed to convince several Andalusian anarchist groups to form a regional federation, but was prevented from contacting anarchist groups in Madrid after the assassination of Eduardo Dato. He then travelled to Barcelona and met Domingo Ascaso, who told him about the repressive conditions in the city, which prevented Catalan anarchist groups from participating in any wider coordination. Fearing the extension of the armed conflict with the &quot;pistoleros&quot; to Zaragoza, Durruti went to Bilbao to acquire weapons. Durruti, Gregorio Suberviola, and Rafael Torres Escartín robbed a paymaster in Eibar and used the money to acquire pistols and finance the CNT.

Back in Zaragoza, Durruti went to work as a locksmith and, other than attempting to support anarchist prisoners, lived a relatively secluded life. He spent much of his free time educating himself on anarchist philosophy in Inocencio Pina&#x27;s library, where he read the works of Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin, finding that their respective radicalism and practicality balanced each other out. When trials against the imprisoned anarchists were convened, Durruti convinced the CNT to support calls for a general strike, which brought together sufficient public support that the defendants were acquitted. &quot;Los Justicieros&quot; then began to discuss the role of the group in revolutionary politics, with Pina advocating for them to constitute a revolutionary vanguard, while Durruti argued against the proposal, which he believed would separate them from the working class. At this meeting, he met Francisco Ascaso, who agreed with his anti-bureaucratic arguments and soon became one of his closest friends. Ascaso, Durruti, and other members of the group decided to move to Barcelona to combat the rise of &quot;yellow syndicalism&quot;.

===&quot;Los Solidarios&quot;===

In Barcelona, Durruti formed friendships with trade union activists of the CNT, with whom he established a new anarchist group, &quot;Los Solidarios&quot;. From this group, Durruti participated in the establishment of a Regional Commission of Anarchist Relations, which coordinated anarchist groups in Catalonia. The Commission tasked him with acquiring weapons and explosives. Durruti and the Catalan metalworker Eusebi Brau manufactured 6,000 grenades in an underground workshop and stockpiled them in depots throughout Barcelona. After the assassination of Salvador Seguí by &quot;pistoleros&quot; on 10 March 1923, the city exploded into social conflict, with open gun fights between radicalised workers, police and &quot;pistoleros&quot;.

As members of &quot;Los Solidarios&quot; began carrying out armed robberies to sustain their insurgent campaign, in April 1923, Durruti travelled to Madrid, where he gave stolen money to the defense fund of and , who had been charged with murdering Eduardo Dato. He had planned to attend a conference called by a local anarchist group, but the meeting was postponed by a week. He instead took the time to visit Manuel Buenacasa, who initially didn&#x27;t recognise Durruti, remarking that he had &quot;dressed like an Englishman&quot; and wore thick-rimmed glasses. Durruti said that he wanted to visit imprisoned assassins; Buenacasa attempted to dissuade him, but Durruti pressed forward, believing a visit would raise their morale. He was only able to visit one prisoner, , whose deafness prevented them from having a conversation. After leaving the prison, he was quickly arrested by Madrid police on Calle de Alcalá. His identity was confirmed, he was charged with armed robbery, attempted regicide and desertion, and he was transferred to Donostia for trial. The Spanish press praised his capture, declaring him one of the leading terrorists in Spain. Defended by the Catalan lawyer Joan Rusiñol, Durruti was acquitted of the charges of armed robbery and attempted regicide, but remained in prison for desertion.
His release was delayed after members of &quot;Los Solidarios&quot; assassinated Fernando González Regueral in León; the police erroneously assumed local members of the CNT and Durruti&#x27;s family had been involved, so launched an investigation into the possibility of his involvement. The Spanish press also blamed the &quot;infamous gang led by the terrorist Durruti&quot; for the assassination of Archbishop Juan Soldevila. While police carried out arrests and raids to apprehend Soldevila&#x27;s assassins, Durruti was released from prison. He had promised his mother that he would immediately visit her in León after his release, but when he heard that Ascaso and other members of &quot;Los Solidarios&quot; had been arrested, he instead went to Barcelona. There he found &quot;Los Solidarios&quot; were discussing internal conflicts between revolutionary, moderate and Bolshevik factions of the CNT, as well as the political crisis in the national government over the ongoing Rif War. One of their members, who had infiltrated the armed forces, reported that a military coup was being prepared by general Miguel Primo de Rivera.

In order to procure weapons to resist the imminent coup, Durruti and Torres Escartín set off to Asturias, where they planned to rob a branch of the Bank of Spain. They briefly stopped in Zaragoza, where they learnt of the local movement&#x27;s plans to break anarchists out of prison, before heading to Bilbao, where they found a weapons supplier. By August 1923, they had arrived in Xixón and were beginning preparations for the heist. Joined by other &quot;Solidarios&quot;, on 1 September, they stole 650,000 pesetas from the bank vault and escaped into the mountains in a hijacked car. During the heist, the bank manager had attempted to disarm Durruti, slapped him and even bit his finger. After some struggle, Durruti managed to throw him off and fired his gun, with the bullet grazing the manager&#x27;s neck. After escaping, the &quot;Solidarios&quot; then split up, with one group taking the money to purchase the weapons, while Durruti and Torres Escartín hid out in a mountain cabin. On 3 September, the cabin was assaulted by Civil Guards. Torres Escartín was arrested, but Durruti managed to get away. In León, the press printed fantastical stories about his escape, with one story claiming he had stripped a clergyman of his cassock at gunpoint and fled in disguise as a priest. When his mother was asked about her son, she replied: &quot;I don’t know if my son has millions. All I know is that every time he comes to León, I have to dress him from head to toe and pay for the return trip&quot;.

===Exile in Paris===

By November 1923, &quot;Los Solidarios&quot; were facing harsh repression by the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera, which had taken a close interest in liquidating the &quot;Durruti gang&quot;. Fearing for their lives, Durruti and Ascaso were dispatched to Paris. They were given the remaining money from the Xixón heist, with which they were tasked with establishing a revolutionary centre in exile and publishing propaganda. In Paris, they provided the funds for the establishment of an International Anarchist Press, which published Sébastien Faure&#x27;s &quot;Anarchist Encyclopedia&quot;. Having quickly spent most of their money, they were forced to live a frugal lifestyle and soon sought out jobs, although the Spanish press alleged they had gone to the city to carry out more robberies. By January 1924, Durruti was working as a mechanic for Renault and Ascaso was manufacturing tubes at a factory. The two lived together in the neighbourhood of Bellveille, where many other exiled anarchists had established themselves. Durruti and Ascaso constantly discussed the issue of revolution with their fellow exiles. They remained optimistic about the prospects of revolution, eschewing dogmatic debates over political theory in favour of encouraging their comrades to take direct action.

In mid-1924, Domingo Ascaso arrived in Paris and informed Durruti and Francisco of his plan to ignite an insurrection in Catalonia. Tired of constant meetings and anxious to finally take action, they jumped at the chance. By September 1924, plans for the operation were well underway, but difficulties acquiring weapons and supporters in Barcelona made many of the insurgents sceptical about their chances. Durruti gave a speech to his comrades, attempting to make points about revolutionary action, rather than to convince anybody. He admitted that the news from Barcelona was discouraging, but he still believed that a revolutionary situation existed in Catalonia, due to the repression of Catalan nationalists and intellectuals, the continuation of the Rif War and the deteriorating conditions of the working classes. He affirmed that they had the ability to spark a revolution, and that even if they failed, they would still bring Spain closer to revolution. By the time the day of action came, none of the revolutionaries who heard his speech had wavered.

In November 1924, Durruti set off to the France–Spain border. He was part of a group of revolutionaries that were to cross the Basque side of the border, between Hendaia and Bera. They managed to dispatch the first detachment of border guards they encountered and marched into the Pyrenees, where they were ambushed by another detachment of border guards. Outnumbered and exhausted, they were forced into a fighting retreat, during which two revolutionaries were killed and one gravely wounded. Two days later, others in the group were arrested and transferred to Iruña, where they were tried and executed. Defeated, Durruti returned to Paris and hid out in a suburban house provided by local anarchists. At the behest of the Spanish dictatorship, the French government moved to expel Spanish anarchists from the country. But Durruti refused to leave until he heard of the situation in Barcelona. Before long, Ricardo Sanz García had arrived in Paris. He told Durruti and Ascaso about the defeat of the insurrection in Barcelona, and that the Revolutionary Committee was now in urgent need of funds. Durruti and Ascaso decided to go to Latin America, where they could solicit support from Spanish emigrants. In December 1924, Durruti and Ascaso set off with false passports and embarked from Le Havre.

===Expropriations in Latin America===
After arriving in Havana, Cuba, Durruti and Ascaso stayed at the home of a young Cuban anarchist. They had tactical disagreements with their host, who supported educational initiatives and rejected their agitation for direct action. Undeterred, the two found jobs as dockworkers and began agitating among their co-workers, who particularly appreciated Durruti&#x27;s kind and helpful nature. Using plain language to communicate his ideas, Durruti called for the workers to form a trade union, based on a horizontal structure without union representatives, which could take collective action for the improvement of their living and working conditions. By the time the dockworkers established such a union, Durruti had caught the attention of the police and had to leave Havana. They moved to Santa Clara Province, where they found jobs harvesting sugarcane and were quickly caught up in a sitdown strike. After the violent repression of the strike, Ascaso and Durruti murdered their employer, leaving a note which attributed the attack to &quot;Los Errantes&quot; (). As police searched for them, they returned to Havana, where they hijacked a fishing vessel and took it to Mexico.
While disembarking in Yucatán, they were caught by officers of the Mexican Treasury, but Durruti managed to bribe the agents into releasing them. They made their way to Mexico City, where they were hosted by the General Confederation of Workers (CGT) until reuniting with Alejandro Ascaso and Gregorio Jover in March 1925. They then moved to Tecomán, where they linked up with the local anarchist group. Together they robbed an office and donated the money to the CGT. Durruti continued to hand over large sums of money to the CGT, which aroused suspicion, forcing him to show a letter from Sébastian Faure confirming his own receipt of a large amount of money. As he was living under the assumed identity of a wealthy Peruvian mine-owner, Durruti treated his comrades in the CGT to expensive meals at restaurants, where he gave them money to support the establishment of schools for children. Mexican anarcho-syndicalists remembered Durruti as one of the strongest supporters of the CGT.

In May 1925, after briefly stopping in Cuba for a quick bank robbery, the group went to Valparaíso, Chile. There, on 16 July, they robbed a branch of the Bank of Chile. In August 1925, they finally travelled to Buenos Aires, Argentina, which they planned to make the centre of their operations. Durruti found a job as a dockworker and lived a rather unassuming life for a few months. But after a series of botched robberies against train stations by men with Spanish accents, the identities of &quot;Los Errantes&quot; were provided to the Argentine police by their counterparts in Chile and Spain. The Argentine police posted wanted posters for Durruti and his comrades throughout the city. One poster was seen by the poet Raúl González Tuñón, who was inspired by it to write a poem about Durruti&#x27;s mugshot. In response to the posters, on 19 January 1926, &quot;Los Errantes&quot; carried out a bank robbery in San Martín and escaped with 64,085 pesos. 

Police attempts to apprehend them were frustrated after &quot;ABC&quot; erroneously reported that Durruti had been arrested in the French city of Bordeaux. At the end of February 1926, &quot;Los Errantes&quot; left South America; they arrived back in France two months later. By June 1926, Durruti, Ascaso and Jover were plotting to attack Alfonso XIII, on the occasion of the king&#x27;s visit to Paris. But before they could carry out their attempt, a police informant they hired as driver gave them up. They were arrested on 25 June and imprisoned in La Santé Prison.

===Extradition proceedings===

On 7 October 1926, the trial of Ascaso, Durruti and Jover began at the Palais de Justice; Durruti was charged with the use of a false passport, the criminal possession of a weapon and rebellion. As he was proficient in the French language, Durruti spoke for the group: he confessed to the charges against them, but justified their actions due to the political repression of the Primo de Rivera dictatorship. The three were ultimately convicted for short prison sentences, which Durruti and Jover had already served in pre-trial detention. The French government then granted an extradition request by the Argentine government, but their lawyers appealed the decision, so Durruti and Jover were pre-emptively detained at the Conciergerie.

In letters to his family, Durruti assured them that he had not been forced into penal labour, despite the claims by Leonese newspapers. He told his family to ignore anything the Spanish press wrote about him, refuting every claim the &quot;idiotic journalists&quot; had made about his condition, and spoke about the support he had received from sympathisers in France and Argentina. He thanked his family for sending their good wishes and reassured them that his deep libertarian convictions had helped him endure every hardship. He signed off his letter to them with a declaration that &quot;the revolution will put an end to this social disorder&quot;.

By November 1926, as campaigns against their extradition began to gain wider public support, Ascaso, Durruti and Jover were notified that they were to be handed over to the Argentine police. Durruti and Ascaso accepted their own extradition, but appealed for the French government to grant clemency for Jover, who had two young children. On 13 February 1927, as disputes over the extradition proceedings escalated into political demonstrations and legislative reforms, Durruti, Ascaso and Jover began a hunger strike in protest against the continued threat of extradition. On 25 April, he wrote to his family that his life was now in the hands of the French Justice Minister Louis Barthou. He nevertheless remained optimistic and expressed love for his mother, asking his siblings to take care of her. By the end of May, the Argentine government had retreated from the extradition order and the deadline for the extradition expired. On 8 July, after Louis Lecoin had secured a majority in the Chamber of Deputies and threatened to bring down the government of Raymond Poincaré, Durruti, Ascaso and Jover were released. When a journalist asked Durruti what he would do next, he responded &quot;we&#x27;re going to continue the struggle with even greater intensity than before&quot;.

===Clandestinity===

Immediately after his release, the French government ordered Durruti&#x27;s expulsion from the country, but he was unable to find a country that would grant him an exit visa. During this time, he frequented an anarchist bookshop in Ménilmontant, where he met and struck up a relationship with the French anarchist Émilienne Morin. He also met the Ukrainian anarchist revolutionary Nestor Makhno, who had been driven into exile by the Red Army after the defeat of his Makhnovist movement in Ukraine. Makhno agreed to meet Durruti and Ascaso, who paid homage to him and his struggle to realise anarchism in Ukraine. Makhno expressed optimism to them about the possibility of revolution in Spain, due to the organisational abilities of the Spanish anarchists, and expressed hope that he would live to participate in it.

On 23 July 1927, the French police smuggled Durruti and Ascaso into Belgium, where they were received by the Belgian anarchist Marcel Dieu. The following month, they were taken back to the border by Belgian police and forced back into France. Facing deportation back to Spain, they were given refuge by the pacifist Émile Bouchet at his home in Joigny. After some close calls with the Gendarmerie, on the advice of fellow members of &quot;Los Solidarios&quot;, they moved to Lyon. In early November 1927, Ascaso and Durruti arrived in Lyon. With false documents, they were able to find housing and jobs, and managed to stay covert in the city, which lacked thorough policing. There they found out about the recent formation of the Iberian Anarchist Federation (FAI), which had united anarchist groups throughout Spain and Portugal. They also became involved in debates over the relationship between the CNT and the Spanish anarchist movement. Durruti and Ascaso upheld the revolutionary potential of both the proletariat and the peasantry in Spain, and believed that anarchists ought to accelerate the revolutionary process by encouraging revolutionary initiatives and staying focused on long-term goals over short-term material improvements. Their ideas were rejected by more orthodox anarchists, who accused them of &quot;anarcho-Bolshevism&quot;.

Durruti and Ascaso also aligned themselves against proposals to establish sections of the CNT in France, as they believed it would divert attention away from revolutionary initiatives in Spain. In January 1928, Durruti and Ascaso went to Paris, where they heard news from Ricardo Sanz and Joaquín Cortés about the Spanish and Argentine anarchist movements. Together they attended a meeting of exiled Spanish anarchist groups, where they opposed a proposal by Bruno Carreras to establish CNT sections in France. Shortly after the meeting, Durruti and Ascaso were arrested by French police. They were imprisoned from April to October 1928 and, after their release, were still unable to secure visas so they could leave France. They initially attempted to secure a visa from the Soviet Union, but when its embassy required them to pledge their loyalty to the socialist state, they refused. Instead they moved to Berlin, where the German anarchists Augustin Souchy and Rudolf Rocker hid them in a safe house, while they worked on regularising their situation. Despite interventions by members of the Social Democratic Party, they were unable to secure asylum, due to objections by the Catholic Centre Party.

Durruti and Ascaso subsequently decided to return to Mexico. With help from the actor Alexander Granach, Rocker was able to raise enough funds to cover their journey. However, when Durruti and Ascaso arrived in Belgium in early 1929, they discovered the country had relaxed its immigration laws and become a safe haven for Spanish exiles. Marcel Dieu helped secure them a residence permit. They decided to send most of the money back to Rocker and remain in Brussels, where Durruti found work as a metalworker. Ida Mett recalled that his skills as a mechanic meant that he could easily find work, even during the Great Depression. Mett recalled one occasion, when Durruti tested the best out of any applicants for a job position, the manager asked him for his nationality; he responded that he was a mechanic.

During their time in Brussels, Durruti and Ascaso were involved in numerous conspiracies. In January 1929, they collaborated in a plot by José Sánchez-Guerra to overthrow Primo de Rivera. The plot was unsuccessful, but it resulted in mobilisation of the CNT and the wider Spanish anarchist movement. In December 1929, Durruti and Ascaso were implicated in an alleged plot by Camillo Berneri to assassinate Belgian princess Marie-José and Italian prince Umberto, but the plot was eventually discovered to have been fabricated by the authorities of Fascist Italy. Berneri was deported, but Durruti and Ascaso were allowed to remain in the country. The following month, on 28 January 1930, Miguel Primo de Rivera was removed from power and his dictatorship in Spain collapsed. As the Spanish anarcho-syndicalist movement was revived, many anarchist exiles began to return to the country. Durruti and Ascaso were themselves tempted to return, but as many of the repressive structures of the dictatorship remained in place, cautioned them to wait for the right moment.

==Insurrectionary leadership in the Republic==
===Return to Spain===

When the Second Spanish Republic was proclaimed on 14 April 1931, Durruti and Ascaso were among the first anarchist exiles to return to Barcelona. The following day, Durruti and Ascaso reunited with Ricardo Sanz, who told them about the CNT&#x27;s role in installing the republican government of Lluís Companys; Durruti and Ascaso regarded this to have been a mistake. They believed that the new Republican government would fail to make any radical reforms to existing socio-economic conditions, which would provoke popular discontent that anarchist revolutionaries could channel into a social revolution. For this position, they were denounced as &quot;anarcho-Bolsheviks&quot; by other members of the CNT and as &quot;infantile revolutionaries&quot; by Marxists.

Upon his arrival in Barcelona, Durruti initially stayed at Luis Riera&#x27;s house in Sant Martí de Provençals. The Ascaso brothers later found him his own place in Poblenou, rented under the name of their mother Emilia Abadía. Durruti was unable to find work in the city and was kept busy by his political activism, which kept him from returning to see his family in León. As many former members of &quot;Los Solidarios&quot; remained in prison, Durruti and Ascaso had set about agitating for their immediate release. At a meeting of the CNT at Montjuïc, on 18 April, Durruti gave a speech about the new Republic. He declared that the regime change had marked the beginning of a process of democratisation and predicted that, if the new government disregarded the political and economic demands of the working class, it would bring the country towards civil war. According to one listener, his style of public speaking was to improvise short sentences, which formed a close connection with his audience; after his speech, he immediately left the stage to mingle with the crowd.

In preparation for International Workers&#x27; Day, Durruti was delegated to accompany foreign anarchists that would be visiting Barcelona, including the French anarchist Louis Lecoin. When Lecoin noticed that Barcelona was covered in posters from the Communist Party of Spain (PCE), but none from the CNT and FAI, Durruti reassured him that a few sentences in &quot;Solidaridad Obrera&quot; would be enough to mobilise their members; on the day, more than 100,000 people turned up to the anarchist rally. After the demonstration arrived at the Palace of the Generalitat of Catalonia, the Civil Guard began to shoot at the demonstrators. Amid the panicked crowd, Durruti climbed on top of a truck and addressed the demonstrators; he called for calm so that nobody was trampled and cautioned armed demonstrators from returning fire. Clashes with the police only ended after the intervention of the army, which dispersed the police and the demonstrators. 

When writing to his family on 6 May 1931, Durruti advised them not to come to Barcelona, as his life at the time was too busy. He welcomed them to come after his partner Emilienne Morin arrived in the city, when they would be able to get a house and spend time with them. On 11 May, he sent them another letter, informing them that Morin had arrived from Paris, that he had managed to find a job and that he was looking for a house. By June 1931, Durruti was constantly occupied with meetings, speaking at rallies and attending to other responsibilities. Between activism and his job, he was rarely able to see Morin. At the third congress of the CNT, hosted in Madrid, Durruti welcomed Rudolf Rocker, the secretary of the International Workers&#x27; Association (IWA), and discussed the political changes in Spain with him. At the welcome rally at the Palace of Communications, Rocker was overwhelmed by the more than 15,000 attendees. When he asked Durruti why none of the speakers at the rally were applauded, Durruti told him that, as anarchists wanted to prevent the formation of personality cults, they rejected applause as they believed it encouraged vanity and leaderism.

===Political agitation and personal matters===
By August 1931, strike actions in Barcelona had escalated into open conflict with the Catalan government and business owners, culminating in the 1931 Barcelona rent strike, during which Durruti spoke before a popular assembly at the Palau de les Belles Arts. He wrote again to his family that he was constantly occupied by rallies and union organising, which kept him from travelling to León to visit them. Durruti&#x27;s mother then pressed his sister Rosa to travel to Barcelona and visit him. She reported that Durruti and Morin lived in squalid conditions with few possessions; Morin, who was pregnant at the time, slept on an empty bed base without a mattress. When Rosa chided her brother for not having told his family about his living situation and said they could have bought a mattress for Morin, he shrugged it off, saying Morin&#x27;s pregnancy was going well. In a letter to a friend, she concluded &quot;What could I do? My brother will always be an incurable optimist&quot;.

After the publication of the &quot;Manifesto of the Thirty&quot;, in which moderate members of the CNT leadership called for the organisation to rein in its revolutionary initiatives, Durruti again came under attack from the right-wing press, which denounced his leadership of the FAI as banditry. Durruti never sought out journalists to publicly comment on the manifesto, as he instinctively disliked journalists, believing them to be lacking in class consciousness. It was only when Eduardo de Guzmán, editor of the independent anarchist newspaper &#x27;, approached Durruti for comment that his thoughts on the matter were publicised. Durruti rejected the manifesto&#x27;s calls for peace with the Republican government; as the new government had not carried out any fundamental economic or political reforms, he considered it necessary for the Spanish working class to undertake a social revolution against the prevailing socio-economic order. In articles for &quot;Le Temps&quot; and &#x27;, he wrote that he felt personally targetted by the manifesto and criticised its signatories for collaborating with politicians at a time of heightened political repression. Durruti was later expelled from the Food Workers&#x27; Union, after he accused the signatory of collaborating with political parties, without evidence.

The publication of the manifesto coincided with increased political repression against the CNT, as well as criticisms of the organisation by the PSOE and PCE. In a letter to his brother Manolín, Durruti denounced the PCE as &quot;pawns&quot; of the Soviet Union and advised his brother to ignore their &quot;slander&quot; against the CNT, which he said needed to focus its energies on clarifying its positions and combatting political repression. At the café &quot;La Tranquilidad&quot;, on the , Durruti had a public debate over Bolshevism with the Soviet journalist Ilya Ehrenburg, during which Durruti criticised the Soviet Union for not providing him refuge during his period of clandestinity. There he was also informed by his sister that the &quot;&quot; (BOA) had printed an order to arrest him for the 1923 Xixón bank heist, and that police had searched her home in León, looking for him. The Spanish press branded Durruti, Ascaso and Joan Garcia Oliver as &quot;public enemies&quot;, culminating with Ascaso&#x27;s arrest in October 1931. Durruti frequently spoke at rallies protesting the arrest, during which he decried the Republic for maintaining the repressive apparatus of the dictatorship and called for social revolution against the political system. For one of these speeches, he was briefly arrested and cautioned for &quot;insults against authority&quot;.

After receiving news of his arrest, his family urged him to quit the anarchist movement and return to León, where he could return to work as a mechanic. Durruti rebuffed their request, recalling the economic difficulties his family had faced and reaffirming his desire to continue fighting for social justice. Less than a week after he sent this letter, on 4 December 1931, Emilienne Morin gave birth to their daughter Colette Durruti. On 8 December, Durruti informed his sister Rosa that he no longer needed her money; he had charged the Northern Railroad Company an indemnity for his dismissal in August 1917, which gave him and Morin 2,600 pesetas to spend on essentials for their daughter and furniture for their house. Durruti continued to organise for the release of anarchist prisoners, causing enough of a political scandal that he predicted he would soon be imprisoned. A few days later, he went to Girona to speak at a rally and was arrested when he arrived at the railway station. Although he was charged for his attempt against Alfonso XIII in Paris, Durruti believed he had been arrested to prevent him from speaking at the rally. Under pressure from the city&#x27;s workers, the civil governor quickly ordered his release and the police inspector apologised for the arrest. When he finally spoke at the rally, Durruti declared that his arrest for attempting to assassinate Alfonso XIII proved that Spain was still effectively ruled as a monarchy.

After the rally, Durruti received a letter from his sister, informing him that their father was gravely ill. Durruti, along with Morin and their daughter, finally returned to León for the first time in 14 years. His father died before he made it there; Satiago Durruti&#x27;s funeral was co-organised by the UGT and CNT, who hoped to pay tribute to him and express support for his son. The local CNT branch asked him to stay so he could speak at a rally, but as pretext to prevent this, the Civil Guard arrested Durruti and charged him for the 1923 Xixón robbery. Durruti told the police chief that the money from the heist had been spent on bringing about the Republic and warned that, if he did not speak at the rally, the city would face an uprising. Durruti addressed the rally the following day, speaking before workers that had come from León, Asturias, Galicia and Castile. He declared that the Republic had failed to solve Spain&#x27;s social and political issues and proclaimed that a social revolution against the existing order was inevitable; in order to bring about the revolution, he called for the working class to unite. Durruti&#x27;s revolutionary optimism soon spread.

===Alt Llobregat insurrection and deportation===

In January 1932, Durruti went on a speaking tour of central Catalonia, where mine workers were being repressed by the Civil Guard. At a rally in Sallent, he called for workers to rise up in revolution, expropriate the capitalists and overthrow the state. In Fígols, he showed mine workers how to make improvised explosive devices out of dynamite and scrap metal. On 18 January 1932, insurrection broke out in the region, as workers armed themselves and proclaimed libertarian communism. The insurrection lasted for less than a week before it was suppressed by the army. For his part in the insurrection, Durruti was arrested on 21 January. He was among the 110 anarchist militants who were packed onto the &quot;Buenos Aires&quot; steamship, where they were sentenced without trial to deportation. They were detained for three weeks while the ship was anchored in port. When Durruti and Ascaso started a hunger strike, they were separated from the other detainees. Before his deportation, Durruti was permitted a brief visit to say goodbye to his infant daughter. On the morning of 10 February, the ship left mainland Spain in the direction of Spanish Guinea.

On the way to Africa, the deportees were crammed into the cargo hold below deck. Malnourished and held in unsanitary conditions, many of the deportees fell gravely ill. In protest against the conditions, the deportees mutinied and forced their way onto the deck, forcing the captain to provide them with access to fresh air, as well as better food and bunks. The ship then rerouted to the Canary Islands to drop off the sick, before heading to Río de Oro. There the military governor Ramón Regueral Jove, the son of Fernando González Regueral, refused to accept the deportees if Durruti was among them. After consulting with Navy Minister José Giral, the ship returned to Fuerteventura, where it dropped off Durruti and a number of other deportees. 
Upon arriving in the Canarian island in April 1932, he received letters from Morin, as well as other friends and family. In a letter to his family, he told them of the harsh conditions on the transport ship, including an armed confrontation with soldiers incited by a drunken officer, and chastised the government for subjecting him to social isolation. He reassured them that he was in good health before describing the squalid conditions on Fuerteventura, where he lived in a barracks on an allowance of 1.75 pesetas per day. He also mentioned how the islanders warmed up to his presence, having initially been under the assumption that the anarchists engaged in child cannibalism; he even met a woman from the province of León, who gave him books and offered him a place to stay at her home. He did not know how long he would be exiled or even what the reason was. He quipped about returning to León and asking the local deputies why they had supported his deportation and whether the government was &quot;at war with geography&quot;, due to the confused journey the ship had taken. According to an acquaintance of Durruti, he lived an &quot;orderly and contemplative life&quot; in Fuerteventura, where he spent most of his time reading books, frequenting the breakwater and flirting with women. He also often quarrelled with his fellow exiles, who he perceived as idiotic and illiterate.

In mainland Spain, social conflict was progressively escalating even without the presence of the &quot;provocateur&quot; Durruti, with strike actions, occupations and violent attacks becoming commonplace. As the government attempted to crack down on the labour movement&#x27;s activities, in August 1932, right-wing forces led by General José Sanjurjo attempted a coup, but a general strike by the CNT defeated the attempt. The coup plotters were exiled to the African colonies, forcing the government to allow the deported anarchists to return. Durruti was one of the last anarchists that was permitted to leave the Canary Islands, from which he was taken directly to Barcelona by steamship. By the time Durruti arrived back in Barcelona in September 1932, Catalonia had been granted a statue of autonomy and the CNT had definitively split, with its moderate and revolutionary factions falling into open conflict. After arriving, he immediately returned to his family, finding that Morin had struggled to financially support their daughter in his absence.

===Barcelona uprising and prison sentence===
On 15 September, Durruti spoke before a large anarchist rally at the Palau de les Belles Arts. He praised the CNT and FAI for sticking to their revolutionary objectives and warned the government that the anarchists were ungovernable, despite any attempts to control or repress them. He rejected claims from the press that the anarchists were &quot;thieves and criminals&quot;, countering with his belief that business owners were the real thieves, as they lived off the exploitation of labour. Turning to his deportation, he said that the government had failed in its objectives to isolate him, as it had enabled him to spread anarchist propaganda in the Canary Islands. After praising the CNT for preventing Sanjurjo&#x27;s coup, he declared that if the Republican government did not resolve the problems which faced the working class, as he believed they would not, then the working class would do it themselves. The following week, on 23 September, Durruti was arrested and held incommunicado at the on Via Laietana. He was detained for two months on grounds of &quot;governmental order&quot;, which again caused financial difficulties for his family.

After he was released in early December 1932, Durruti quickly returned to his job at the textile factory; Morin herself worried about when he would next be incarcerated. Three days after he was released, Durruti and other members of his affinity group &quot;Nosotros&quot; gathered at Joan Garcia Oliver&#x27;s house to discuss plans for another insurrection. At the meeting, Durruti expressed regret that the CNT had wasted time on internal debates, while the state had strengthened itself with a new, well-equipped police force, the Assault Guard. The group resolved to bring about a social revolution and established a revolutionary committee, on which Durruti served as the official representative of the CNT&#x27;s National Committee. Durruti was dispatched to Cádiz, where he met with the Andalusian Regional Confederation and discussed the planned insurrection. In the Catalan capital, Durruti was assigned to oversee operations in Horta and Gràcia, where he would lead an attack against the Civil Guard barracks at the Travessera de Gràcia and Navas, and against the Carabineros barracks at .

When the insurrection broke out on the evening of 8 January 1933, Durruti led the assault against the Travessera de Gràcia barracks, where he found that the police had already mobilised. As he distributed weapons to the insurgents in Gràcia, the young student asked him for one so he could die for the proletariat; Durruti refused to give him a weapon, saying it was better to live than die, and told him to return to school, as he could be more helpful in the rearguard. By the early hours of 9 January, the insurrection had failed. As public criticism of the insurrection soon followed, in the newspaper &quot;La Voz Confederal&quot;, Durruti attempted to defend his actions as a necessary effort to prevent the government from consolidating power. He rejected accusations that the insurgents had attempted to take power and establish a dictatorship, denied that they were Blanquists and Trotskyists, and reaffirmed his conviction to continue. He also drew attention to the peasantry, who he considered of primary importance for revolution.

For two months after the insurrection, Durruti and Ascaso hid out in Teresa Margalef&#x27;s house in Horta, where Durruti was able to frequently see his partner Morin and his daughter Colette, despite the police searching for him. In late March 1933, the CNT dispatched Durruti and Ascaso to speak at a rally in Seville. Throughout Andalusia and Extremadura, local unions planned rallies when they found out that the two would be coming. After arriving and speaking at the rally, on 8 April, as they were planning a speaking tour of the province, they were arrested on charges of &quot;insults to authority&quot; and &quot;incitement to rebellion&quot;. While in pre-trial detention, they received a visit from their judge, who told them that they would be released on bail. But even after their bail was paid, the provincial governor prevented them from being released. The Madrid newspaper &quot;&quot; claimed that Durruti had been arrested because he was planning another insurrection in Andalusia. Durruti was visited in prison by the writer Pío Baroja, who portrayed him as a romantic hero and described him as an &quot;incarnation of the Spanish guerrilla&quot;. In contrast, Interior Minister Santiago Casares Quiroga denounced Durruti as an &quot;idler and delinquent&quot;.
Durruti and Ascaso were incarcerated in El Puerto de Santa María prison for six months. They were held &quot;incomunicado&quot; and in unsanitary conditions, without ever being formally charged. Prison authorities censored their letters to their families, which they were only allowed to write once per week. Durruti protested, asserting that they still did not know the reason they had been incarcerated. Nevertheless, he was able to smuggle some of his letters out to the &quot;&quot; and &quot;El Luchador&quot; newspapers, in which he publicised the conditions he was being held in. In June, he smuggled out a letter to Morin, in which he reported that the authorities had kept visitors from seeing him.

Following a meeting between the CNT lawyer Eduardo Barriobero and Casares Quiroga, prisoners began to receive word that the governor of Cádiz was considering their release, although Durruti was notified by the local court that his bail had been voided and that he was still charged with insults and incitement. As months went past, no prisoners were released. On 14 July 1933, Durruti sent a letter to his family, telling them of how, after the guards murdered a prisoner, he de-escalated an impending prison riot when he noticed the guards had machine guns pointed at them; he believed they intended to provoke a massacre. The prisoners subsequently announced their intention to carry out a hunger strike, in protest against their continued incarceration. After eight days of hunger strike, on 5 October 1933, Durruti and his fellow inmates were released. Two days later, he arrived at the &quot;CNT&quot; newspaper offices in Madrid, then the following day, he finally returned to Barcelona.

===Zaragoza uprising and general strike===
By the time Durruti arrived back in Barcelona, President Niceto Alcalá-Zamora had dissolved the Azaña government and called the 1933 Spanish general election, through which the right-wing was set to rise to power. Growing unemployment in Spain directly affected Durruti, who was unable to find a job at his former factory. He signed up to the job pool of the CNT Metalworkers&#x27; Union, which managed to find him and two other unemployed workers mechanical jobs at a large workshop. But when he showed up to the workshop, the management told him they only sought two workers; Durruti discovered that he had been blacklisted. In solidarity with him, his two colleagues rejected the jobs and threatened to report the incident to the CNT. Worried that it would cause a strike in the workshop, or even escalated to the entire industry, Durruti told them not to. He believed that strikes out to be declared when workers needed them, rather than in reaction to provocations from employers. He concluded that a strike, at that time, would be detrimental to the workers&#x27; cause and told his two companions to go to work the next day. When he told Ascaso about the incident, his friend approved of his response, agreeing that the employing class was attempting to antagonise the labour movement. The two viewed right-wing newspapers, such as &quot;La Vanguardia&quot;, as part of the problem, due to their publication of sensationalist pieces about robberies by suspected anarchists. Durruti and Ascaso visited the office of &quot;La Vanguardia&quot; and gave the newspaper a statement, on behalf of the FAI, clarifying that the organisation did not approve of individual robberies and requesting the newspaper stop publishing its acronym in stories about them. Although &quot;La Vanguardia&quot; refused to publish the statement, it also stopped using the names of the CNT and FAI in its reports of such &quot;diverse events&quot;.

In response to the apparent inevitability of a right-wing electoral victory, the CNT resolved to carry out another insurrection against the forthcoming government. Durruti was appointed to a National Revolutionary Committee (NRC), within which he was to organise the insurrection. Durruti believed that, although the CNT did not have sufficient time or resources to establish a strong paramilitary force, they ought to carry out an insurrection anyway. He said that a revolutionary defeat would be preferable to inactivity or absence from political life during an election, and that an insurrection could send a warning to the incoming government about their revolutionary potential. On 12 November, Durruti spoke before a crowd of 100,000 people, at a CNT rally at La Monumental. On 16 November, he spoke at a FAI rally at the Palau de les Belles Arts, which attracted more than twice as many attendees than the 45,000-capacity venue could hold. Durruti opened that, although he did not possess the oratory skills of Emilio Castelar or Peter Kropotkin, his life spent among working people had made him know how to act. He believed that the Republic was destabilised enough that the political system would soon collapse and that social revolution would therefore be inevitable. He described how political leaders such as Azaña lacked sufficient popular support to hold rallies, while anarchist rallies attracted numerous and enthusiastic audiences. He called for Catalan anarchists to abstain from voting in the election, as he believed no political party represented Spanish workers, and declared that anarchists would be ready to confront the actions of a reactionary government. He then rejected claims by bourgeois newspapers that the FAI had been involved in robberies, declaring that the FAI only supported the collective expropriation of property: workers seizing their means of production. He also rejected accusations of the FAI forming a dictatorship within the CNT, claiming that only popular assemblies governed the labour movement and accusing moderate syndicalists of abandoning their committment to anarchist communism. Durruti declared that the Spanish anarchist movement was the only anarchist movement in the world that was capable of carrying out revolutionary change, that revolutionaries around the globe expected Spanish workers to lead the start of a world revolution. He thus directed workers to stay in their workplaces, where they could respond to any attempt to form a fascist dictatorship by occupying factories and seizing the means of production. Durruti invoked a sense of collective responsibility, calling for workers to unite against fascism and struggle for an anarchist revolution.

Following the right-wing victory in the election, on 23 November 1933, Durruti moved to Zaragoza and began planning the insurrection. When local Aragonese militants expressed doubt about their region leading the insurrection, he pointed out that political repression had left Andalusia and Catalonia unable to initiate any insurrection, while the workers&#x27; movement in Aragon was still strong; he ultimately convinced them to be the ones to lead it. The insurrection broke out on 8 December 1933. A general strike broke out in Zaragoza, where revolutionaries took over parts of the city for a number of days. After a week, the insurrection was suppressed, the government declared a state of emergency in Zaragoza and Durruti was arrested. He was tortured by police and narrowly saved from being executed under the &quot;ley de fugas&quot;. In prison, he attempted to secure the release of as many detainees as possible. He suggested that they make the state&#x27;s dossier about the insurrection disappear, which would force police to get new statements from prisoners and thus allow for the modification of numerous forced confessions. A group of young anarchists then broke into the Zaragoza Commerce Court and stole the dossier from the judges at gunpoint. With the dossier secured, Durruti and the other members of the NRC confessed to sole responsibility for the insurrection, while many prisoners that had given forced confessions were released. In February 1934, the government transferred Durruti to a prison in the province of Burgos. He was kept in solitary confinement and under constant surveillance, preventing him from communicating with other prisoners. From his cell, he was nevertheless able to publicise his thoughts on a proposed united front between the CNT and UGT. He called for the alliance to exclude political parties and constitute itself from the bottom-up, based on a federation of workers&#x27; councils, which could establish workers&#x27; control over the Spanish economy.

In April 1934, the government proclaimed a general amnesty, both for far-right figures of the 1932 coup attempt and anarchists involved in the December 1933 insurrection. Durruti was released and attempted to return to Barcelona, but he did not have money for the trip. The Asturian CNT leader Ramón Álvarez, who was also imprisoned for the insurrection, gave him what little money he had. When Durruti stopped in Zaragoza, he found the city in the middle of a general strike. The Catalan CNT had offered to provide child care for the duration of the strike, so Durruti continued on to Barcelona to prepare for the reception of the children. By the time he returned, Durruti&#x27;s former ally, the Catalan president Francesc Macià, had overseen a wide-scale crackdown against the anarchist movement. His daughter Colette had also learned to walk and speak, without him being their to see it. The night he arrived, he was informed that his friend Bruno Alpini had been executed by police under the &quot;ley de fugas&quot;. The killing enraged Durruti, who privately wished death on the Catalan police chief Miquel Badia.

Durruti quickly sought to discuss the general strike in Zaragoza with the Catalan Regional Committee of the CNT, which had come under the leadership of Francisco Ascaso. Ascaso believed that the Catalan authorities intended to stop the Barcelona CNT from taking in the Aragonese children, but Durruti rejected the possibility, thinking it would cause a public outcry. Ascaso also helped him find work, putting Durruti in contact with the Food Workers&#x27; Union, which secured him a seasonal job at a beer factory. On 6 May, when people began to assemble on Carrer del Consell de Cent to collect the Aragonese children, they were attacked by the Urban Guard and Assault Guard. As he watched the violence unfold, Durruti regretted that he had dismissed Ascaso&#x27;s worries about Catalan government repression. When they found out that the convoy of buses carrying the children had been diverted to Terrassa, Durruti and Ascaso took a taxi to the city. There they found the local anarchist movement had mobilised and was guarding the buses. They directed them on to Barcelona and finally united the children with their host families.

===1934 Revolution===

In May 1934, Durruti&#x27;s job search was still being hindered by him being blacklisted. With him out of a job, his partner became the family&#x27;s breadwinner and Durruti himself stayed at home to care for their daughter. When his anarchist comrades joked about him doing &quot;women&#x27;s work&quot;, he criticised them for misogyny. During this period of his life, Durruti sank into a depression and grew increasingly frustrated with the CNT, convinced its members were not sufficiently educating themselves and worried that its activities were turning it towards reformism. He believed that a political crisis was imminent in Spain, which could create the conditions for a revolutionary situation, and called for actions to strengthen the working class and weaken the capitalists. In late May, the CNT food workers&#x27; union found Durruti temporary employment at the S.A. Damm beer factory, but when he arrived, the company said they would not hire him. Rather than going on strike, Durruti suggested that the CNT organise a boycott against the company, which would stifle the company&#x27;s profits without affecting production. The boycott resulted in a victory for the CNT, which secured a stable contract for its workers.

In June, Durruti was nominated by the Catalan regional committee to attend a national meeting of the CNT, where the issue of an alliance with the UGT was to be discussed. Durruti sought to reiterate his position on the creation of a revolutionary workers&#x27; alliance, based on workers&#x27; councils, from the bottom-up. At the meeting, Durruti argued against the Asturian committee of the CNT, which had already signed a pact with the UGT. The meeting ultimately resolved to schedule a national conference to make a binding decision on the proposed alliance, but before it could be held, the Revolution of 1934 broke out. On 4 October, Durruti was arrested in his home by the Catalan police, who held him incommunicado in their prefecture on Via Laietana. While he was in his cell, on 6 October, the regional government proclaimed a Catalan State, although this was quickly suppressed by the Spanish Army. Martial law was imposed in Catalonia and the army took over the police prefecture. There they found Durruti, who they sentenced to 6 months in prison.

From his cell in La Model, Durruti kept up with the news of the revolution and its suppression. In discussions with other inmates, he argued that anarchists ought to be patient and rebuild their organisational strength, which he considered key to a revolutionary victory against the right-wing. He posited that liberal democracy had already been defeated by fascism in the 1933 election, and that now the choice facing the Spanish people was between fascism and social revolution. While he remained sceptical of the PSOE, he believed that a revolutionary alliance with the UGT would be necessary to resist a coming &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;. As increasing numbers of anarchists were imprisoned for armed robbery, Durruti also aligned himself against the practice, declaring that &quot;it isn&#x27;t time for individual expropriations, but to prepare the collective one&quot;. When Durruti was released from prison in April 1935, he discovered that he was being blamed for the rise in armed robberies by the journalist . Enraged, he went looking for Planes and forced his way into the offices of &quot;&quot;, but did not find him. Jacinto Toryho recalled that Durruti was particularly upset because he had just received an eviction notice, as he had not been able to pay rent while he was in prison.

At a meeting of Barcelona&#x27;s anarchist groups in May 1935, Durruti spoke on behalf of &quot;Nosotros&quot;. He denounced the recent rise in armed robberies, which he believed served only to discredit the CNT, and proposed that the FAI distance itself from individuals involved in armed robberies. A young Argentine anarchist objected, pointing out that Durruti was condemning a practice he once participated in. He admitted to this, but insisted that times had changed. He held that, as the CNT counted more than 1 million members, individual actions were no longer acceptable; conditions demanded only collective action. When discussing the political climate, he affirmed his belief that a civil war was imminent, and that anarchists ought to prepare for it by organising workers&#x27; militias under strict military discipline. He also discussed with Ascaso the new communist strategy of the popular front; the two believed that such an electoral alliance, as it was being proposed in Spain by Largo Caballero, would be used to isolate the CNT.

===Preparations for Civil War===
Durruti was arrested and imprisoned again in June 1935. His time in prison caused difficulties for the CNT-FAI, which was deprived of one of its most dedicated activists. In August 1935, he was transferred to in Valencia. There he was surrounded by other anarchist inmates, who often debated the internal divisions in the CNT and FAI, particularly the recent establishment of the Syndicalist Party and the Opposition Unions by the &quot;treintistas&quot;. Durruti was disinterested in these debates, who was focused on other issues. On 11 September 1935, he wrote to José Mira, affirming his position that the CNT ought to organise towards a social revolution, rather than focusing on short-term gains and individual acts of sabotage. He commented that these acts had caused many prisoners in Valencia to lose faith in the CNT and place their hopes in an electoral victory for the left-wing. Durruti believed that such short-term struggles for better conditions were necessary, but that achieving libertarian communism ought to remain the main priority of the CNT.

Upon his release from prison in November 1935, Durruti found himself a focus of criticism by some sections of the CNT, including the Transport Workers&#x27; Union, which accused him of becoming a moderate. According to Josep Peirats, he convinced them of his arguments by beating his fists on the table as he spoke, which reified his reputation as a fighter. Some days later, he attended a rally in support of the Andalusian anarchist , who was facing a death sentence for organising a prison break. When police attempted to arrest Ascaso for denouncing the government, Durruti helped him escape. The two were later charged for insulting the government and driven underground. Durruti subsequently travelled back to his home city of León and spoke at a local anarchist rally, where he warned the attendees to prepare for an imminent civil war. He was then arrested by the Civil Guard and transferred to Barcelona, where he was released from detention on 10 January 1936. By this time, individual attacks against business owners and the police had largely ceased, and anarchists were now discussing whether to vote in the upcoming 1936 Spanish general election. Durruti believed that a right-wing victory would result in a dictatorship, while a left-wing victory would lead to a reactionary &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;. In either case, Durruti believed that workers needed to prepare for open conflict with the right-wing. But unlike in 1933, in this election, Durruti refused to advise anarchists to abstain from voting, as he hoped anarchists as a voting bloc would be able to pressure the government to release their political prisoners. After the Popular Front won the election, Manuel Azaña&#x27;s new left-wing government extended amnesty to right-wing military leaders, while limiting it for imprisoned members of the CNT. On 6 March, Durruti denounced the government&#x27;s actions at a CNT meeting. He declared that the new government had been elected by workers and could just as easily be removed by those same workers.

By the time of the 4th National Congress of the CNT, held in Zaragoza on 1 May 1936, Durruti was looked up to as an informal leader within the organisation. Due to his anti-authoritarianism, he often expressed discomfort with this leadership position, which only increased his esteem among others. Differences of opinion with another leading anarchist, Joan Garcia Oliver, caused clashes between the two. Garcia Oliver considered the CNT-FAI to be the revolutionary vanguard, while Durruti wanted a wholely anarchist revolution, driven forward by all popular forces, not just the CNT-FAI. Durruti thought Garcia Oliver&#x27;s conception of revolution resembled Bolshevism and he worried that it would create a dictatorship by the CNT-FAI. At a meeting of the Textile Workers&#x27; Union, Durruti resisted Garcia Oliver&#x27;s proposals to create a paramilitary, which he believed would impose itself as a new authority and crush the revolutionary aspirations of the masses. Despite Durruti&#x27;s protests, the union supported Garcia Oliver&#x27;s motion and called for the creation of a workers&#x27; army, based on local groups.

By July 1936, open conflict was brewing between the Spanish working-class and bourgeoisie, as both were radicalised against each other. Strike actions and factory occupations spread throughout France and Spain, leading Durruti to conclude that a Europe-wide revolution was in the near future. That month, Durruti had an operation on his hernia. He checked out of the hospital on 14 July, before he had fully recovered, and met up with other members of &quot;Nosotros&quot;, who had already put contingency plans into place for the predicted outbreak of a military coup. The following day, he met with Enric Pérez Farràs, the commander of the &quot;Mossos d&#x27;Esquadra&quot;. He wanted to know what the anarchists were planning and admitted that the Catalan government would collapse, as it did in October 1934, without their help. When the police chief refused to give the anarchists weapons, Durruti concluded that the Catalan government was planning to use them as &quot;cannon fodder&quot;. On 17 July, news began to circulate that the Spanish Army had rebelled in Morocco. CNT unions immediately responded by seizing weapons from the port of Barcelona, causing a standoff with the Assault Guards. Durruti swiftly intervened, telling the police commander Vicente Guarner to disobey his orders and allow the workers to take the weaponry. In order to save face, Guarner only confiscated rifles that were not in working order. 

At 23:30 on 18 July, Durruti, Ascaso and Garcia Oliver met with the Catalan Interior Minister , who they attempted to convince to disarm the police and hand over their weapons to the workers. When Espanya objected to the CNT requisitioning cars and storming gunsmiths, Durruti reprimanded him, declaring that they represented &quot;a working class that isn’t going to go to battle defenselessly&quot;. They left the meeting and went to speak with the dockworkers gathered outside. Durruti told them to stay put, continue to demand weapons and surveil the barracks in the city centre. In the early hours of 19 July, Durruti, Ascaso and Garcia Oliver went all over the city, coordinating with the different unions and defense committees. They then returned to Gregorio Jover&#x27;s apartment on Carrer de Pujades, where the &quot;Nosotros&quot; group had gathered. Everyone else was exhausted, but Durruti remained in high spirits, joking that there would not be any battle that day. At 04:00, they received news that the Nationalists had risen up in Barcelona.

==Military command in the Civil War==
===Battle of Barcelona===
By 09:00 on 19 July, fighting had broken out throughout Barcelona. Durruti met with Ascaso and Garcia Oliver at the Teatre Principal, where they discussed how to gain control of the port and prevent reinforcements from being brought in by ship. When troops began shooting at them from a nearby hotel, Durruti led an attack against the hotel and cleared out the shooters. He was then directed to remain at the Teatre, where he would coordinate their forces for another assault, while Garcia Oliver and Ascaso led their own detachments elsewhere. At 10:00, Durruti arrived at the , where workers&#x27; militias and Assault Guards overpowered the Spanish Army, in the first victory of the day. By 14:00, Durruti was leading an assault against the telephone exchange. Many anarchists died during the attack, but the forces of the CNT were victorious and the exchange was subsequently brought under workers&#x27; control. When General Manuel Goded surrendered later that day, Durruti&#x27;s name was chanted by workers&#x27; militias throughout the city.

By the following day, a social revolution had swept Catalonia, confirming Durruti&#x27;s prediction that workers would respond to a right-wing coup with revolution. Durruti, Ascaso and Garcia Oliver sought to finish off the right-wing mutiny with an attack against the Drassanes barracks. Ascaso was killed during the assault. While Durruti fought back tears for his best friend, the rebel soldiers surrendered and the anarchist militias celebrated their victory. He warned one worker that they had not yet won, that the revolution would still be in progress until they defeated every remaining rebel soldier throughout Spain.

They made their way to the on Via Laietana, where the CNT Regional Secretary Mariano R. Vázquez informed Durruti and Garcia Oliver that President Lluis Companys had requested a meeting with them. Durruti and Garcia Oliver went to the Palace of the Generalitat and met with the Catalan President. Through meeting with Companys and the representatives of other anti-fascist parties, the anarchists moved to establish the Central Committee of Antifascist Militias of Catalonia (CCMA), which would oversee the organisation of militias to fight against the Nationalist forces. At the plenary meeting of the CNT which established the CCMA, Durruti and Garcia Oliver attempted to push for the anarchists to seize power, but their motion was defeated by advocates of collaboration with other anti-fascist political groupings. They accepted the organisation&#x27;s decision, but continued to push for the broadening of the revolution.

Durruti attended the inaugural meeting of the CCMA as one of the representatives for the CNT. At the meeting, Durruti confronted the Catalan nationalist Jaume Miravitlles over an article he had written comparing the FAI to fascists. The meeting appointed Durruti as an assistant to Garcia Oliver, who himself was appointed to oversee the Department of War. When the meeting concluded, Durruti and Garcia Oliver told the Stalinist politician Joan Comorera that they remembered how the Bolsheviks had repressed anarchism in Russia and that they would not allow the Spanish Communists to treat them the same way. Over the subsequent days, Durruti quickly came to regard the CCMA as a bureaucratic organisation, which he did not want to continue participating in. Seeking to continue the fight against the Nationalists, he put together the first militia column: the self-titled Durruti Column.

===Departure to Aragon===
Following Durruti&#x27;s anti-authoritarian philosophy, the Durruti Column was established without a chain of command or hierarchy, with all of its units electing representatives to coordinate military actions. Durruti clashed with his military adviser, Enric Pérez Farràs, over this form of military organisation, which Pérez Farràs believed would not function in battle. He later ended up replacing Pérez Farràs with José Manzana, a non-commissioned officer who better understood Durruti&#x27;s anti-authoritarian philosophy. Although Durruti believed in the necessity of military discipline and co-ordinated operational planning, he insisted that it had to be established on new foundations, rather than the ideas of traditional militarism. Durruti held that solidarity, rather than obedience to authority, would be sufficient to instil discipline and individual responsibility among the column&#x27;s fighters. As his aim was victory for the social revolution, he concluded that their methods to achieve it required radical changes from existing norms. In the organisation of the column, Durruti planned to put anarchist theory into practice. At 08:00 on 24 July 1936, Durruti spoke over the radio to Barcelona&#x27;s workers, asking them to supply his column with food. He hoped that the response to his call would demonstrate the city&#x27;s dedication to the war effort and exemplify the workers&#x27; commitment to collective responsibility.

The Canadian journalist Pierre van Paassen reported meeting with Durruti that morning. According to van Paassen, Durruti spoke of the Nationalist victories in Aragon, Navarre and Andalusia, and predicted that the civil war would continue on for at least a month, until the Nationalists were defeated in all these areas. He then said that the workers were determined to destroy fascism, in spite of the Spanish government, which had consistently failed to suppress fascist elements in the Spanish Army, and the bourgeoisie, which opposed the social revolution. He disregarded the possibility of Soviet intervention, holding Joseph Stalin responsible for the rise of Nazism in Germany and the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, and claimed the Spanish revolutionaries were setting an example for anti-fascists in Germany and Italy. He also disregarded the possibility of French or British intervention on the side of the Republic, expecting that the libertarians would have to fight the forces of Spanish, German and Italian fascism by themselves. Van Paassen interjected, saying that the country would be ruined even if they were victorious. He reported that Durruti responded:

At 10:00, large crowds gathered on the Passeig de Gràcia to bid farewell to the Durruti Column. While cheers broke out around him, Durruti remained mostly silent. At the Bakunin Barracks, he had warned the members of his column that the battle they were about to experience would be very different than the ones they had fought before, as it would likely involve aerial and artillery bombardments and close-quarters combat. He knew that the militiamen trusted him and would follow his lead, so he hoped to conduct himself well and preserve as many of their lives as possible.

===On the Aragon front===
As the Column passed through the villages of Catalonia, a number of people expressed surprise that Durruti was the leader, as he was not wearing stripes to denote his military rank. At every village they passed, Durruti stopped to speak to the residents, who he directed to organise themselves into collectives. After capturing Casp and Burcharaloz, the latter of which the Column established as its headquarters, they set off towards Zaragoza. On 28 July, the Column came under heavy aerial bombardment, killing and wounding a number of militiamen. Aiming to avoid another ambush, Durruti led the Column back to Burcharaloz, where he planned to organise reconnaisance on the enemy positions. There he was reunited with his partner Émilienne Morin, with whom he organised the administrative apparatus of the Column. He also got into an argument with Pérez Farràs, who tried to use the ambush as justification for the restructuring of the Column. Durruti argued that those who had run during the bombardment would go on to fight bravely, if only they were treated as &quot;surprised workers&quot; rather than as deserters.

From the Burcharaloz town hall, Durruti gave a rousing speech to the Column. He chided them for running from the airplanes, pointing out that they had promised to take Zaragoza or die trying. He reminded them of the peasants who were building libertarian communism in their rear, and that their efforts would be for naught if the Nationalists were victorious. While recognising the dangers they faced, he called on them to take advantage of their victory in Barcelona to strike quickly against their enemies. He warned them against a repeat of what had happened that day, and said he did not want any cowards in his column&#x27;s ranks. He welcomed anyone that did not want to continue fighting to give up their rifle to someone more willing, while encouraging those that remained to continue on to Zaragoza and Iruña. He also requested that nobody speak of what happened that day, as he believed it would reflect badly on them. None of the militiamen gave up their rifle, and those who had fled earlier broke down in tears. One eyewitness described it as a transformative experience for the militiamen, who would go on to become hardened fighters.

The Durruti Column then advanced along the Ebro river towards Zaragoza, but they were halted by Nationalist resistance some 20 kilometers outside the city, forcing them to dig in. After consulting with Colonel , Durruti agreed to keep his Column in place until reinforcements arrived. There was little movement on the front lines in early August, which made Durruti impatient. He constantly visited advanced positions, kept track of enemy movements and stayed up to date with reports from his &quot;guerrilla&quot; detachments, which gave him useful information to reinforce their line of defense. He also devoted much of his attention to the agricultural collectives, building relations with local peasants and regularly visiting them to observe their progress. As Stalinists began to carry out attacks against the collectives, Durruti became worried that the collectives would come under threat if they did not unite together. He urged the local peasantry to establish a federation of agricultural collectives, which he said would provide them with more organisational strength and help coordinate the new libertarian socialist economy. Durruti successfully encouraged the militiamen to participate in the collectives, including in the wheat harvest, which helped to build relations between them.

As the fighting on the front lines continued, Durruti became worried that if the war kept going for much longer, it would have a damaging effect on the psyche of the revolutionaries. Thoughts to this effect prevented him from sleeping, so he would often spend his nights keeping watch at sentry positions. He also began hearing complaints from villagers about the bad behaviour of some militiamen, requiring him to reprimand them. On one occasion, he discovered five militiamen had left their sentry posts to go drink wine at a village. He expelled them from the Column and the CNT, then when they did not respond to his reprimands as he had expected, he stripped them of their clothes and sent them back to Barcelona in only their underwear. His temper grew shorter as time went on. Members of the collectives had been complaining to him about a lack of technical personnel and that some of their workers had left the collectives to join the Column. On the former issue, he demanded that Ricardo Sanz send them agronomists from Barcelona; of the latter, he dismissed them from the Column so that they could return to work on the collectives, telling them it was more important to the revolution.

===Return to Barcelona===
Even as the Durruti Column began to run low on ammunition, the front lines remained stagnant, with only low level skirmishes and unsuccessful offensives taking place. Seeking to break the stalemate, Durruti returned to Barcelona and speak with the CCMA. Along the way, he witnessed armed workers guarding every village, without any trace of police presence. At one checkpoint in Cervià de les Garrigues, he posed as a rank-and-file militiaman transferring to the rearguard and requested fuel for his vehicle. He was then directed to speak to the local revolutionary committee. In the town square, he spoke to some women leaving the church and asked them if services were still being held. They told him that the priest had quit to become a farmworker and that a consumer cooperative now occupied the building, which had been stripped of its religious iconography. In the town hall he found a member of the committee, a former schoolteacher, who told him the rest of the committee was in the fields helping with the harvest. He told Durruti that the committee members had been elected by a popular assembly, which considered each candidate&#x27;s ability and conduct prior to the revolution, in a process conducted collectively without any involvement from political parties. When Durruti acquired about dispossessed former landowners, the committee member mentioned that some had joined collectives, while others had opted for individual ownership and cultivation of their own land. Satisfied with the conversation, Durruti returned to the checkpoint and said he had received the fuel for his car, before continuing on his way.

When Durruti arrived back in Barcelona, he found it was still under workers&#x27; control, with electricity, food, fuel, hospitals and public transit, as well as cinemas and theatres, and the textile and metalworking factories, all being managed collectively by the workers themselves. He also found that traditional social relations, including gender separation and the nuclear family, had all but evaporated. He visited a number of collectives, before moving on to the headquarters of the CNT-FAI. He found the building full of busy people, coming and going between its various offices. When he asked Mariano Vázquez whether the CNT was becoming a bureaucracy, the Catalan Regional Secretary explained to Durruti that they were simply implementing the decisions of the grassroots and that workers&#x27; self-management still formed the formation for all economic organisation. Durruti left the encounter optimistic that the anarchists were remaining true to their principles. He then went to the CCMA headquarters on the Pla de Palau and met with Garcia Oliver, who he found to be stressed and sleep deprived. Together they discussed the situation in Aragon, including the slated offensive to take Zaragoza, the supply shortages and the restructuring of their war committee. But then Garcia Oliver informed Durruti that the Zaragoza offensive would have to be postponed in favour of the planned Mallorca landings, which they hoped would provoke a confrontation between the British and Italians. Durruti believed that France and the United Kingdom would continue to uphold appeasement rather than confront the Italians. He argued that delaying the Zaragoza offensive further would allow the Nationalists to fortify their positions and thus prevent the militias from taking the city and linking up with Republican forces in the north, which he believed to be a necessary prerequisite to an offensive against the Nationalists in Andalusia.

Garcia Oliver responded that the decision had already been made, due to their choice to collaborate with the Republican political parties, and that he would have to remain in his position in the CCMA to give legal protection to the revolution. Durruti argued that the legalisation of their revolutionary activities would only strengthen the Catalan government and weaken the CCMA, which he believed would lead them towards a form of state socialism. Worrying that this would result in an armed conflict between the workers and the Catalan government, Durruti called a regional meeting of the CNT. At the meeting, Durruti and Garcia Oliver argued for the CNT to end its collaboration with the political parties, but the collaborationist position held firm, as CNT members worried that such a break would accelerate civil conflict within the anti-fascist ranks. Durruti left Barcelona and returned to Aragon, seeking to hold his position, strengthen the confederal militias and continue advancing the revolution.

== Death ==
In November, having been persuaded to leave Aragón by the anarchist leader Federica Montseny on behalf of the government, Durruti led his militia to Madrid to aid in the defence of the city. On 19 November, he was shot while leading a counterattack in the Casa de Campo area (see also Battle of Madrid).

Antony Beevor in &quot;The Spanish Civil War&quot; (1982) maintains that Durruti was killed when a companion&#x27;s machine pistol went off by mistake. He assessed that, at the time, the anarchists lied and claimed he had been hit by an enemy sniper&#x27;s bullet &quot;for reasons of morale and propaganda&quot;. 
The first rumor of his death was that he was shot by his comrades because he enforced discipline.

Durruti died on 20 November 1936, at the age of 40, in a makeshift operating theatre set up in what was formerly the Ritz Hotel. The bullet was lodged in the heart; the diagnosis recorded was &quot;death caused by pleural haemorrhage&quot;. In his later book &quot;Durruti in the Spanish Revolution&quot;, it was alleged that Durruti was killed by a 9mm bullet to the thorax. The autopsy reported:&quot;Durruti had a very developed chest. Given the topography of the thorax, I realized that the diagnosis that surgery was impossible had been mistaken. An operation could have produced positive results, although doubtlessly the patient would not have survived.&quot; Following a large funeral procession, he was buried in Barcelona&#x27;s Montjuïc Cemetery.

A few hours after Durruti&#x27;s death, in reprisal, José Luzón Morales ordered the execution of 52 policemen who had been held captive in a monastery in Calle de Santa Engracia.

The famous quote, &quot;We renounce everything except victory&quot;, is associated with Durruti but this phrase was created by the CNT and never spoken by Durruti himself.

== Personal life ==
On 14 July 1927, Durruti met French anarcho-syndicalist, writer and shorthand typist Émilienne Morin at the &quot;Librairie internationale anarchiste (&quot;International Anarchist Library) in Paris. They became life partners until his death. When Durruti was expelled from France in July 1927, Morin accompanied him into Belgium, and worked to feed them both when he was unemployed. The couple travelled to Spain in 1931 and on 4 December 1931, their daughter Colette Durruti was born in Barcelona. Morin brought Collette up virtually single-handedly, with the help of an anarchist friend, Teresa Margaleff due to Durruti&#x27;s absences. In 1936 Morin ran the press office for the Durruti Column and wrote many articles for French anarchist publications on the situation in Spain. She returned to France after Durruti&#x27;s death, remaining heavily involved in anarchist politics and writing, and worked to raise funds for Spanish refugees in France.

== Legacy ==

At first, Durruti&#x27;s death was not made public, for morale reasons. Durruti&#x27;s body was transported across the country to Barcelona for his funeral. Over a half million people filled the streets to accompany the cortege during its route to the Montjuïc Cemetery. It was the last large-scale public demonstration of anarchist strength of numbers during the Spanish Civil War. The event was recounted in &quot;Red Spanish Notebook: the first six months of revolution and the civil war,&quot; by Trotskyist activist Mary Stanley Low.

Hugh Thomas has remarked that, &quot;the death of Durruti marked the end of the classic age of Spanish anarchism. An anarchist poet proclaimed that Durruti’s nobility while living would cause ‘a legion of Durrutis’ to spring up behind him&quot;.

In 1937, as a response to the further participation of the CNT-FAI in the Republican government, and after the May Days in 1937 in Barcelona, the Friends of Durruti Group was founded, to try and save the anarchist principles of the revolution. The name of Durruti clearly taken because of the revolutionary commitment and the symbol that he still was for that in the anarchist camp. The &quot;Friends of Durruti group&quot; had a newspaper called &quot;El Amigo del Pueblo&quot; (The Friend of the People) and tried to make revolutionary propaganda among the rank and file of the CNT. The group was however fiercely repressed by the reformist wing of the CNT, in collaboration with the Republican government.

A Situationist group of Strasbourg University students spent their student union&#x27;s budget on a giant flyposted comic strip in 1966. One of its panels, featuring two cowboys discussing philosophical reification, was called &quot;The Return of the Durutti Column&quot; , in reference to Durruti&#x27;s military unit. This, in turn, influenced Tony Wilson&#x27;s naming of his English post-punk band, The Durutti Column.

Willem van Spronsen, an American anarchist who was killed in 2019 while trying to firebomb a fleet of buses operated by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) for mass deportation, used Durruti&#x27;s surname as a part of his alias.&gt;

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Anarchism in Spain
* Anarchist Catalonia

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208815" start="0" end="33" title="Buenaventura Durruti" label="José Buenaventura Durruti Dumange"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="74" end="81" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="82" end="91" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="92" end="105" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q550420" start="124" end="127" title="Confederación Nacional del Trabajo" label="CNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q952769" start="136" end="139" title="Federación Anarquista Ibérica" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="177" end="194" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982745" start="255" end="281" title="Spanish Revolution of 1936" label="Spanish Revolution of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q486236" start="324" end="342" title="Anarchism in Spain" label="anarchist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699" start="484" end="488" title="León, Spain" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q131322389" start="535" end="551" title="Santiago Durruti" label="Santiago Durruti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="622" end="660" title="Spanish Empire#End of the global empire (1808–1899)" label="Spanish colonial empire was collapsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17630734" start="704" end="719" title="Jerez uprising" label="peasant revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="723" end="732" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q628191" start="747" end="764" title="industrial action" label="industrial action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="769" end="777" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="783" end="797" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="802" end="811" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="832" end="849" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="1477" end="1496" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q768224" start="1674" end="1698" title="University of Valladolid" label="University of Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q327029" start="1758" end="1766" title="mechanic" label="mechanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1889" end="1905" title="Melchor Martínez" label="Melchor Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="1951" end="1988" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="2069" end="2078" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995444" start="2418" end="2436" title="mineral processing" label="mineral processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="2468" end="2473" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q833196" start="2550" end="2579" title="Unión General de Trabajadores" label="Unión General de Trabajadores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2735" end="2749" title="Iglesias Munís" label="Iglesias Munís"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="2862" end="2880" title="electoral politics" label="electoral politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120936" start="2894" end="2917" title="revolutionary socialism" label="revolutionary socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3115" end="3126" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402030" start="3128" end="3146" title="Spain during World War I" label="Spanish neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q80143" start="3276" end="3285" title="Matallana de Torío" label="Matallana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273650" start="3439" end="3457" title="workplace bullying" label="workplace bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="3549" end="3566" title="solidarity action" label="solidarity action"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="4036" end="4047" title="Civil Guard (Spain)" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990395" start="4104" end="4128" title="Compañía de los Caminos de Hierro del Norte de España" label="Northern Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q429324" start="4150" end="4175" title="1917 Spanish general strike" label="nationwide general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213592" start="4213" end="4218" title="Dismissal (employment)" label="fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379902" start="4466" end="4486" title="Draft evasion" label="conscription evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273" start="4504" end="4509" title="Xixón" label="Xixón"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="4571" end="4577" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q104285" start="4655" end="4664" title="Occitania" label="Occitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q550420" start="4770" end="4804" title="Confederación Nacional del Trabajo" label="Confederación Nacional del Trabajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188993" start="4815" end="4834" title="anarcho-syndicalism" label="anarcho-syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="4904" end="4913" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018102" start="5214" end="5225" title="La Felguera" label="La Felguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q60979" start="5245" end="5253" title="La Robla" label="La Robla"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="5360" end="5382" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="5488" end="5501" title="Court Martial" label="Court Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="5505" end="5513" title="Donostia" label="Donostia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5557" end="5561" title="Rosa Durruti" label="Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5646" end="5651" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571514" start="5991" end="6007" title="Manuel Buenacasa" label="Manuel Buenacasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q681893" start="6053" end="6063" title="Errenteria" label="Errenteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409969" start="6767" end="6782" title="Los Justicieros" label="Los Justicieros"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="6818" end="6833" title="state terrorism" label="state terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363" start="6917" end="6929" title="Alfonso XIII" label="Alfonso XIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7167" end="7186" title="Marcelino del Campo" label="Marcelino del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20002757" start="7191" end="7210" title="Gregorio Suberviola" label="Gregorio Suberviola"/>
<link wikidata="Q56827005" start="7438" end="7464" title="self-managed social center" label="self-managed social centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="7527" end="7533" title="Aragón" label="Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7724" end="7738" title="Inocencio Pina" label="Inocencio Pina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777040" start="8327" end="8337" title="Andalusians" label="Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q365162" start="8474" end="8486" title="Eduardo Dato" label="Eduardo Dato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="8509" end="8518" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q19998294" start="8527" end="8541" title="Domingo Ascaso" label="Domingo Ascaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="8617" end="8624" title="Catalans" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322306" start="8713" end="8763" title="Pistolerismo" label="the armed conflict with the &amp;quot;pistoleros&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="8793" end="8799" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098024" start="8854" end="8876" title="Rafael Torres Escartín" label="Rafael Torres Escartín"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156771" start="8886" end="8895" title="paymaster" label="paymaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q496567" start="8899" end="8904" title="Eibar" label="Eibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304418" start="9009" end="9018" title="locksmith" label="locksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q27645" start="9246" end="9261" title="Mikhail Bakunin" label="Mikhail Bakunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752" start="9266" end="9281" title="Peter Kropotkin" label="Peter Kropotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875977" start="9722" end="9744" title="vanguardism" label="revolutionary vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q727733" start="9875" end="9891" title="Francisco Ascaso" label="Francisco Ascaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418259" start="10090" end="10108" title="company union" label="yellow syndicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870572" start="10285" end="10299" title="Los Solidarios" label="Los Solidarios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10565" end="10576" title="Eusebi Brau" label="Eusebi Brau"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="10596" end="10603" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915830" start="10711" end="10725" title="Salvador Seguí" label="Salvador Seguí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672648" start="10793" end="10808" title="social conflict" label="social conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="10956" end="10971" title="armed robberies" label="armed robberies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="10989" end="11007" title="insurgency" label="insurgent campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="11679" end="11687" title="deafness" label="deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209710" start="11784" end="11797" title="Policía Municipal de Madrid" label="Madrid police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424746" start="11801" end="11816" title="Calle de Alcalá" label="Calle de Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="11866" end="11879" title="armed robbery" label="armed robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475448" start="11891" end="11899" title="regicide" label="regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="11904" end="11913" title="desertion" label="desertion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12085" end="12097" title="Joan Rusiñol Soulere" label="Joan Rusiñol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12296" end="12322" title="Fernando González Regueral" label="Fernando González Regueral"/>
<link wikidata="Q717800" start="12628" end="12642" title="Juan Soldevila y Romero" label="Juan Soldevila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="13064" end="13077" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436010" start="13079" end="13087" title="moderate politics" label="moderate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="13092" end="13101" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q766437" start="13199" end="13206" title="Rif War" label="Rif War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="13284" end="13297" title="military coup" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192894" start="13328" end="13350" title="Miguel Primo de Rivera" label="Miguel Primo de Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q789966" start="13501" end="13514" title="Bank of Spain" label="Bank of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q324708" start="14592" end="14599" title="cassock" label="cassock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744988" start="14967" end="14998" title="dictatorship of Primo de Rivera" label="dictatorship of Primo de Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15373" end="15402" title="International Anarchist Press" label="International Anarchist Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375013" start="15420" end="15435" title="Sébastien Faure" label="Sébastien Faure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053903" start="15449" end="15471" title="Anarchist Encyclopedia" label="Anarchist Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="15736" end="15743" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419626" start="15773" end="15778" title="Tube (fluid conveyance)" label="tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815949" start="15840" end="15850" title="Belleville, Paris" label="Bellveille"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="16075" end="16080" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="16097" end="16113" title="political theory" label="political theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="16162" end="16175" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146970" start="16799" end="16822" title="revolutionary situation" label="revolutionary situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637319" start="17281" end="17300" title="France–Spain border" label="France–Spain border"/>
<link wikidata="Q191754" start="17402" end="17409" title="Hendaye" label="Hendaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q818675" start="17414" end="17418" title="Bera, Navarre" label="Bera"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="17521" end="17529" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="17804" end="17809" title="Iruña" label="Iruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q9069043" start="18150" end="18169" title="Ricardo Sanz García" label="Ricardo Sanz García"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="18376" end="18389" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="18532" end="18540" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="18599" end="18605" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905932" start="18607" end="18611" title="Republic of Cuba (1902–1959)" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q486222" start="18662" end="18677" title="Anarchism in Cuba" label="Cuban anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751622" start="18742" end="18765" title="anarchism and education" label="educational initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="18848" end="18858" title="dockworker" label="dockworker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814648" start="18979" end="18993" title="plain language" label="plain language"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="19061" end="19072" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205789" start="19085" end="19105" title="Flat organization" label="horizontal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518641" start="19114" end="19134" title="union representative" label="union representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471594" start="19154" end="19171" title="collective action" label="collective action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392373" start="19372" end="19392" title="Santa Clara Province" label="Santa Clara Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="19427" end="19436" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118398" start="19469" end="19483" title="sitdown strike" label="sitdown strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394544" start="19625" end="19637" title="Los Errantes" label="Los Errantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420024" start="19724" end="19738" title="fishing vessel" label="fishing vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="19754" end="19760" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="19784" end="19791" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506364" start="19829" end="19845" title="Secretariat of Finance and Public Credit" label="Mexican Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="19931" end="19942" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992740" start="19974" end="20006" title="General Confederation of Workers (Mexico)" label="General Confederation of Workers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20034" end="20050" title="Alejandro Ascaso" label="Alejandro Ascaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q734152" start="20055" end="20069" title="Gregorio Jover" label="Gregorio Jover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619095" start="20104" end="20111" title="Tecomán" label="Tecomán"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="20840" end="20850" title="Valparaíso" label="Valparaíso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897682" start="20852" end="20857" title="Parliamentary Republic (Chile)" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631674" start="20906" end="20919" title="Central Bank of Chile" label="Bank of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="20963" end="20975" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="20977" end="20986" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q425932" start="21476" end="21495" title="Raúl González Tuñón" label="Raúl González Tuñón"/>
<link wikidata="Q781245" start="21669" end="21679" title="San Martín, Buenos Aires" label="San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q287076" start="21775" end="21778" title="ABC (newspaper)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="21859" end="21867" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q290432" start="22267" end="22282" title="La Santé Prison" label="La Santé Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q143080" start="22387" end="22404" title="Palais de Justice, Paris" label="Palais de Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431489" start="22444" end="22458" title="false passport" label="false passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909414" start="22464" end="22495" title="criminal possession of a weapon" label="criminal possession of a weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="22500" end="22509" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22539" end="22554" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354932" start="22834" end="22853" title="pre-trial detention" label="pre-trial detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q138101" start="23039" end="23051" title="Conciergerie" label="Conciergerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="23134" end="23146" title="penal labour" label="penal labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="24213" end="24226" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q509816" start="24361" end="24384" title="Ministry of Justice (France)" label="French Justice Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q271887" start="24385" end="24398" title="Louis Barthou" label="Louis Barthou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666714" start="24660" end="24672" title="Louis Lecoin" label="Louis Lecoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320283" start="24703" end="24722" title="Chamber of Deputies (France)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="24770" end="24786" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701404" start="25246" end="25258" title="Ménilmontant" label="Ménilmontant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11610431" start="25328" end="25343" title="Émilienne Morin" label="Émilienne Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47900" start="25395" end="25408" title="Nestor Makhno" label="Nestor Makhno"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="25448" end="25456" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436243" start="25481" end="25500" title="Makhnovshchina" label="Makhnovist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="25900" end="25907" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407596" start="25959" end="25970" title="Marcel Dieu" label="Marcel Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26148" end="26161" title="Émile Bouchet" label="Émile Bouchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q476584" start="26177" end="26183" title="Joigny" label="Joigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422336" start="26217" end="26228" title="National Gendarmerie" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="26307" end="26311" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q952769" start="26563" end="26591" title="Iberian Anarchist Federation" label="Iberian Anarchist Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="26841" end="26852" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="26861" end="26870" title="peasantry" label="peasantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001522" start="26919" end="26955" title="accelerationism" label="accelerate the revolutionary process"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27156" end="27174" title=":wikt:anarcho-bolshevism" label="anarcho-Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27472" end="27486" title="Joaquín Cortés (anarchist)" label="Joaquín Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27642" end="27656" title="Bruno Carreras" label="Bruno Carreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27959" end="27971" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="28092" end="28098" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q486213" start="28110" end="28127" title="Anarchism in Germany" label="German anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q66787" start="28128" end="28143" title="Augustin Souchy" label="Augustin Souchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213562" start="28148" end="28161" title="Rudolf Rocker" label="Rudolf Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="28279" end="28302" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="28364" end="28385" title="Centre Party (Germany)" label="Catholic Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q78817" start="28474" end="28491" title="Alexander Granach" label="Alexander Granach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407596" start="28727" end="28738" title="Marcel Dieu" label="Marcel Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529607" start="28760" end="28776" title="residence permit" label="residence permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q274122" start="28899" end="28907" title="Ida Mett" label="Ida Mett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="29001" end="29017" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q674177" start="29337" end="29356" title="José Sánchez-Guerra y Martínez" label="José Sánchez-Guerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q969881" start="29574" end="29589" title="Camillo Berneri" label="Camillo Berneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q72919" start="29622" end="29632" title="Marie-José of Belgium" label="Marie-José"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="29652" end="29659" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="30343" end="30366" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30371" end="30381" title="1931 Spanish local elections#Aftermath" label="proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981" start="30630" end="30644" title="Lluís Companys" label="Lluís Companys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279967" start="30921" end="30938" title="social revolution" label="social revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="31089" end="31097" title="Marxism" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31159" end="31169" title="Luis Riera" label="Luis Riera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773169" start="31186" end="31210" title="Sant Martí de Provençals" label="Sant Martí de Provençals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404773" start="31265" end="31273" title="Poblenou" label="Poblenou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31313" end="31326" title="Emilia Abadía" label="Emilia Abadía"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122701" start="31646" end="31654" title="Montjuïc" label="Montjuïc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="31791" end="31806" title="democratisation" label="democratisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="31953" end="31962" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499" start="32199" end="32230" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day" label="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666714" start="32351" end="32363" title="Louis Lecoin" label="Louis Lecoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q478811" start="32432" end="32456" title="Communist Party of Spain" label="Communist Party of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q599118" start="32725" end="32763" title="Palace of the Generalitat of Catalonia" label="Palace of the Generalitat of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="33797" end="33803" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394961" start="33858" end="33897" title="IWA-AIT" label="International Workers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849031" start="33988" end="34012" title="Cybele Palace" label="Palace of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="34220" end="34237" title="cult of personality" label="personality cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321250" start="34293" end="34299" title="vanity" label="vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051266" start="34304" end="34313" title="leaderism" label="leaderism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="34379" end="34392" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q124252298" start="34508" end="34534" title="1931 Barcelona rent strike" label="1931 Barcelona rent strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q280783" start="34572" end="34588" title="popular assembly" label="popular assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697379" start="34596" end="34620" title="Palau de les Belles Arts" label="Palau de les Belles Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807059" start="35000" end="35008" title="bed base" label="bed base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815679" start="35389" end="35412" title="Treintism" label="Manifesto of the Thirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="35511" end="35524" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="35642" end="35650" title="banditry" label="banditry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772431" start="35839" end="35856" title="Eduardo de Guzmán" label="Eduardo de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q639137" start="36324" end="36332" title="Le Temps (Paris)" label="Le Temps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36862" end="36869" title="Manolín Durruti" label="Manolín"/>
<link wikidata="Q135" start="36906" end="36911" title="Pawn (chess)" label="pawns"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="36925" end="36937" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="36984" end="36991" title="Defamation" label="slander"/>
<link wikidata="Q348497" start="37244" end="37258" title="Ilya Ehrenburg" label="Ilya Ehrenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631282" start="37619" end="37637" title="Joan Garcia Oliver" label="Joan Garcia Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304634" start="37647" end="37661" title="public enemy" label="public enemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209574" start="37999" end="38008" title="Police caution" label="cautioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="38019" end="38044" title="Lèse-majesté" label="insults against authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="38347" end="38361" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38472" end="38487" title="Colette Durruti" label="Colette Durruti"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="38621" end="38630" title="indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038" start="38961" end="38967" title="Girona" label="Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088107" start="39028" end="39043" title="Girona railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="40375" end="40382" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043594" start="40387" end="40394" title="Old Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113390" start="40806" end="40823" title="Catalunya Central" label="central Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728" start="40899" end="40906" title="Sallent" label="Sallent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508" start="41012" end="41018" title="Fígols" label="Fígols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="41055" end="41082" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="41091" end="41099" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="41104" end="41115" title="scrap metal" label="scrap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11945463" start="41137" end="41173" title="Alt Llobregat insurrection" label="insurrection broke out in the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573481" start="41466" end="41478" title="Spanish transport Buenos Aires (1887)" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232509" start="41898" end="41912" title="Spanish Guinea" label="Spanish Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799916" start="41973" end="41983" title="cargo hold" label="cargo hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="42304" end="42318" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q929147" start="42359" end="42369" title="Río de Oro" label="Río de Oro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42399" end="42418" title="Ramón Regueral Jove" label="Ramón Regueral Jove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017382" start="42540" end="42553" title="Ministry of the Navy (Spain)" label="Navy Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q518956" start="42554" end="42564" title="José Giral" label="José Giral"/>
<link wikidata="Q192534" start="42587" end="42600" title="Fuerteventura" label="Fuerteventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778765" start="43001" end="43017" title="social isolation" label="social isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="43143" end="43151" title="barracks" label="barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097826" start="43330" end="43347" title="child cannibalism" label="child cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="43378" end="43394" title="province of León" label="province of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175034" start="43589" end="43597" title="Legislator" label="deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="43928" end="43938" title="Breakwater (structure)" label="breakwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="44363" end="44380" title="right-wing politics" label="right-wing forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q436763" start="44396" end="44409" title="José Sanjurjo" label="José Sanjurjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109574" start="44410" end="44426" title="Sanjurjada" label="attempted a coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896294" start="44845" end="44863" title="Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia of 1932" label="statue of autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="45631" end="45653" title="exploitation of labour" label="exploitation of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562014" start="46167" end="46179" title="Via Laietana" label="Via Laietana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643970" start="46554" end="46568" title="affinity group" label="affinity group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131632200" start="46575" end="46583" title="Nosotros (group)" label="Nosotros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552849" start="46852" end="46865" title="Security and Assault Corps" label="Assault Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="46939" end="46962" title="workers&amp;#x27; council" label="revolutionary committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81978" start="47083" end="47088" title="province of Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771488" start="47256" end="47261" title="Horta-Guinardó" label="Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q852697" start="47266" end="47272" title="Gràcia" label="Gràcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342531" start="47344" end="47364" title="Travessera de Gràcia" label="Travessera de Gràcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813816" start="47369" end="47374" title="Navas, Sant Andreu" label="Navas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658104" start="47392" end="47403" title="Carabineros" label="Carabineros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773859" start="47428" end="47440" title="anarchist insurrection of January 1933" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q980173" start="47880" end="47889" title="rearguard" label="rearguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="48258" end="48270" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q881698" start="48294" end="48304" title="Blanquism" label="Blanquists"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="48309" end="48320" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48532" end="48547" title="Teresa Margalef" label="Teresa Margalef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771488" start="48564" end="48569" title="Horta-Guinardó" label="Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="48775" end="48782" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="48809" end="48820" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q95088" start="49000" end="49008" title="province of Seville" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q220980" start="49510" end="49520" title="Pío Baroja" label="Pío Baroja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397403" start="49545" end="49558" title="romantic hero" label="romantic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="49616" end="49625" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q186666" start="49664" end="49688" title="Santiago Casares Quiroga" label="Santiago Casares Quiroga"/>
<link wikidata="Q203040" start="49787" end="49811" title="El Puerto de Santa María" label="El Puerto de Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816276" start="50499" end="50517" title="Eduardo Barriobero y Herrán" label="Eduardo Barriobero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920604" start="50958" end="50969" title="prison riot" label="prison riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313785" start="51551" end="51571" title="Niceto Alcalá-Zamora" label="Niceto Alcalá-Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132158" start="51622" end="51651" title="1933 Spanish general election" label="1933 Spanish general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="51671" end="51681" title="right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190694" start="51716" end="51737" title="unemployment in Spain" label="unemployment in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="52108" end="52119" title="blacklisting" label="blacklisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="52912" end="52926" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="53810" end="53822" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q337522" start="54191" end="54204" title="La Monumental" label="La Monumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q718209" start="54443" end="54458" title="Emilio Castelar" label="Emilio Castelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752" start="54462" end="54477" title="Peter Kropotkin" label="Peter Kropotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q345321" start="54910" end="54929" title="Abstention" label="abstain from voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="55302" end="55321" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="55799" end="55815" title="world revolution" label="world revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075769" start="55945" end="55964" title="occupation of factories" label="occupying factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046415" start="56029" end="56054" title="collective responsibility" label="collective responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9108414" start="56602" end="56614" title="anarchist insurrection of December 1933" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022077" start="56968" end="56980" title="ley de fugas" label="ley de fugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10896978" start="57265" end="57282" title="forced confession" label="forced confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q55271" start="57672" end="57690" title="province of Burgos" label="province of Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q132627" start="57707" end="57727" title="solitary confinement" label="solitary confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307777" start="57897" end="57909" title="united front" label="united front"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="58058" end="58080" title="workers&amp;#x27; councils" label="workers&amp;#x27; councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673073" start="58104" end="58125" title="workers&amp;#x27; control" label="workers&amp;#x27; control"/>
<link wikidata="Q10988470" start="58447" end="58460" title="Ramón Álvarez Palomo" label="Ramón Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806213" start="58870" end="58884" title="Francesc Macià" label="Francesc Macià"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59100" end="59112" title="Bruno Alpini" label="Bruno Alpini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9033460" start="59261" end="59273" title="Miquel Badia" label="Miquel Badia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450434" start="59835" end="59861" title="Carrer del Consell de Cent, Barcelona" label="Carrer del Consell de Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751597" start="59923" end="59934" title="Guàrdia Urbana de Barcelona" label="Urban Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13939" start="60176" end="60184" title="Terrassa" label="Terrassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644044" start="60585" end="60596" title="Breadwinner model" label="breadwinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q745312" start="60716" end="60733" title="women&amp;#x27;s work" label="women&amp;#x27;s work"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="60764" end="60772" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q667944" start="61283" end="61303" title="Temporary work" label="temporary employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012930" start="61311" end="61320" title="S.A. Damm" label="S.A. Damm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="61469" end="61476" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782534" start="62267" end="62285" title="Revolution of 1934" label="Revolution of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q42346215" start="62508" end="62521" title="Catalan State (1934)" label="Catalan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753103" start="62750" end="62758" title="La Model (Barcelona)" label="La Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029789" start="64850" end="64869" title="military discipline" label="military discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="64935" end="64948" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="65334" end="65342" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121556" start="65502" end="65519" title="Syndicalist Party" label="Syndicalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65528" end="65545" title="Opposition Unions" label="Opposition Unions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65689" end="65698" title="José Mira Martínez" label="José Mira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586943" start="67318" end="67347" title="1936 Spanish general election" label="1936 Spanish general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q246708" start="67839" end="67852" title="Popular Front (Spain)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="68388" end="68409" title="anti-authoritarianism" label="anti-authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="69068" end="69080" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075769" start="69507" end="69526" title="Occupation of factories" label="factory occupations"/>
<link wikidata="Q133076" start="69689" end="69695" title="hernia" label="hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8776222" start="69953" end="69971" title="Enric Pérez i Farràs" label="Enric Pérez Farràs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424346" start="70000" end="70022" title="Mossos d&amp;#x27;Esquadra" label="Mossos d&amp;#x27;Esquadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570324" start="70328" end="70341" title="cannon fodder" label="cannon fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="70423" end="70430" title="Spanish protectorate in Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9093379" start="70613" end="70628" title="Vicente Guarner" label="Vicente Guarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046073" start="71577" end="71594" title="Carrer de Pujades, Barcelona" label="Carrer de Pujades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="71804" end="71816" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813618" start="71821" end="71842" title="July 1936 military uprising in Barcelona" label="risen up in Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658141" start="72025" end="72041" title="Teatre Principal (Barcelona)" label="Teatre Principal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604672" start="72839" end="72851" title="Manuel Goded" label="Manuel Goded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982745" start="72984" end="73001" title="Spanish Revolution of 1936" label="social revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773164" start="73012" end="73021" title="Revolutionary Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263924" start="73229" end="73238" title="Barcelona Royal Shipyard" label="Drassanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9029015" start="73665" end="73683" title="Mariano R. Vázquez" label="Mariano R. Vázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393554" start="74007" end="74061" title="Central Committee of Antifascist Militias of Catalonia" label="Central Committee of Antifascist Militias of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="74140" end="74158" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalist forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027426" start="74668" end="74685" title="Jaume Miravitlles" label="Jaume Miravitlles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500336" start="74956" end="74969" title="Joan Comorera" label="Joan Comorera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033142" start="75024" end="75043" title="anarchism in Russia" label="anarchism in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984304" start="75389" end="75403" title="Durruti Column" label="Durruti Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="75533" end="75549" title="chain of command" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="75553" end="75562" title="command hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="75724" end="75745" title="military organisation" label="military organisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75851" end="75863" title="José Manzana" label="José Manzana"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="75867" end="75891" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029789" start="76006" end="76025" title="military discipline" label="military discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q149377" start="76043" end="76063" title="Military operation plan" label="operational planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="76164" end="76174" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="76194" end="76204" title="solidarity" label="solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456974" start="76218" end="76227" title="obedience" label="obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="76231" end="76240" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="76272" end="76282" title="discipline" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190255" start="76287" end="76312" title="individual responsibility" label="individual responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="76798" end="76808" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046415" start="76855" end="76880" title="collective responsibility" label="collective responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410568" start="76907" end="76925" title="Pierre van Paassen" label="Pierre van Paassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="77506" end="77519" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551794" start="77574" end="77604" title="Japanese invasion of Manchuria" label="Japanese invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419892" start="78097" end="78114" title="Passeig de Gràcia" label="Passeig de Gràcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="78459" end="78480" title="Close-quarters battle" label="close-quarters combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q56019" start="78828" end="78841" title="military rank" label="military rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q13473501" start="78960" end="78970" title="collective" label="collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q64010" start="78989" end="78993" title="Caspe" label="Casp"/>
<link wikidata="Q526133" start="78998" end="79009" title="Bujaraloz" label="Burcharaloz"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="79772" end="79781" title="desertion" label="deserters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="80977" end="80981" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="81577" end="81601" title="collective farming" label="agricultural collectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769645" start="83837" end="83860" title="Cervià de les Garrigues" label="Cervià de les Garrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q614084" start="84220" end="84240" title="consumer cooperative" label="consumer cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="84885" end="84905" title="individualism" label="individual ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511024" start="85432" end="85449" title="Sex segregation" label="gender separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="85458" end="85472" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q919922" start="86484" end="86501" title="Battle of Majorca" label="Mallorca landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="86661" end="86672" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="87460" end="87475" title="state socialism" label="state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q549307" start="88126" end="88143" title="Federica Montseny" label="Federica Montseny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393554" start="88189" end="88196" title="Central Committee of Antifascist Militias of Catalonia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="88200" end="88206" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046524" start="88307" end="88320" title="Casa de Campo" label="Casa de Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q685062" start="88336" end="88352" title="Battle of Madrid" label="Battle of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="88356" end="88369" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140161" start="88472" end="88486" title="machine pistol" label="machine pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="88641" end="88647" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="88652" end="88662" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q751982" start="89455" end="89473" title="funeral procession" label="funeral procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q126453" start="89509" end="89526" title="Montjuïc Cemetery" label="Montjuïc Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q61858124" start="89582" end="89600" title="José Luzón Morales" label="José Luzón Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q188993" start="89938" end="89957" title="Anarcho-syndicalism" label="anarcho-syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="89970" end="89986" title="shorthand typist" label="shorthand typist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11610431" start="89987" end="90002" title="Émilienne Morin" label="Émilienne Morin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90363" end="90378" title="Colette Durruti" label="Colette Durruti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="91001" end="91010" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q126453" start="91123" end="91140" title="Montjuïc Cemetery" label="Montjuïc Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="91372" end="91382" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296206" start="91392" end="91408" title="Mary Stanley Low" label="Mary Stanley Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q335150" start="91411" end="91422" title="Hugh Thomas (writer)" label="Hugh Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885246" start="91769" end="91777" title="May Days" label="May Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843548" start="91804" end="91828" title="Friends of Durruti Group" label="Friends of Durruti Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="92370" end="92382" title="Situationist" label="Situationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q157575" start="92392" end="92413" title="Strasbourg University" label="Strasbourg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047902" start="92474" end="92483" title="flyposted" label="flyposted"/>
<link wikidata="Q863448" start="92557" end="92582" title="Reification (Marxism)" label="philosophical reification"/>
<link wikidata="Q478601" start="92714" end="92725" title="Tony Wilson" label="Tony Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724658" start="92771" end="92789" title="The Durutti Column" label="The Durutti Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q85732347" start="92792" end="92811" title="Willem van Spronsen" label="Willem van Spronsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q85732347" start="92843" end="92857" title="2019 Tacoma attack" label="killed in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="92912" end="92952" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="93026" end="93031" title="Pseudonym" label="alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q486236" start="93069" end="93087" title="Anarchism in Spain" label="Anarchism in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773164" start="93090" end="93109" title="Anarchist Catalonia" label="Anarchist Catalonia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152738" wikidata="Q6029752" url="?curid=152738" title="Infinite Corridor">
<text>The Infinite Corridor is a hallway that runs through the main buildings of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, specifically parts of the buildings numbered 7, 3, 10, 4, and 8 (from west to east). 

Twice a year, in mid-November and in late January, the corridor lines up lengthwise with the position of the Sun, causing sunlight to fill the entire corridor. Named MIThenge, the event is celebrated by students, faculty, and staff.

==Significance==

The corridor is important not only because it links major MIT buildings, but also because it serves as the most direct indoor route between the east and west ends of the campus. The corridor was designed as the central spine of the original set of MIT buildings designed by William W. Bosworth in 1913. 

The Infinite Corridor is slightly longer than that of the University Hall building at the University of Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, which measures long. It is, however, significantly shorter than the so called &quot;K-Straße&quot; (K-street) in the Rost-/Silberlaube building of the Free University of Berlin, which measures about .

==Etiquette==

On occasion, students in the Transport Lab of the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) have studied foot traffic in the Infinite Corridor, as a safer, more accessible model of highway traffic. In 1997, one student report made the following observations about the informal rules that seem to apply to Infinite Corridor traffic:

The rules of the road for the Infinite Corridor include: stay to the right, limit group size, pass on the left, form a line at bottlenecks, don&#x27;t stop/slow down, no tailgating, traffic within corridor has right of way, no physical contact and no eye contact.
==Hacks==
Because the heavy pedestrian traffic in the Infinite Corridor guarantees a large audience, it is a setting for some &quot;hacks&quot; (practical jokes), especially those of a serial nature such as a series of &quot;Burma Shave&quot; style signs. The &quot;Mass Toolpike&quot; hack in 1985 involved placing traffic signals, lane markings, and highway-like signs along the length of the Infinite Corridor. An April Fools&#x27; Day post from the Alumni Association blog &quot;Slice of MIT&quot; suggested that the corridor floor would be replaced with a self-powering moving walkway made of piezoelectric tiles.

==Geography==
===Entrance===
An outside grand stairway leads up from Massachusetts Avenue to Lobby 7, the main entrance to the Infinite Corridor. This location is often called &quot;77 MassAve&quot;, an abbreviation of its official street address; the street itself forms the western boundary of the main or central campus. The MIT Student Center (Building W20) is located directly across the street, at 84 Massachusetts Avenue.

Nearby bus stops serve MBTA buses from Harvard Square, and from Back Bay across the Charles River via the Harvard Bridge, as well as various shuttle buses. Food vendor trucks often park in designated spaces near the entrance.

===Lobby 7===

Lobby 7, so named because of its location in Building 7 (formally named the Rogers Building), is a large vertical space open all the way up to the interior of the Little Dome. A carved inscription circles the space just below the base of the Little Dome. Four empty pedestals occupy the corners of the square lobby; they were originally intended for large Neoclassical figural sculptures, but are instead often occupied by students studying, or occasionally playing live music. The Infinite Corridor begins straight ahead through the lobby, on the opposite side from the street.

During the 1970s, two large pillars flanking the entrance to the Infinite Corridor were partially wrapped in paper and used by the liberal &quot;Alternative Advertising&quot; and somewhat less liberal &quot;Pillar Productions&quot; where students would scrawl responses to issues of the day such as nuclear power or whether disco sucked. A display of Air Force art was once withdrawn after vandalism in the lobby.

Lobby 7 is frequently used for formally scheduled or impromptu concerts, as well as dance performances. Occasionally, &quot;performance art&quot; hacks or installation art hacks are sited in Lobby 7. Banners advertising campus events are often hung from the upper levels of Lobby 7, including the occasional hack banner such as &quot;Don&#x27;t let the Grinch steal your Christmas&quot; (in reference to complaints about the campus Christmas tree). The cavernous interior space of Lobby 7 is frequently the site of hacks that require a large volume of unobstructed indoor space.

===Memorial Lobby (Lobby 10)===
A two-story atrium space at the half-way point of the corridor, informally known as Lobby 10, is part of the MacLaurin Buildings in Building 10, underneath the Great Dome. In this space, it is quite common to find several booths or tables advertising upcoming events, or students engaged in other public activities and demonstrations, such as juggling or dancing. Often, there are fund-raising activities, such as selling used books, tickets for shows or concerts, artworks made in the MIT GlassLab or Student Art Association, or Chinese pastries and other snacks.

On November 18, 2013 a formal dedication ceremony was held to rename the space Memorial Lobby. The travertine walls bear the engraved names of MIT alumni who died in each of several wars, and these inscriptions have been re-gilded to make them more readable.

===Different levels===
The Infinite Corridor has five levels: the basement, and floors 1 through 4. Elevators in Lobby 7 and in Lobby 10 provide access to each floor, as do numerous stairways. The elevators in Lobby 10 also provide access to the Barker Engineering Library, via the 5th floor. In accordance with its US location, MIT buildings usually use the American floor numbering scheme.

The first floor (called the &quot;ground floor&quot; by some) is the most traveled level, and is often the only one referred to as &quot;the&quot; Infinite Corridor. It is most of a floor above ground level at Massachusetts Avenue (the west end, Building 7), and in areas is a full floor up, with a parking lot entrance passing underneath (this entrance crosses the basement-level corridor at grade between Buildings 7 and 3). At its east end in Building 8, it is also about half a floor up. The Basement Infinite Corridor mirrors the first floor passage, but connects to the extensive below-grade system of tunnels connecting many buildings.

==Displays==

The walls lining the Infinite Corridor were painted stark &quot;Institute Gray&quot; with black doorway trim until Spring 1970, when a number of wall murals appeared. With two notable exceptions, the paintings were soon replaced by bulletin boards and enclosed display cases which remained largely unchanged for several decades. A Summer 2010 renovation installed more-durable boards, and more clearly marked many portions of them as reserved for exclusive use by one specified student activity or another.

The Cashier&#x27;s Office wall was painted as a giant dollar bill for over 25 years (and was itself the subject of a number of non-destructive hacks). The mural was eventually removed and replaced with a glass wall when the space behind it was converted to a community lounge. A picture of the old wall mural is etched into the glass, as a historical marker. The oldest remaining wall mural (near the former location of the Admissions Office) is an early-1970s style colorful painting of a &quot;multicultural&quot; group of people walking quickly, painted by Andrea H. Pritchard, wife of Physics Professor David E. Pritchard. Having survived many renovations and repaintings of the Infinite Corridor, the mural now is a carefully preserved relic of that era.

Some adjacent laboratories, notably those of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (DMSE, Course 3), now have floor-to-ceiling glass walls and large posters or display cases explaining some of their research activities and course offerings. This is a natural result of the DMSE&#x27;s facilities location surrounding the eastern end of the Infinite Corridor.

==MIT&#x27;s Infinite Solar System model==
In 2018, MIT professor Richard Binzel installed a 1:30,000,000,000 ratio Solar System model along 200 m of the Infinite Corridor at the third floor level. Each full-color plaque shows the to-scale size of a planet, along with an enlarged image and some basic data. At the scale of the model, the speed of light reduces to 1 cm/s, so that by walking normally, a viewer can attain warp speed, exceeding the cosmic speed limit. In addition to a printed brochure, a free online self-guided tour is available.

==MIThenge==

On several days each year, the Sun sets in alignment with the Infinite Corridor and shines along its entire length. This is known as &quot;MIThenge&quot;, a reference to Stonehenge&#x27;s alignment with the Sun (although the type of alignment bears a closer relationship with that of Newgrange and Maeshowe in that the sunlight passes through the mass of the buildings rather than through the standing stones of Stonehenge). These alignments occur on several days around January 31 and November 11. The phenomenon was spotted, calculated, and popularized in 1975–76 according to a &quot;Sky and Telescope&quot; article; the naming convention follows that coined for &quot;Manhattanhenge&quot;. 

A less-known alignment with the Moon also occurs, but it is more subtle and more difficult to observe. Although it occurs in alignment with the corridor during the summertime months, the sunrise cannot be observed then, due to visual obstructions at the eastern end of the Infinite Corridor.

A campus newspaper, &quot;The Tech&quot;, has published etiquette and viewing suggestions for first-time observers. Several online videos offer different perspectives on the phenomenon and on the observers.

==Demonstrations==
During the 1960s, a common Technology Day demonstration used the unobstructed length of the corridor to demonstrate the speed of light in a simple, direct way. A strobe light, photocell, and oscilloscope were positioned at one end of the corridor, and a mirror at the other. The round-trip time is about 1.67 microseconds. The photocell picked up both the direct and reflected flashes. The flash duration being well under a microsecond, the result was two nicely separated pulses on the oscilloscope screen, which could be measured to compute the speed.

==In popular culture==
Early in the film &quot;Good Will Hunting&quot;, a pivotal scene takes place in the Infinite Corridor where Matt Damon&#x27;s janitor character solves a difficult mathematics problem that had been posted there as a challenge to the students.

Science fiction author Joe Haldeman, who taught writing at MIT for decades, discusses the Infinite Corridor in his 2007 novel &quot;The Accidental Time Machine&quot;.

The 2022 video game &quot;Shadows Over Loathing&quot; features a school called SIT (Seaside Institute of Technology) which is clearly a parody of MIT. SIT contains an &quot;Infinite Corridor&quot; which is genuinely infinite.

==References==
== External links ==

* MIT&#x27;s Infinite Solar System self-guided tour
* MIThenge and photo
* Alan Eliasen publishes information about MITHenge solar and lunar events, and predictions for future dates.
* How MIThenge Got Its Start, &quot;Slice of MIT&quot; Alumni Association blog (2011)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6029752" start="4" end="21" title="Infinite Corridor" label="Infinite Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180921" start="57" end="116" title="Campus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="main buildings of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="371" end="379" title="#MIThenge" label="MIThenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019760" start="731" end="750" title="William W. Bosworth" label="William W. Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689439" start="852" end="876" title="University of Lethbridge" label="University of Lethbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="878" end="893" title="Alberta, Canada" label="Alberta, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="1046" end="1071" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Free University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323994" start="1307" end="1322" title="traffic" label="highway traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637391" start="1855" end="1860" title="Hacks at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="hacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q931092" start="1868" end="1882" title="practical joke" label="practical joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999325" start="1948" end="1959" title="Burma Shave" label="Burma Shave"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="2140" end="2161" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day" label="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="2298" end="2312" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="2321" end="2334" title="piezoelectric" label="piezoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907324" start="2412" end="2432" title="Massachusetts Avenue (Cambridge)" label="Massachusetts Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="2796" end="2800" title="MBTA" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587858" start="2812" end="2826" title="Harvard Square" label="Harvard Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q141690" start="2837" end="2845" title="Back Bay" label="Back Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q794927" start="2857" end="2870" title="Charles River" label="Charles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587840" start="2879" end="2893" title="Harvard Bridge" label="Harvard Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368498" start="2914" end="2925" title="shuttle bus" label="shuttle bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303463" start="2929" end="2947" title="Food truck" label="Food vendor trucks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3371" end="3402" title="Sculpture#North America" label="Neoclassical figural sculptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867604" start="3919" end="3931" title="Disco Sucks" label="disco sucked"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3946" end="3955" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="4134" end="4149" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="4165" end="4181" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="4442" end="4456" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="4965" end="4973" title="juggling" label="juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q944359" start="5044" end="5054" title="used books" label="used books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054613" start="5152" end="5168" title="Chinese bakery products" label="Chinese pastries"/>
<link wikidata="Q749316" start="5179" end="5184" title="snack" label="snack"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="5287" end="5297" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723132" start="5331" end="5341" title="MIT alumni" label="MIT alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="5409" end="5418" title="gilding" label="re-gilded"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="5816" end="5831" title="floor numbering" label="floor numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="6140" end="6151" title="parking lot" label="parking lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q183398" start="6731" end="6746" title="bulletin boards" label="bulletin boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058210" start="7061" end="7072" title="United States one-dollar bill" label="dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072907" start="8208" end="8222" title="Richard Binzel" label="Richard Binzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941852" start="8258" end="8276" title="Solar System model" label="Solar System model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="8481" end="8495" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332178" start="8564" end="8574" title="warp speed" label="warp speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785352" start="8875" end="8915" title="Archaeoastronomy and Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge&amp;#x27;s alignment with the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q339503" start="8989" end="8998" title="Newgrange" label="Newgrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q507076" start="9003" end="9011" title="Maeshowe" label="Maeshowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090034" start="9377" end="9391" title="Manhattanhenge" label="Manhattanhenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768223" start="9720" end="9728" title="The Tech (newspaper)" label="The Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q188907" start="9750" end="9759" title="etiquette" label="etiquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="10041" end="10055" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271517" start="10083" end="10095" title="strobe light" label="strobe light"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="10097" end="10106" title="photocell" label="photocell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="10112" end="10124" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q193835" start="10523" end="10540" title="Good Will Hunting" label="Good Will Hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="10607" end="10617" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q347461" start="10765" end="10777" title="Joe Haldeman" label="Joe Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q937944" start="10874" end="10901" title="The Accidental Time Machine" label="The Accidental Time Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806050" start="10936" end="10957" title="Shadows Over Loathing" label="Shadows Over Loathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="11046" end="11052" title="parody" label="parody"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152742" wikidata="Q2657031" url="?curid=152742" title="King Nine Will Not Return">
<text>&quot;&quot;King Nine&quot; Will Not Return&quot; is the season two premiere episode, and 37th overall, of the American television anthology series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It originally aired on September 30, 1960 on CBS.

This was the first episode where Rod Serling appeared on camera at the beginning, rather than introducing the episode in a voice-over narration.

==Opening narration==
==Plot==
It&#x27;s World War II, and the &quot;King Nine&quot;, a B-25 Mitchell bomber, has crashed in the desert. Captain James Embry finds himself stranded, alone except for the wreckage and the mystery of what happened to his crew, all of whom have disappeared. The movement of the plane in the wind and his visions of the missing men serve to heighten Embry&#x27;s disorientation.

While searching for his crew, Embry finds the grave of one of his men, and recognizes in the sky Navy F9F Cougar jets, which are impossible for 1943. He is bewildered as to how he knows about jet aircraft and becomes increasingly distressed. Embry collapses in the sand, and it is revealed that he is apparently hospitalized and suffering hallucinations, 17 years after the crash.

Confident that Embry will recover, two doctors discuss their speculation that his suffering has been triggered by a newspaper headline. The paper has reported the desert discovery of the long-lost &quot;King Nine,&quot; which had not returned to base from a wartime mission in 1943. Having come down with a fever just before he was to board the ill-fated flight, Embry had been replaced on the mission by another captain. Seeing the headline has triggered survivor guilt, the intensity of which has caused him to imagine himself at the crash site.

The doctors assure Embry he has returned to the site only in his mind. However, when a nurse handling his clothes accidentally turns one of his shoes on its side, sand spills out.

==Closing narration==
==Cast==
*Bob Cummings as Captain James Embry
*Gene Lyons as Psychiatrist
*Paul Lambert as Doctor
*Jenna McMahon as Nurse

==Production notes==

This was the first episode to feature the familiar Marius Constant &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; theme. The score by Fred Steiner was later used in other &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episodes.

The episode was based on the discovery of the B-24 Liberator bomber &quot;Lady Be Good&quot; and her crew&#x27;s remains, which had crash-landed at night, deep in the Libyan desert after running out of fuel, while returning from a World War II bombing mission over Naples, Italy. In the episode, the marker of a grave of a member of the crew of &quot;King Nine&quot; is dated &quot;5 April 1943,&quot; the day on which the &quot;Lady Be Good&quot; was lost. &quot;Lady Be Good&quot; had been found in 1958, and the bodies of eight of the nine-man crew were discovered between February and August 1960 – the eighth crewman being found just a few weeks before &quot;&quot;King Nine&quot; Will Not Return&quot; aired.

The bomber aircraft used in this episode was a North American Aviation B-25C-10NA &quot;42-32354&quot;, which still exists in storage with Aero Trader, Borrego Springs, California.

Cummings played a number of pilots during his career.

==Short story adaptation==
&quot;King Nine Will Not Return&quot; was adapted into short story form by Walter B. Gibson in the 1963 collection &quot;Rod Serling&#x27;s Twilight Zone&quot; as &quot;Return From Oblivion&quot;. Despite the different title, it follows the plot of the television version precisely, with no significant changes.

== See also ==
* &quot;Lady Be Good (aircraft)&quot;
* List of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (1959 TV series) episodes
* &quot;Sole Survivor&quot; (1970)

==References==
==Further reading==
*Zicree, Marc Scott: &quot;The Twilight Zone Companion&quot;. Sillman-James Press, 1982 (second edition)
*DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. 
*Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, Md.: OTR Publishing. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2657031" start="6" end="43" title="King Nine Will Not Return" label="&amp;quot;King Nine&amp;quot; Will Not Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="111" end="130" title="American television" label="American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="154" end="171" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="224" end="227" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="263" end="274" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="464" end="477" title="North American B-25 Mitchell" label="B-25 Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q401053" start="886" end="896" title="Grumman F-9 Cougar" label="F9F Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332768" start="1622" end="1636" title="survivor guilt" label="survivor guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q366678" start="1928" end="1940" title="Bob Cummings" label="Bob Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531326" start="1965" end="1975" title="Gene Lyons (actor)" label="Gene Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151931" start="1993" end="2005" title="Paul Lambert (actor)" label="Paul Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q19586544" start="2017" end="2030" title="Jenna McMahon" label="Jenna McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342033" start="2114" end="2129" title="Marius Constant" label="Marius Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="2296" end="2310" title="Consolidated B-24 Liberator" label="B-24 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q432131" start="2324" end="2336" title="Lady Be Good (aircraft)" label="Lady Be Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2481" end="2493" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="2515" end="2521" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2523" end="2528" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173387" start="2562" end="2567" title="grave (burial)" label="grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="3013" end="3047" title="North American B-25 Mitchell" label="North American Aviation B-25C-10NA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641983" start="3048" end="3068" title="List of surviving North American B-25 Mitchells" label="&amp;quot;42-32354&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049424" start="3118" end="3145" title="Borrego Springs, California" label="Borrego Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q466896" start="3305" end="3321" title="Walter B. Gibson" label="Walter B. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q432131" start="3566" end="3589" title="Lady Be Good (aircraft)" label="Lady Be Good (aircraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059942" start="3598" end="3661" title="List of The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;The Twilight Zone&amp;quot; (1959 TV series) episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557460" start="3664" end="3696" title="Sole Survivor (1970 film)" label="&amp;quot;Sole Survivor&amp;quot; (1970)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152743" wikidata="Q2735222" url="?curid=152743" title="The Man in the Bottle">
<text>&quot;The Man in the Bottle&quot; is episode 38 of the American television series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It originally aired on October 7, 1960, on CBS.

==Opening narration==
==Plot==
A poor elderly woman visits Arthur Castle, an unsuccessful antiques dealer, bringing a wine bottle she found in a trash can. It has no value, but he buys it for a small amount out of pity. The bottle proves to contain a genie, who offers to grant four wishes to Castle and his wife. They use their first wish to repair a broken glass cabinet, proving the genie&#x27;s power, and then receive a million dollars in cash upon making their second wish. After they have given tens of thousands away to their friends, an IRS employee visits the shop and presents the Castles with a tax bill that leaves them with only $5 once they pay it.

The genie warns them that every wish has consequences, and that they should think carefully before making their next one. Castle decides that he wants to be in a position of great power, and wishes to be a leader - who cannot be voted out of office - of a modern and powerful country. He is turned into Adolf Hitler and transported to the last days of World War II; he is hiding in the &quot;Führerbunker&quot; as one of his men brings him a vial of cyanide so he can kill himself. In desperation, he wishes to be returned to his old life and throws the vial to the floor.

In an instant, Castle&#x27;s final wish is granted and he is returned to his shop, where the wine bottle shatters on the floor. He and his wife have nothing to show for their experience except a repaired cabinet — which Castle accidentally breaks again as he sweeps up — and a changed perspective on life. He dumps the pieces of the bottle into a trash can outside; they magically reform into a whole bottle, waiting for someone else to pick it up and release the genie.

==Closing narration==
==Production notes==

Luther Adler previously had portrayed Hitler in two 1951 feature films: &quot;The Magic Face&quot;, a fantasy about a European impersonator who somehow manages to murder Hitler and then assumes his identity, and &quot;The Desert Fox&quot;, a drama about Erwin Rommel.

Both the 1891 short story &quot;The Bottle Imp&quot; by Robert Louis Stevenson and the 1901 short story &quot;The Monkey&#x27;s Paw&quot; by W.W. Jacobs feature an object containing a supernatural power that can grant the wishes of its human possessors, indicating that such is a dangerous power to enjoy.

==See also==
*List of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (1959 TV series) episodes

==References==
*DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. 
*Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2735222" start="6" end="27" title="The Man in the Bottle" label="The Man in the Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="88" end="105" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="413" end="418" title="jinn" label="genie"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="708" end="711" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1130" end="1142" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1179" end="1191" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153491" start="1219" end="1231" title="Führerbunker" label="Führerbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="1277" end="1284" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993476" start="1295" end="1307" title="Death of Adolf Hitler" label="kill himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q50285475" start="1995" end="2009" title="The Magic Face" label="The Magic Face"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2135" end="2149" title="The Desert Fox: The Story of Rommel" label="The Desert Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="2171" end="2183" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82737" start="2218" end="2232" title="The Bottle Imp" label="The Bottle Imp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="2242" end="2264" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210939" start="2296" end="2317" title="The Monkey&amp;#x27;s Paw" label="The Monkey&amp;#x27;s Paw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385758" start="2327" end="2338" title="W.W. Jacobs" label="W.W. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="2370" end="2388" title="supernatural power" label="supernatural power"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059942" start="2507" end="2570" title="List of The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;The Twilight Zone&amp;quot; (1959 TV series) episodes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152744" wikidata="Q2860817" url="?curid=152744" title="Nervous Man in a Four Dollar Room">
<text>&quot;Nervous Man in a Four Dollar Room&quot; is episode 39 of the American television anthology series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It originally aired on October 14, 1960, on CBS.

According to the book &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot; by Martin Grams, Serling wrote the teleplay in response to a request from CBS to write scripts using as few actors as possible for budgetary purposes. This episode was produced $5,000 under budget.

==Opening narration==
==Plot==
An insecure, unsuccessful gangster named Jackie Rhoades waits in a cheap hotel room for instructions from his boss, George. George gives Jackie a gun and orders him to shoot a barkeeper who has refused to pay for protection. Jackie begs to be given another job, but George flatly refuses, roughs Jackie up, and leaves. Terrified, Jackie starts talking to his reflection in the mirror, trying to justify committing murder. He puts a cigarette to his lips but finds no match.

A puff of smoke emerges from the other side of the mirror, and he sees reflected a different version of himself: a strong, self-assured, confident man. Jackie and his reflection engage in a lengthy argument about how his life has turned out as a result of going along with peers and never standing up for himself. Finally, the double tells Jackie he wants to take over, that it is his turn to run their life, and that he deserves to live. Jackie argues but cannot decide what to do.

George telephones and Jackie nervously assures him that he is on the way to do the job. The double reappears and tries to persuade Jackie to let him out. He knows that disaster will strike, life will be over, if Jackie tries to do the job; he refuses to let Jackie lead them both to ruin. Angry and panicking, Jackie spins the mirror on the chest of drawers and, as it spins, Jackie backs away in terror when he sees that the double is looming larger and larger.

George comes by, furious that Jackie has not done his job, and demands to know: &quot;So what&#x27;ve you got to say for yourself?&quot; Jackie calmly looks up at him and answers, &quot;Two words. I resign!&quot; emphasizing the point by kicking and punching George. Jackie opens the door and orders a bewildered George out, tossing the gun after him and telling him to never come back. Ringing the room clerk to check out, Jackie refers to himself as &quot;Jackie- &quot;John&quot; Rhoades.&quot; The nervous Jackie, now on the other side of the mirror, asks, &quot;What&#x27;s to do now?&quot; John responds, &quot;Now we go look for a job. Now maybe we get married. Now maybe we stop biting our nails.&quot; John then walks out of the room, looks back at the mirror, and sees only his own confident reflection.

==Closing narration==
==See also==
*List of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (1959 TV series) episodes

==References==
*DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. 
*Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2860817" start="6" end="39" title="Nervous Man in a Four Dollar Room" label="Nervous Man in a Four Dollar Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="67" end="86" title="American television" label="American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="110" end="127" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="179" end="182" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059942" start="2785" end="2848" title="List of The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;The Twilight Zone&amp;quot; (1959 TV series) episodes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152745" wikidata="Q259808" url="?curid=152745" title="A Thing About Machines">
<text>&quot;A Thing About Machines&quot; is episode 40 of the American television anthology series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It originally aired on October 28, 1960, on CBS.

==Opening narration==
==Plot==
Lonely, ill-tempered gourmet magazine critic and misanthrope Bartlett Finchley berates a repairman after the latter fixes his television and tells him to stop abusing his appliances over mild inconveniences. Believing the machines are conspiring against him, however, Finchley continues to do so. Fed up with his paranoid behavior, his secretary quits. Following this, his typewriter types out the message &quot;GET OUT OF HERE FINCHLEY&quot; repeatedly on its own and the TV displays a program with a woman saying the same message. While trying to shave, his electric shaver rises and lunges at him before his telephone repeats the typewriter and TV&#x27;s message despite Finchley ripping the telephone out of the wall earlier.

Finchley hears a siren outside and goes to investigate, finding that his car rolled down the driveway and nearly hit a child. After rudely dismissing the attending police officer and neighbors, Finchley returns to his house, drinks, and passes out. When he awakens, the machines repeatedly tell him to leave while his razor slithers downstairs after him. He runs outside, only to be chased by his car until he ends up drowning in the pool and sinking to the bottom. After the police pull him out, neither they nor the ambulance personnel can explain how he sank without being weighted, and theorize he may have had a heart attack.

==Closing narration==
==Cast==
*Richard Haydn as Bartlett Finchley
*Barbara Stuart as Edith Rogers
*Barney Phillips as TV repairman
*Jay Overholts as Intern
*Henry Beckman as Policeman
*Margarita Cordova as Girl on TV

==See also==
* List of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (1959 TV series) episodes

==References==
* DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. 
* Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. 

==External links==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q259808" start="6" end="28" title="A Thing About Machines" label="A Thing About Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="56" end="75" title="American television" label="American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="99" end="116" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="168" end="171" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458730" start="226" end="233" title="gourmet" label="gourmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495660" start="243" end="249" title="food critic" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="254" end="265" title="misanthrope" label="misanthrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="578" end="588" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457835" start="765" end="780" title="electric shaver" label="electric shaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="1553" end="1565" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355379" start="1600" end="1613" title="Richard Haydn" label="Richard Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q807657" start="1636" end="1650" title="Barbara Stuart" label="Barbara Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861767" start="1668" end="1683" title="Barney Phillips" label="Barney Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q254809" start="1726" end="1739" title="Henry Beckman" label="Henry Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148954" start="1754" end="1771" title="Margarita Cordova" label="Margarita Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059942" start="1802" end="1865" title="List of The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;The Twilight Zone&amp;quot; (1959 TV series) episodes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152746" wikidata="Q2628044" url="?curid=152746" title="The Howling Man">
<text>&quot;The Howling Man&quot; is episode 41 of the American television anthology series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It originally aired on November 4, 1960 on CBS. The episode was based on the short story by Charles Beaumont published in the November 1959 issue of &quot;Rogue&quot; magazine.

==Opening narration==
==Plot==
While on a walking trip through post–World War I Central Europe circa 1919, David Ellington becomes lost in a storm. He sees an ancient castle, now the home of a monastic order. He knocks at the door and pleads for help. He is told by the monk who opens the door that they do not allow visitors. After Ellington further begs, the monk goes to speak to a person he names as Brother Jerome, while Ellington waits and hears a wolf-like howl coming from inside the castle. The monk returns and, when asked about the howling, says it is merely the wind. The monk takes Ellington to meet Brother Jerome, the leader of the order. After Ellington explains himself, Brother Jerome announces that there is no help to be had there and that Ellington must leave. Bewildered, Ellington walks out and collapses in the hallway.

When Ellington awakens, he again hears howling. He investigates and finds a man in a cell. The man claims to be unjustly imprisoned by the &quot;mad&quot; monks, and beaten by Brother Jerome using the staff he carries. Ellington is seen talking to the prisoner and is taken back to Brother Jerome. Ellington agrees to leave but also threatens to go to the police. Brother Jerome, disturbed by Ellington&#x27;s threat, then reveals the truth: the prisoner is the Devil himself, and can only be contained by Brother Jerome&#x27;s &quot;Staff of Truth&quot;. The Devil had come to the village shortly after World War I to corrupt it, but Brother Jerome used the staff to imprison him. These actions have given the world five years of relative peace. Ellington pretends to believe the story; Brother Jerome is not fooled and assigns a brother to watch him.

Ellington waits until his guard falls asleep, then creeps down to the cell and sees that the door is held shut only by a staff that is within reach of the imprisoned man. At the man&#x27;s urging, Ellington removes the staff. The prisoner exits the cell and pins Ellington to the floor with a wave of his hand. As he walks toward the exit, he begins to change, taking on the appearance of the Devil, before departing the castle in a plume of smoke. Brother Jerome arrives, and sadly explains that the inability to recognize the Devil has always been Man&#x27;s great weakness.

Ellington has been telling his story to a maid. He says that ever since then he has been hunting for the Devil to atone for his mistake, through World War II, the Korean War, and the development of nuclear weapons. He has finally succeeded, locking the Devil in a closet barred by a staff similar to Brother Jerome&#x27;s. Ellington intends to return him to the castle; he warns the skeptical housekeeper to not remove the staff under any circumstances. As soon as Ellington leaves, the maid hears a howl from behind the door, removes the staff, and opens the door.

==Closing narration==
==Cast==
*H.M. Wynant as David Ellington
*John Carradine as Brother Jerome
*Robin Hughes as The Howling Man
*Frederic Ledebur as Brother Christophorus
*Ezelle Poule as Housekeeper

==Production==
This was the first aired episode of the second season that was not written by Rod Serling.

Charles Beaumont had originally envisioned that the monks would keep the Devil imprisoned by putting a cross in front of his cell door. Fearful of a backlash in the religious community, the producers substituted the &quot;staff of truth&quot; over Beaumont&#x27;s objections.

==See also==
*List of &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; (1959 TV series) episodes

==References==
*Zicree, Marc Scott. &quot;The Twilight Zone Companion&quot;. Sillman-James Press, 1982 (second edition).
*DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. 
*Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2628044" start="6" end="21" title="The Howling Man" label="The Howling Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="49" end="68" title="American television" label="American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="92" end="109" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="160" end="163" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="209" end="225" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359502" start="272" end="277" title="Rogue (magazine)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="363" end="374" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="375" end="389" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="462" end="468" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="488" end="502" title="monastic order" label="monastic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="565" end="569" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="1602" end="1607" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2717" end="2729" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2735" end="2745" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2770" end="2784" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627977" start="3171" end="3182" title="H.M. Wynant" label="H.M. Wynant"/>
<link wikidata="Q312878" start="3203" end="3217" title="John Carradine" label="John Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352551" start="3237" end="3249" title="Robin Hughes (actor)" label="Robin Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q86638" start="3270" end="3286" title="Frederic Ledebur" label="Frederic Ledebur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3313" end="3325" title="Ezelle Poule" label="Ezelle Poule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="3449" end="3465" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="3552" end="3557" title="Christian cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059942" start="3740" end="3799" title="List of The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;Twilight Zone&amp;quot; (1959 TV series) episodes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152747" wikidata="Q2629160" url="?curid=152747" title="Eye of the Beholder (The Twilight Zone, 1959)">
<text>&quot;Eye of the Beholder&quot; (also titled &quot;The Private World of Darkness&quot; when initially rebroadcast in the summer of 1962) is episode 42 of the American television anthology series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. It originally aired on November 11, 1960, on CBS.

==Opening narration==
==Plot summary==
Janet Tyler has undergone her eleventh treatment - the maximum number legally allowed by the &quot;State&quot; - in an attempt to look normal. Her head is completely bandaged so that her face is entirely covered, and her face is described as a &quot;pitiful twisted lump of flesh&quot; by the nurses and doctor, lurking in the shadows of the darkened hospital room. The outcome of the procedure cannot be known until the bandages are removed. Unable to bear the bandages any longer, Janet pleads with the doctor and eventually convinces him to remove them early. As he prepares, the nurse says that she still is uneasy about Janet&#x27;s appearance. The doctor becomes displeased and questions why Janet or anyone must be judged on their outer beauty. The nurse warns him not to continue in that vein, as it is considered treason.

The doctor removes the bandages and announces that the procedure has failed, her face having undergone no change. Janet is revealed to be a beautiful woman by contemporary standards while the hospital staff all possess monstrous faces with drooping features, large, thick brows, sunken-in eyes, swollen and twisted lips, and wrinkled noses with pig snout-like nostrils. Distraught by the procedure&#x27;s failure, Janet tries to escape until a similarly attractive man named Walter Smith arrives to take her to a village of &quot;[her] own kind&quot; where they will not trouble the State. As he does so, he assures that while the State&#x27;s society find her ugly, others will find her beautiful.

==Closing narration==
==Cast==
*Maxine Stuart as Janet Tyler (under bandages)
*Donna Douglas as Janet Tyler (unmasked)
*William D. Gordon as Doctor Bernardi
*Jennifer Howard as Nurse
*Edson Stroll as Walter Smith
*George Keymas as The Leader
*Joanna Heyes as Nurse #2

==Production==
Because of the complex makeup and camera angles, this was one of the most difficult episodes of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; to film. The director, Douglas Heyes, wanted the show to feature actors with sympathetic voices. To achieve this, he cast the episode with his back to the performers.Maxine Stuart, spoke all the lines of the main character Janet Tyler, when her head is entirely covered by bandages, and dubbed the single line spoken by Tyler when she is revealed (as portrayed by the actress Donna Douglas). 

The original title for this episode was &quot;Eye of the Beholder&quot;. Stuart Reynolds, a television producer, threatened to sue writer and producer Rod Serling for the use of the name. At the time, Reynolds was selling an educational film of the same name to public schools. Reruns following the initial broadcast featured the title screen &quot;The Private World of Darkness&quot;. Because CBS consulted different prints over the years for syndication packages, the closing credits for this episode vary from one title to the other, depending on which television station is using which package. In &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;″s original DVD release the syndicated version was marketed as an &quot;alternate version&quot;. Other than the appearance of the title in the closing credits, however, there are no differences between the two &quot;versions&quot;.

Serling, who wrote the episode, reused the theme for a later teleplay, &quot;The Different Ones&quot;, for his series &quot;Night Gallery&quot;. &quot;The Different Ones&quot; takes place in a futuristic world where a disfigured hermit teenage boy is sent on a NASA rocket to a planet where the inhabitants are revealed to look like him. During the transfer he meets a conventionally handsome alien youth, who is going to Earth because of his own &quot;disfigurement&quot;.

==2003 remake==

This episode was remade for the 2002–03 revival of the series using Serling&#x27;s original script (but discarding Bernard Herrmann&#x27;s original score), with Molly Sims as Janet Tyler, Reggie Hayes as Dr. Bernardi and Roger Cross as the Leader. The make-up was changed to make the faces look more melted, ghoulish and decayed with deep ridges. The remake follows the original script more faithfully. The projection screens were changed to plasma screens and more of the dialogue from the Leader&#x27;s monologue was used.

==See also==
* List of &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; (1959 TV series) episodes
*&quot;Weird Science&quot; #21 Sep/Oct 1953, &quot;The Ugly One&quot;

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Zicree, Marc Scott. &quot;The Twilight Zone Companion&quot;. Sillman-James Press, 1982 (second edition).
* DeVoe, Bill. (2008). &quot;Trivia from The Twilight Zone&quot;. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. 
* Grams, Martin. (2008). &quot;The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic&quot;. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. 

==External links==
* &quot;Eye of the Beholder&quot; Review at &quot;The Twilight Zone Project&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2629160" start="6" end="25" title="Eye of the Beholder (The Twilight Zone, 1959)" label="Eye of the Beholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629160" start="51" end="80" title="Eye of the Beholder (The Twilight Zone, 1959)" label="The Private World of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="158" end="177" title="American television" label="American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="201" end="218" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="271" end="274" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795996" start="1880" end="1893" title="Maxine Stuart" label="Maxine Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036761" start="1927" end="1940" title="Donna Douglas" label="Donna Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56254397" start="1968" end="1985" title="William D. Gordon (actor)" label="William D. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178451" start="2006" end="2021" title="Jennifer Howard (actress)" label="Jennifer Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048263" start="2032" end="2044" title="Edson Stroll" label="Edson Stroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053777" start="2062" end="2075" title="George Keymas" label="George Keymas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038007" start="2281" end="2294" title="Douglas Heyes" label="Douglas Heyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795996" start="2424" end="2437" title="Maxine Stuart" label="Maxine Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036761" start="2634" end="2647" title="Donna Douglas" label="Donna Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3046" end="3049" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="3295" end="3298" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="3640" end="3653" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3777" end="3781" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581244" start="4040" end="4069" title="The Twilight Zone (2002 TV series)" label="2002–03 revival of the series"/>
<link wikidata="Q236537" start="4169" end="4179" title="Molly Sims" label="Molly Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308242" start="4196" end="4208" title="Reggie Hayes" label="Reggie Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093611" start="4229" end="4240" title="Roger Cross" label="Roger Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059942" start="4549" end="4608" title="List of The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes" label="List of &amp;quot;Twilight Zone&amp;quot; (1959 TV series) episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567110" start="4616" end="4629" title="Weird Science (comics)" label="Weird Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152749" wikidata="Q739046" url="?curid=152749" title="Les Diaboliques (film)">
<text>Les Diaboliques (, released as Diabolique in the United States and variously translated as The Devils or The Fiends) is a 1955 French psychological horror thriller film co-written and directed by Henri-Georges Clouzot, starring Simone Signoret, Véra Clouzot, Paul Meurisse and Charles Vanel. It is based on the 1952 novel &quot;She Who Was No More&quot; (&quot;Celle qui n&#x27;était plus&quot;) by Pierre Boileau and Thomas Narcejac.

The story blends elements of thriller and horror, with the plot focusing on a woman and her husband&#x27;s mistress who conspire to murder the man. It was the 10th highest-grossing film of the year in France, with a total of 3,674,380 admissions. The film also received the 1954 Louis Delluc Prize.

Clouzot, after finishing &quot;The Wages of Fear&quot; (1953), optioned the screenplay rights, preventing Alfred Hitchcock from making the film. The film helped inspire Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960). Robert Bloch, the author of the novel &quot;Psycho&quot;, stated in an interview that his all-time favorite horror film was &quot;Les Diaboliques&quot;.

==Plot==
A second-rate boarding school in Saint-Cloud, Hauts-de-Seine, in the Paris metropolitan area, is run by the tyrannical and cruel Michel Delassalle. The school is owned, though, by Delassalle&#x27;s teacher wife, the frail Christina, an émigrée from Venezuela. Michel also has an extramarital relationship with Nicole Horner, another teacher at the school. Rather than antagonism, the two women have a somewhat close relationship, primarily based on their apparent mutual hatred of Michel. He is cruel to the students, beats Nicole, and mocks Christina about her heart condition.

Unable to stand his mistreatment any longer, Nicole devises a plan to get rid of Michel forever. Though hesitant at first, Christina ultimately consents to help Nicole. Using a threatened divorce to lure Michel to Nicole&#x27;s apartment building in Niort, a town several hundred kilometers away, Christina sedates him. The two women then drown him in a bathtub and, driving back to the school, dump his body in the neglected swimming pool. When his corpse floats to the top, they think it will appear to have been an accident. Almost everything goes according to their plans until the body fails to surface. Michel&#x27;s corpse is nowhere to be found when the pool is drained. Afterwards, the suit that Michel had been wearing when they drowned him is returned from the dry cleaners. When the proprietor of the dry cleaners also returns a key to a room in a nearby hotel that was with the clothes, Christina goes to the room. There, the cleaning man tells her that Michel had kept the room for a while but was rarely if ever seen and stored nothing there.

Nicole sees in the newspaper that the police have found the corpse in the Seine. However, when Christina goes to the morgue, she finds it is not actually Michel&#x27;s body. There, she meets Alfred Fichet, a retired senior policeman now working as a private detective. He becomes involved in the case, much to Nicole&#x27;s chagrin.

Christina, Nicole and other teachers find a student who claims that Michel has ordered him to rake leaves as punishment for breaking a window. Accusing him of lying, Christina confiscates his slingshot. Under the stress, Christina&#x27;s heart condition worsens, and her doctors fear she may die soon unless she maintains strict bed rest. When the school photograph is taken, the result seems to show Michel&#x27;s spectral figure in the window behind the students. Unnerved, Nicole leaves the school; she asks Christina to accompany her, but she is too ill and afraid.

Christina, overcome by fear, confesses everything to Alfred. He does not believe her, but he investigates the pool. That night, Christina hears noises and wanders around the school. When she realizes that someone is following her, she runs back to her room. There, she finds Michel&#x27;s corpse submerged in the bathtub, which is filled with water. Michel rises from the tub, and Christina suffers a fatal heart attack. Michel and Nicole have set up Christina from the beginning, with Michel acting as a vengeful ghost to scare Christina to death. However, Alfred hears their celebration and figures out everything, telling them they will be sentenced to 15 to 20 years in prison, depending on the judge.

The school is closed in the wake of the scandal. As the children and teachers leave, the same boy who had earlier broken a window breaks another. When asked how he recovered his slingshot, the boy says that Christina gave it to him.

==Cast==
==Production==
===Writing===
It was Clouzot&#x27;s wife Vera who drew his attention to the Boileau-Narcejac novel. Clouzot read it through the night and optioned the rights in the morning. He and his brother Jean (who took the pseudonym Jérôme Géronimi) spent 18 months adapting the novel. In the book, the action takes place between Enghien-les-Bains and Nantes but Clouzot transposed it to Saint-Cloud and Niort, his own birthplace. He wasn&#x27;t particularly interested in the insurance scam that was the criminal motive in the book. He switched the gender of the murderers and invented the private-school setting. Susan Hayward suggests that the gender switch made by Clouzot was caused not so much by censorship considerations (in the source novel, Lucienne and Mireille turn out to be a pair of lesbian lovers), but by his desire to create a sizeable role for his wife. The book has only one principal female character, Lucienne, since the supposed victim, Mireille disappears early on. Vera with her distinctly feminine demeanor was ill-suited for the role of Lucienne (called Nicole in the film). So in Clouzot&#x27;s script, Mireille (now named Christina) is the one who has a weak heart, and is the object of manipulation of her husband Michel and his mistress Nicole. Clouzot also followed the convention that the culprits should be exposed by the detective in the end (another departure from the novel where the authors let them get away).

===Casting===
Clouzot cast Simone Signoret in the role of Nicole. He previously filmed her husband Yves Montand in &quot;The Wages of Fear&quot;, and the two couples became friends. The director was also aware of Vera&#x27;s limitations as an actress and needed someone to lend her support in such a demanding role. Signoret signed an eight-week contract but the shooting actually took 16 weeks. She ended up being paid for only eight weeks of work despite staying until the end of the filming because she neglected to read the small print. Signoret&#x27;s co-star Paul Meurisse also recalls in his memoirs that the actress was further bemused by Clouzot&#x27;s constant attempts to find clever ways of lighting Vera&#x27;s face while muting the light on Signoret so she wouldn&#x27;t upstage his wife.

Clouzot knew Paul Meurisse back from 1939 when the latter was trying to pursue a singing career. Clouzot then was trying to sell his song lyrics to Edith Piaf, Meurisse&#x27;s lover at the time. By the late 1940s Meurisse had become an established stage and screen actor, known for the roles of icy and sophisticated villains, and he seemed a natural choice for the role of Michel.

The film featured two Clouzot regulars: Pierre Larquey as M. Drain and Noël Roquevert as M. Herboux. Michel Serrault made his screen debut as M. Raymond, one of the schoolteachers. Charles Vanel—who previously co-starred in Clouzot&#x27;s &quot;The Wages of Fear&quot;—was cast as the seemingly inept Inspector Fichet.

Clouzot also auditioned 300 children and selected 35. Among them were Jean-Philippe Smet (the future Johnny Hallyday), Patrick Dewaere&#x27;s brother Yves-Marie Maurin, and Georges Poujouly, who previously received acclaim in René Clément&#x27;s &quot;Forbidden Games&quot;.

===Filming===
The filming began on August 18, 1954 and finished on November 30 the same year. Clouzot asked his assistant Michel Romanoff to find a suitable filming location for the boarding school. The latter discovered a decrepit chateau in L&#x27;Etang-la-Ville between Saint-Cloud and the Bois-du-Boulogne. The building and its surroundings matched the director&#x27;s vision perfectly since they projected the desired mood of decay and neglect. The adjacent swimming pool was dirty and full of slime. Clouzot spent five weeks shooting at this location.

The screenplay placed Nicole&#x27;s house in Niort, but the actual house used for filming was in Montfort-l&#x27;Amaury, just opposite the building that previously appeared in Clouzot&#x27;s &quot;Le Corbeau&quot;. The morgue scenes were shot in the Institut Médico-légal in Paris. The rest was filmed at Saint-Maurice Studios southeast of Paris which took an additional nine weeks.

The cinematographer, Armand Thirard, used two camera crews to speed up the shooting that was falling behind schedule. Despite his efforts, the filming took twice longer than the projected 48 days.

Originally the film was to be called &quot;Les Veuves&quot; (&quot;The Widows&quot;) but this was deemed unmarketable. Eleven weeks into filming it was changed to &quot;Les Démoniaques&quot;. Eventually it was renamed &quot;Les Diaboliques&quot; but this title was already used for a collection of short stories by the 19th-century writer Barbey d&#x27;Aurevilly. Clouzot was permitted to use this title but only on the condition that he give the author a proper mention. He did it by opening the film with a quote from the preface to d&#x27;Aurevilly&#x27;s work: &quot;A portrait is always moral when it is tragic and shows the horror of the things it represents.&quot;

==Release==
The film created a sensation upon its original release and was a success at the box office with 3,674,380 admissions in France alone. It has often been likened to the films of Alfred Hitchcock; some sources say that Hitchcock missed out on purchasing the rights to the Boileau and Narcejac novel by just a few hours, Clouzot getting to the authors first. The end credits contain an early example of an &quot;anti-spoiler message&quot;.

==Critical reception==
Bosley Crowther gave the film an enthusiastic review in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, calling it &quot;one of the dandiest mystery dramas that has shown here&quot; and &quot;a pip of a murder thriller, ghost story and character play rolled into one&quot;. He added &quot;the writing and the visual construction are superb, and the performance by top-notch French actors on the highest level of sureness and finesse.&quot; The &quot;Chicago Daily Tribune&quot; wrote, &quot;If you like a good mystery and can stand it fairly morbid and uncompromising as to detail, this is one of the best offerings in a long time.&quot; The reviewer added, &quot;You may suspect, as I did, one of the answers as the film nears its finale, but if you solve it all, you&#x27;ve missed your profession.&quot; &quot;Variety&quot; was more critical: “Although this has a few hallucinating bits of terror, the film is primarily a creaky-door type of melodrama. Its macabre aspects and lack of sympathy for the characters make this a hybrid which flounders between a blasting look at human infamy and an out-and-out contrived whodunit.&quot; The National Board of Review named it among the best foreign films of 1955, and called it &quot;a genuine thriller—a shocking, satisfying chunk of &quot;Grand Guignol&quot; psychological suspense.&quot;

British reviews were negative on first release. Milton Shulman in the &quot;Sunday Express&quot; accused the film of &quot;calculated malevolence&quot;, and commented that &quot;it is no trick to sicken an audience by such blunt methods as these.&quot; C. A. Lejeune in &quot;The Observer&quot; called it &quot;extremely clever and very horrid,&quot; and complained about &quot;a vogue at the moment for the horrid in entertainment.&quot; Reg Whiteley in the &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; described it as &quot;a suspenseful but sordid slice of French life,&quot; and exclaimed: &quot;Just how horrible can films get?&quot;

Roger Ebert, reviewing the 1995 re-release, wrote: &quot;The famous plot of the movie usually deceives first-time viewers, at least up to a point. The final revelations are somewhat disappointing, but Clouzot doesn&#x27;t linger over them. The most disturbing elements of the movie are implied, not seen.&quot; &quot;Time Out&quot; commented that the film &quot;makes for a great piece of Guignol misanthropy&quot; where &quot;everyone is in the end a victim, and their actions operate like snares setting traps that leave them grasping for survival.&quot;

On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, &quot;Les Diaboliques&quot; holds an approval rating of 95% based on 85 reviews, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website&#x27;s critics consensus reads, &quot;Cruel, dark, but undeniably effective, &quot;Diabolique&quot; is a suspense thriller as effective as Hitchcock&#x27;s best work and with a brilliant twist ending.&quot;

==Awards==
*1954: Louis Delluc Prize – Best Film
*1955: New York Film Critics Circle Awards – Best Foreign Film
*1956: Edgar Allan Poe Awards – Best Foreign Film

==Legacy and remakes==
The film gained additional press when, only five years after its release, Véra Clouzot died of a heart attack, aged 46, somewhat mirroring her character in the film, who also had heart problems.

&quot;Les Diaboliques&quot; is now considered a classic of the horror genre and film in general. Kim Newman wrote in &quot;Empire&quot;: &quot;The horrific mystery has lost only a fraction of its power over the years, though literally dozens of films (see: &quot;Deathtrap&quot;, &quot;Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte&quot;, &quot;Games&quot; etc.) have borrowed part or all of its tricky storyline. This was one of the first movies to depend on a twist ending which forces you to reassess everything you thought you had been told earlier in the film.&quot; The British Film Institute included it in their list of the &quot;100 Best Thrillers of All Time&quot;, calling it &quot;a compelling, grisly thriller... capped by an unforgettable twist ending.&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed is as No 19 among the 25 best horror films of all time.

The scene in which Christina&#x27;s husband emerges from the bathtub ranked number 49 on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;100 Scariest Movie Moments&quot;.

In 1964, TV writer/producer/director Joseph Stefano was inspired by this film to create a pilot for a thriller anthology series for the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). Titled &quot;The Unknown&quot;, the pilot failed to take off. Stefano then rewrote and reshot it—adding fantasy elements in the process—as an episode of &quot;The Outer Limits&quot; called &quot;The Forms of Things Unknown&quot;. Both versions starred Vera Miles as Kassia Paine, Barbara Rush as Leonora Raymond, and Scott Marlowe as their sadistic blackmailer-returned-from-the-dead, Andre Pavan.

The 1967 film &quot;Games&quot;, written by Gene R. Kearney and directed by Curtis Harrington, and starring James Caan and Katharine Ross, has a different basic situation, but similar twists at the end, and again features Simone Signoret as the corrupt woman of mystery.

British filmmaker Jimmy Sangster cited it as a major influence on his writing and directing, stating: &quot;most of my &#x27;psycho&#x27; type movies ... were derivative of each other and they all went back to my original inspiration: &quot;Les Diaboliques&quot;. I&#x27;m not the only one to follow that path. I guess I just did it more than most.&quot;

An American version of &quot;Les Diaboliques&quot;, titled &quot;Reflections of Murder&quot;, was made by ABC in 1974, starring Tuesday Weld, Joan Hackett, and Sam Waterston. In 1993, another made-for-television film remake was made; this one was titled &quot;House of Secrets&quot;, and it starred Melissa Gilbert. In 1996, the film was remade again as &quot;Diabolique&quot;, adapted by Don Roos, directed by Jeremiah S. Chechik, and starring Sharon Stone and Isabelle Adjani in the leading female roles, with Chazz Palminteri as the husband and Kathy Bates as the detective.

==Home media==
The film was released on DVD by The Criterion Collection in July 1999 and was then re-released on DVD and Blu-ray in May 2011. The latter release features selected-scene commentary by French-film scholar Kelley Conway, a new video introduction by Serge Bromberg, and a new video interview with novelist and film critic Kim Newman.

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===


==External links==
* 
* &quot;Diabolique: Murder Considered as One of the Fine Arts&quot; – an essay by Terrence Rafferty at The Criterion Collection 
* &quot;Diabolique&quot; – an essay by Danny Peary at The Criterion Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q604725" start="134" end="154" title="psychological horror" label="psychological horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="155" end="168" title="thriller film" label="thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55384" start="196" end="217" title="Henri-Georges Clouzot" label="Henri-Georges Clouzot"/>
<link wikidata="Q106126" start="228" end="243" title="Simone Signoret" label="Simone Signoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q434573" start="245" end="257" title="Véra Clouzot" label="Véra Clouzot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384411" start="259" end="272" title="Paul Meurisse" label="Paul Meurisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q965918" start="277" end="290" title="Charles Vanel" label="Charles Vanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943990" start="328" end="347" title="She Who Was No More" label="She Who Was No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662892" start="399" end="433" title="Boileau-Narcejac" label="Pierre Boileau and Thomas Narcejac"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="478" end="484" title="Horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="543" end="551" title="mistress (lover)" label="mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q734335" start="715" end="733" title="Louis Delluc Prize" label="Louis Delluc Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q465773" start="767" end="784" title="The Wages of Fear" label="The Wages of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="812" end="822" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="842" end="858" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="928" end="934" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="949" end="961" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275361" start="993" end="999" title="Psycho (novel)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="1145" end="1156" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12543" start="1158" end="1172" title="Hauts-de-Seine" label="Hauts-de-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081225" start="1181" end="1204" title="Paris metropolitan area" label="Paris metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q184159" start="1942" end="1947" title="Niort" label="Niort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="2825" end="2830" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943990" start="4693" end="4719" title="She Who Was No More" label="the Boileau-Narcejac novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q255105" start="4940" end="4957" title="Enghien-les-Bains" label="Enghien-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="4962" end="4968" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="4998" end="5009" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q184159" start="5014" end="5019" title="Niort" label="Niort"/>
<link wikidata="Q106126" start="6087" end="6102" title="Simone Signoret" label="Simone Signoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q106057" start="6159" end="6171" title="Yves Montand" label="Yves Montand"/>
<link wikidata="Q465773" start="6181" end="6198" title="The Wages of Fear" label="The Wages of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384411" start="6877" end="6890" title="Paul Meurisse" label="Paul Meurisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="7012" end="7022" title="Édith Piaf" label="Edith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385796" start="7287" end="7301" title="Pierre Larquey" label="Pierre Larquey"/>
<link wikidata="Q533912" start="7318" end="7332" title="Noël Roquevert" label="Noël Roquevert"/>
<link wikidata="Q318088" start="7348" end="7363" title="Michel Serrault" label="Michel Serrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q965918" start="7428" end="7441" title="Charles Vanel" label="Charles Vanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212015" start="7668" end="7683" title="Johnny Hallyday" label="Johnny Hallyday"/>
<link wikidata="Q551439" start="7686" end="7701" title="Patrick Dewaere" label="Patrick Dewaere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509056" start="7740" end="7756" title="Georges Poujouly" label="Georges Poujouly"/>
<link wikidata="Q313190" start="7793" end="7805" title="René Clément" label="René Clément"/>
<link wikidata="Q976558" start="7819" end="7834" title="Forbidden Games" label="Forbidden Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q687396" start="8086" end="8107" title="L&amp;#x27;Étang-la-Ville" label="L&amp;#x27;Etang-la-Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q209626" start="8136" end="8152" title="Bois de Boulogne" label="Bois-du-Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q251655" start="8499" end="8521" title="Montfort-l&amp;#x27;Amaury" label="Montfort-l&amp;#x27;Amaury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145140" start="8599" end="8609" title="Le Corbeau" label="Le Corbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q677834" start="8807" end="8821" title="Armand Thirard" label="Armand Thirard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232089" start="9266" end="9295" title="Les Diaboliques (short story collection)" label="a collection of short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q314963" start="9323" end="9346" title="Jules Barbey d&amp;#x27;Aurevilly" label="Barbey d&amp;#x27;Aurevilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="9845" end="9861" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q77852" start="10082" end="10089" title="spoiler (media)" label="spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="10129" end="10144" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="10563" end="10584" title="Chicago Daily Tribune" label="Chicago Daily Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="10926" end="10933" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="11249" end="11277" title="National Board of Review" label="The National Board of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861458" start="11501" end="11515" title="Milton Shulman" label="Milton Shulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="11529" end="11543" title="Sunday Express" label="Sunday Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930468" start="11706" end="11719" title="C. A. Lejeune" label="C. A. Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="11729" end="11741" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="11918" end="11930" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="12073" end="12084" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="12390" end="12398" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="12638" end="12655" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="12664" end="12679" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q734335" start="13034" end="13052" title="Louis Delluc Prize" label="Louis Delluc Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q226003" start="13072" end="13107" title="New York Film Critics Circle" label="New York Film Critics Circle Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569790" start="13135" end="13157" title="List of Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay winners" label="Edgar Allan Poe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="13461" end="13473" title="horror film" label="horror genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q717204" start="13495" end="13505" title="Kim Newman" label="Kim Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="13521" end="13527" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194374" start="13661" end="13670" title="Deathtrap (film)" label="Deathtrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q631947" start="13684" end="13713" title="Hush...Hush, Sweet Charlotte" label="Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364140" start="13727" end="13732" title="Games (film)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="13958" end="13980" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="14333" end="14338" title="Bravo (US TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q326681" start="14424" end="14438" title="Joseph Stefano" label="Joseph Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="14523" end="14552" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="American Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q839437" start="14719" end="14735" title="The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364140" start="14979" end="14984" title="Games (film)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15003" end="15018" title="Gene R. Kearney" label="Gene R. Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q738839" start="15035" end="15052" title="Curtis Harrington" label="Curtis Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q95043" start="15067" end="15077" title="James Caan" label="James Caan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232837" start="15082" end="15096" title="Katharine Ross" label="Katharine Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q106126" start="15181" end="15196" title="Simone Signoret" label="Simone Signoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q967593" start="15249" end="15263" title="Jimmy Sangster" label="Jimmy Sangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084826" start="15652" end="15673" title="Reflections of Murder" label="Reflections of Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q239818" start="15715" end="15727" title="Tuesday Weld" label="Tuesday Weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q273541" start="15729" end="15741" title="Joan Hackett" label="Joan Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q284876" start="15747" end="15760" title="Sam Waterston" label="Sam Waterston"/>
<link wikidata="Q230929" start="15886" end="15901" title="Melissa Gilbert" label="Melissa Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q617117" start="15947" end="15957" title="Diabolique (1996 film)" label="Diabolique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035907" start="15976" end="15984" title="Don Roos" label="Don Roos"/>
<link wikidata="Q655416" start="15998" end="16017" title="Jeremiah S. Chechik" label="Jeremiah S. Chechik"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="16032" end="16044" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q106383" start="16049" end="16064" title="Isabelle Adjani" label="Isabelle Adjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q338812" start="16099" end="16115" title="Chazz Palminteri" label="Chazz Palminteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q544465" start="16135" end="16146" title="Kathy Bates" label="Kathy Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="16213" end="16237" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q717204" start="16500" end="16510" title="Kim Newman" label="Kim Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703508" start="16663" end="16680" title="Terrence Rafferty" label="Terrence Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="16684" end="16708" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220732" start="16749" end="16760" title="Danny Peary" label="Danny Peary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152750" wikidata="Q732001" url="?curid=152750" title="Tricity, Poland">
<text>Tricity, or Tri-City (; , ; ; German: &quot;Dreistadt&quot;), is an urban area in Pomeranian Voivodeship, Poland, consisting of three contiguous coastal cities in Pomerelia forming a row on the coastline of the Gdańsk Bay, Baltic Sea, namely the cities of Gdańsk, Gdynia, and Sopot, along with other cities and towns in their vicinity. In 2021, the three core cities were inhabited by 749,786 people, while the Tricity together with its metropolitan area had a combined population of between 1 and 1.5 million, depending on the definition of the boundaries of the latter.

The designation has been used informally or semi-formally only. A strategic cooperation declaration, the Tricity Charter (Polish: &quot;Karta Trójmiasta&quot;), was signed by the three city mayors on 28 March 2007. The only incorporated common management authority in the Tricity metro is the Gdańsk Bay Public Transport Metropolitan Union () which is, despite the name, an inter-municipal union and not a metropolitan one.

== Economy ==
Nearly 35% of taxpayers from Tricity are in the middle and high taxable income groups (average for Poland 10%). Approximately 12% of Tricity taxpayers are in the highest taxable income group (Polish average 3%).

== Population ==
The total population of the 3 cities comprising Tricity (Gdańsk + Gdynia + Sopot):
* XII.1960: 481,100 inhabitants (286,900 + 150,200 + 44,000)
* XII.1970: 604,800 inhabitants (365,600 + 191,500 + 47,700)
* XII.1975: 693,800 inhabitants (421,000 + 221,100 + 51,700)
* XII.1980: 744,400 inhabitants (456,700 + 236,400 + 51,300)
* XII.2004: 754,960 inhabitants (460,524 + 253,650 + 40,785)
* XII.2006: 748,126 inhabitants (456,658 + 251,844 + 39,624)
* XII.2019: 752,954 inhabitants (470,907 + 246,348 + 35,719)
* XII.2021: 749,786 inhabitants (470,633 + 244,104 + 35,049)
The Tricity metropolitan area also includes Wejherowo, Reda, Rumia, Pruszcz Gdański, and several other communities. The total population in 2006 was 1,100,500, in an area of 1,580.69 km2.

* Largest urban areas of the European Union
* Largest European metropolitan areas

The Tricity continuous urban area includes the following cities:
According to official EU publication the population of Larger Urban Zone of Tricity is 1,098,379.

== Education ==

Tricity is an important center of education.
* Gdańsk: Number of universities: 13 (2010) Number of students: 52,436 (2009) Number of graduates: 10,439 (2001)
* Gdynia: Number of universities: 7 (2010) Number of students: 21,362 (2010)

Some of the universities in the Tricity:
* Academy of Physical Education in Gdańsk
* Academy of Fine Arts in Gdańsk
* Academy of Music in Gdańsk
* Gdynia Maritime University
* Polish Naval Academy in Gdynia
* Medical University of Gdańsk
* University of Gdańsk
* Gdańsk University of Technology
* SWPS University in Sopot
* Sopot University of Applied Sciences
* Gdańsk School of Banking
* Gdańsk Management College
* Gdańsk Higher School of Humanities
* Gdańsk Administration School
* Social Economic Higher School in Gdańsk
* The Higher School of Tourism and Hotel Industry in Gdańsk
* Academy of International Economic and Political Relations in Gdynia
* Kwiatkowski University of Business and Administration in Gdynia
* Pomeranian Higher School of Humanities in Gdynia
* The Higher School of Physical Culture and Tourism in Sopot
* Sopot College

== Entertainment ==

Cinemas:

* Gdańsk Film Centre (studio cinemas; all three closed in 2015)
** Helikon
** Kameralne
** Neptun
* Helios Gdańsk Alfa
* Helios Gdańsk Forum
* Helios Gdynia
* Kameralne Cafe
* Kinoplex
* Multikino Gdańsk
* Multikino Sopot
* Multikino Rumia
* Gdyńskie Centrum Filmowe 
* Polonia
* Żak

Theatres:

* Wybrzeże Theatre
* Danuta Baduszkowa Musical Theatre in Gdynia
* Witold Gombrowicz Municipal Theatre in Gdynia
* Atelier Theatre in Sopot
* Dreams Theatre
* Miniatura Theatre in Gdańsk
* Theatre Znak in Gdańsk
* Wybrzeżak Theatre
* Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre
* Scena Kameralna Teatru Wybrzeże
* Summer Scene of Gdynia&#x27;s Municipal Theatre
* Scena Teatralna ŻAK
* Theatrum Gedanense Foundation

Opera house and Philharmonic

* Forest Opera in Sopot
* Polish Baltic Philharmonic
* Polska Filharmonia Kameralna in Sopot
* Baltic Opera

Museums and art galleries

* Gdańsk City Gallery
* Chodowiecki and Grass House
* Państwowa Galeria Sztuki in Sopot
* National Museum
* Zbrojownia Sztuki
* Art Cybernetics Institute (ICS)
* CSW Łaźnia
* Art Lab Wyspa
* multiple small noninstitutional galleries (Galeria UL, Tajna Galeria, Brama Wyżynna, KIT)
* Museum of the Second World War
* National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk

== Climate ==

Tricity has a temperate climate with warm summers and mild winters. The climate regime differs significantly between cities with Gdańsk belonging to a humid continental climate (monthly mean temperature below zero for two months a year) and Gdynia to oceanic climate (no monthly mean temperature below freezing) according to Koppen-Geiger classificiation. Rain is possible all year round. Autumns are warmer than springs due to the warming effect of the adjacent Baltic Sea. Winters are wet, windy and mild, compared to the interior of Poland. Sea temperatures have been rising significantly during last decades prolonging the summer season to five months in recent years.

==Sport==
Tricity has a number of professional teams, which compete in basketball, volleyball, speedway, handball, rugby union and football.

The most known football clubs, contesting the Tricity Derby, are Lechia Gdańsk and Arka Gdynia.

Both clubs also possess highly successful rugby teams, RC Arka, who play at the National Rugby Stadium and RC Lechia. There is a third top-flight Polish rugby team Ogniwo Sopot, making the Tricity Poland&#x27;s rugby capital.

The third football club is Bałtyk Gdynia, in the past also a multi-sports club with over 20 different sections.

Wybrzeże Gdańsk are the Tricity&#x27;s speedway team, formerly a multi-sports club, now its only other remaining section is the reactivated handball team, former ten-times men&#x27;s Polish champions.

Arka also fields a men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s professional basketball team while Trefl Sopot is the other men&#x27;s professional basketball club in the Tricity.

Stoczniowiec Gdańsk is the local ice hockey team.

== Transport ==

The Tricity has a well-developed traffic infrastructure and public transport system. Development of the Tricity was smoothed by the construction of the rapid transit rail (SKM) 1951, binding the whole area from Tczew by Gdańsk, Sopot 1953, Gdynia 1956, Reda, Rumia to Wejherowo 1957. In 1975, the Tricity Beltway was constructed.

The Gdańsk Bay Public Transport Metropolitan Union (MZKZG), a body incorporated by the municipalities in the area to act as a common public transport authority, issues tickets valid both for the SKM Rapid Transit Rail, as well as for all or some of the trams and buses in Gdańsk or trolleybuses and buses in Sopot and Gdynia.

===Road transport===
The backbone of the Tricity is the inner highway. It starts in Gdańsk and goes through Sopot, Gdynia, Rumia and Reda to Wejherowo. It consists of 2-4 lanes in each direction.

The dual carriageway Tricity Beltway (Obwodnica Trójmiejska) starts in the vicinity of Pruszcz Gdański and goes through the western districts of Gdańsk to Gdynia-Chylonia.

====Trolleybus, bus and coach====
The variety and number of public bus lines and coach connections facilitates the travel around the Tricity and surrounding areas. One of the most popular means of transport in the Pomerania province is the public coach. The high number of bus lines covers every quarter of the three cities within the metropolis. In addition to usual buses, Gdynia also operates trolleybuses which reach Sopot.

=== Rail transport ===
====Tramway====
The city of Gdańsk operates a well-developed tram system.

==== Tricity Rapid Transit Rail ====
The Tricity area is served by the SKM rail network (known in Polish as &quot;Szybka Kolej Miejska w Trójmieście&quot; or &quot;Tricity Rapid Transit Rail&quot;). It currently provides regular service primarily on two dedicated railways complemented by some of the ordinary railways in the region, both as a commuter rail connecting some of the peripheral towns and villages with each other and with the principal cities of Gdańsk, Gdynia and Sopot, as well as internal rapid transit service within the urban core formed by the three cities. The intervals range from every 6 minutes during peak time on the main common section between Gdańsk and Gdynia to 30 minutes at the farthest ends.
The rapid transit rail network has achieved since its inception in 1951 a unifying effect on the metro area formerly divided by a frontier, by linking the connected localities with a frequent and reliable service. More recently, a pre-war railway destroyed in 1945 by the retreating German army has been reconstructed as the 19.5 km &quot;Pomorska Kolej Metropolitalna&quot; (Pomeranian Metropolitan Railway) or &quot;PKM&quot; line, also been operated by the SKM, and put into service in 2015, providing connection of the downtown station of Gdańsk Wrzeszcz Station with the Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport, with further service to the Gdynia Główna Station provided via an earlier existing railway, thus forming a loop connected to the primary SKM line directly at its southern terminus, while the northern terminus is connected indirectly through an earlier existing line. The primary SKM line has been served by overhead-powered electrical multiple units since its inauguration, while the PKM line is currently serviced by oil-powered units, though it is scheduled for imminent electrification.

==== Regional rail connections and remote rail destinations ====
The area is well connected to the rest of the Pomerania region, as well as Poland and the rest of Europe. Polregio network provides a regional rail service connecting the cities and towns of the Pomerania. Gdańsk Główny and Gdynia Główna serve as major rail hubs for the area, with these stations and five others, Gdańsk Wrzeszcz, Gdańsk Oliwa, Sopot, Wejherowo and Rumia offering inter-city services to cities around Poland and in other countries, operated by Polish State Railways under the PKP Intercity branding. Most of the stations that are served by regional and inter-city rail are also part of the above-mentioned SKM network.

=== Air transport ===

Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport is one of the three busiest Polish international airports. Its position is associated with a well-developed network of domestic and international transport connections provided in response to the growing demand for business and tourist travel.

The Gdańsk Airport is located 10 km from the centre of Gdańsk, about the same distance from the centre of Sopot and 23 km from the centre of Gdynia. The continually expanding road system which connects the airport with the city centres allows drivers to cover the distances in about 15–20 minutes. The close vicinity of the Tri-city by-pass and junctions with state motorways nos. 1, 6 and 7 facilitates access from areas outside the Tri-city. The convenient location of the airport makes it easy for travellers and cargo carriers to transfer from air to road, and also to the railway network and seaports. Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport has its own railway siding which can be used for handling large lots of cargo dispatched by air.

The Gdańsk Airport operates even the biggest planes and allows thousands of tourists to visit the Pomerania province every day. Just in front of the main entrance to the passenger terminal, the visitors can find a bus that will take them to the city centre. There are frequent SKM trains running from the train station in front of the airport to Gdynia, Gdańsk Wrzeszcz, Kartuzy and Kościerzyna. A passenger may also choose to take a taxi.

A failed attempt was undertaken to partially repurpose the Military Gdynia-Kosakowo Airport into a dual-use military and civil one.

==== Scheduled passenger destinations ====
* Ålesund (WizzAir)
* Aarhus (Eurolot)
* Aberdeen (WizzAir)
* Amsterdam (Eurolot)
* Belfast (EasyJet)
* Barcelona Girona (WizzAir)
* Birmingham (Ryanair)
* Bournemouth (WizzAir)
* Bremen (Eurolot)
* Bristol (EasyJet)
* Cardiff (bmibaby)
* Cologne / Bonn (WizzAir)
* Copenhagen (SAS and Ryanair)
* Cork (Ryanair)
* Coventry (WizzAir)
* Doncaster Sheffield (WizzAir)
* Dortmund (WizzAir)
* Dublin (Ryanair)
* East Midlands Airport (bmibaby)
* Eindhoven (WizzAir)
* Frankfurt (LOT, Lufthansa)
* Frankfurt Hahn (Ryanair)
* Glasgow Prestwick (WizzAir)
* Gothenburg (WizzAir)
* Hamburg Lubeck (WizzAir)
* Haugesund (WizzAir)
* Helsinki (Finnair)
* Iraklion (LOT)
* Karlskrona Ronneby
* Katowice (Eurolot)
* Kraków (Eurolot)
* Leeds Bradford Airport (Ryanair)
* Liverpool (WizzAir)
* London Gatwick Airport (EasyJet)
* London Luton Airport (WizzAir)
* London Stansted Airport (Ryanair)
* Malmö Airport (WizzAir)
* Munich (LOT)
* Oslo (Norwegian, SAS)
* Oslo Torp (WizzAir)
* Poprad (Eurolot)
* Salzburg (Eurolot)
* Stockholm Skavsta Airport (WizzAir)
* Turku (WizzAir)
* Vilnius (AirBaltic)
* Warsaw (LOT)

=== Maritime transport ===
====Scheduled ferry lines====
* Gdynia - Karlskrona - Gdynia (Stena Line)
* Gdynia - Hanko (Finnlines)- freight service only
* Gdańsk - Nynashamn - Gdańsk (Polferries)

==Foreign representatives==

Gdańsk:

* Consul of the Kingdom of Denmark
* General Consulate of China
* General Consulate of Russia
* General Consulate of the Republic of Belarus
* General Consulate of the Federal Republic of Germany
* General Consulate of Ukraine
* Honorary Consul of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
* Honorary Consul of the United Kingdom
* Honorary Consul of the Republic of Latvia
* Honorary Consul of the Republic of Lithuania
* Honorary Consul of the United Mexican States
* Honorary Consul of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
* Honorary Consul of Peru
* Honorary Consul of the Kingdom of Spain

Gdynia:

* General Consulate of the Kingdom of Sweden
* General Consulate of Romania
* Honorary Consul of the Czech Republic
* Honorary Consul of the Republic of Finland
* Honorary Consul of Italy
* Honorary Consul of Azerbaijan
* Honorary Consul of the Republic of Austria
* Honorary Consul of Chile
* Honorary Consul of the Republic of Cyprus
* Honorary Consul of the People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh
* Honorary Consul of the Kingdom of Norway
* Honorary Consul of France

Sopot:

* General Consulate of the Republic of Iceland
* Honorary Consul of the Republic of Slovakia

==See also==
* Metropolitan areas in Poland
* Kashubia
* Little Kashubian Tricity, which lies directly northwest of Tricity
* Tricity Landscape Park

== References ==
== External links ==

* Virtual Tour on beautiful Coast in Gdynia-Orlowo
* Gdańsk transport system (PL, ENG)
* Gdynia transport system (PL)
* SKM (Fast Urban Railway) - map (PL)
* Tricity Public Communication Timetables
* Map and Guide to agglomeration (PL, ENG)
* Map of population density in the urban area
* Tricity for tourists from Scandinavia (ENG)
* City of Gdynia (PL, ENG, DE, SWE, DEN, FR, RU)
* City of Sopot (PL, ENG, DE, FR, RU)
* City of Gdańsk (PL, ENG)
* Pomeranian Voivodeship Tourist Portal (PL, ENG, DE, FR, RU)
* City break in Tricity (ENG)
* Pomeranian Science and Technology Park in Gdynia (PL, ENG, DE, FR, IT, DEN)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="0" end="7" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="12" end="20" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tri-City"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="30" end="36" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="68" end="78" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="82" end="104" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="106" end="112" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="153" end="159" title="city" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="163" end="172" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="211" end="221" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="223" end="233" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="256" end="262" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="264" end="270" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="276" end="281" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="437" end="454" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q672949" start="1857" end="1866" title="Wejherowo" label="Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q936933" start="1868" end="1872" title="Reda, Poland" label="Reda"/>
<link wikidata="Q78712" start="1874" end="1879" title="Rumia" label="Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q988590" start="1881" end="1896" title="Pruszcz Gdański" label="Pruszcz Gdański"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809955" start="2004" end="2045" title="Largest urban areas of the European Union" label="Largest urban areas of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030300" start="2048" end="2083" title="Largest European metropolitan areas" label="Largest European metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="2313" end="2319" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="2426" end="2432" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059233" start="2587" end="2617" title="Academy of Fine Arts in Gdańsk" label="Academy of Fine Arts in Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264760" start="2649" end="2675" title="Gdynia Maritime University" label="Gdynia Maritime University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11684710" start="2678" end="2698" title="Polish Naval Academy" label="Polish Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529378" start="2711" end="2739" title="Medical University of Gdańsk" label="Medical University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758009" start="2742" end="2762" title="University of Gdańsk" label="University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q465922" start="2765" end="2796" title="Gdańsk University of Technology" label="Gdańsk University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970913" start="2799" end="2814" title="SWPS University" label="SWPS University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529385" start="3914" end="3940" title="Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre" label="Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445398" start="4112" end="4133" title="Forest Opera" label="Forest Opera in Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q805784" start="4136" end="4162" title="Polish Baltic Philharmonic" label="Polish Baltic Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146544" start="4205" end="4217" title="Baltic State Opera" label="Baltic Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="4328" end="4333" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11129717" start="4529" end="4559" title="Museum of the Second World War" label="Museum of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845346" start="4562" end="4594" title="National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk" label="National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="4740" end="4746" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="4762" end="4787" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="4852" end="4858" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="4862" end="4877" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4936" end="4949" title="Koppen-Geiger" label="Koppen-Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="5074" end="5084" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="5356" end="5366" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="5368" end="5378" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="5380" end="5388" title="motorcycle speedway" label="speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="5390" end="5398" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="5400" end="5411" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5416" end="5424" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206260" start="5473" end="5486" title="Tricity Derby" label="Tricity Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q734785" start="5492" end="5505" title="Lechia Gdańsk" label="Lechia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q666969" start="5510" end="5521" title="Arka Gdynia" label="Arka Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276160" start="5579" end="5586" title="RC Arka Gdynia" label="RC Arka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180640" start="5604" end="5626" title="Narodowy Stadion Rugby" label="National Rugby Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753568" start="5631" end="5640" title="RC Lechia Gdańsk" label="RC Lechia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091206" start="5659" end="5669" title="Rugby Ekstraliga" label="top-flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796690" start="5688" end="5700" title="Ogniwo Sopot" label="Ogniwo Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669757" start="5778" end="5791" title="Bałtyk Gdynia" label="Bałtyk Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021139" start="5864" end="5879" title="Wybrzeże Gdańsk" label="Wybrzeże Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="5929" end="5946" title="multi-sports club" label="multi-sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q69064066" start="5952" end="5984" title="Wybrzeże Gdańsk (handball)" label="its only other remaining section"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="6004" end="6012" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345484" start="6047" end="6063" title="Polish Ekstraklasa Men&amp;#x27;s Handball League" label="Polish champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q740058" start="6085" end="6095" title="Arka Gdynia (basketball)" label="men&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260039" start="6100" end="6112" title="Arka Gdynia (women&amp;#x27;s basketball)" label="women&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748232" start="6148" end="6159" title="Trefl Sopot" label="Trefl Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892749" start="6230" end="6249" title="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="6450" end="6463" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478985" start="6470" end="6473" title="Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity)" label="SKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q474697" start="6509" end="6514" title="Tczew" label="Tczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="6518" end="6524" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="6526" end="6531" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="6538" end="6544" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q936933" start="6551" end="6555" title="Reda, Poland" label="Reda"/>
<link wikidata="Q78712" start="6557" end="6562" title="Rumia" label="Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672949" start="6566" end="6575" title="Wejherowo" label="Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="6882" end="6886" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="6911" end="6921" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="7157" end="7173" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075613" start="7191" end="7212" title="Obwodnica Trójmiejska" label="Obwodnica Trójmiejska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="7722" end="7732" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997403" start="7822" end="7850" title="Trams in Gdańsk" label="a well-developed tram system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478985" start="7924" end="7927" title="Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity)" label="SKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q934967" start="9121" end="9144" title="Gdańsk Wrzeszcz railway station" label="Gdańsk Wrzeszcz Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q779984" start="9154" end="9180" title="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport" label="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q800808" start="9210" end="9223" title="Gdynia Główna" label="Gdynia Główna"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="9506" end="9530" title="electrical multiple unit" label="electrical multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139703" start="9844" end="9852" title="Polregio" label="Polregio"/>
<link wikidata="Q557448" start="9944" end="9957" title="Gdańsk Główny railway station" label="Gdańsk Główny"/>
<link wikidata="Q800808" start="9962" end="9975" title="Gdynia Główna railway station" label="Gdynia Główna"/>
<link wikidata="Q934967" start="10052" end="10067" title="Gdańsk Wrzeszcz railway station" label="Gdańsk Wrzeszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q594376" start="10069" end="10081" title="Gdańsk Oliwa railway station" label="Gdańsk Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563186" start="10083" end="10088" title="Sopot railway station" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668296" start="10090" end="10099" title="Wejherowo railway station" label="Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523052" start="10104" end="10109" title="Rumia railway station" label="Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q249591" start="10199" end="10220" title="Polish State Railways" label="Polish State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q590406" start="10231" end="10244" title="PKP Intercity" label="PKP Intercity"/>
<link wikidata="Q779984" start="10398" end="10424" title="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport" label="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071029" start="11911" end="11934" title="Gdynia-Kosakowo Airport" label="Gdynia-Kosakowo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q62266" start="12021" end="12028" title="Ålesund" label="Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="12041" end="12047" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="12060" end="12068" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="12081" end="12090" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="12103" end="12110" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="12123" end="12132" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="12152" end="12162" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="12175" end="12186" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="12199" end="12205" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="12218" end="12225" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="12238" end="12245" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="12258" end="12265" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="12285" end="12295" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="12316" end="12320" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="12333" end="12341" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q58900" start="12354" end="12363" title="Doncaster" label="Doncaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="12386" end="12394" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="12407" end="12413" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8977" start="12426" end="12447" title="East Midlands Airport" label="East Midlands Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="12460" end="12469" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="12482" end="12491" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q158211" start="12511" end="12525" title="Frankfurt Hahn" label="Frankfurt Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="12538" end="12545" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="12568" end="12578" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="12591" end="12598" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q109036" start="12618" end="12627" title="Haugesund" label="Haugesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="12640" end="12648" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q160544" start="12661" end="12669" title="Iraklion" label="Iraklion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25789" start="12678" end="12688" title="Karlskrona" label="Karlskrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="12699" end="12707" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="12720" end="12726" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q8699" start="12739" end="12761" title="Leeds Bradford Airport" label="Leeds Bradford Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="12774" end="12783" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="12796" end="12818" title="London Gatwick Airport" label="London Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8712" start="12831" end="12851" title="London Luton Airport" label="London Luton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="12864" end="12887" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London Stansted Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q898922" start="12900" end="12913" title="Malmö Airport" label="Malmö Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="12926" end="12932" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="12941" end="12945" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="12965" end="12969" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26393" start="12987" end="12993" title="Poprad" label="Poprad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="13006" end="13014" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q664946" start="13027" end="13052" title="Stockholm Skavsta Airport" label="Stockholm Skavsta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="13065" end="13070" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="13083" end="13090" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="13105" end="13111" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q25789" start="13187" end="13197" title="Karlskrona" label="Karlskrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q833903" start="13208" end="13218" title="Stena Line" label="Stena Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q216790" start="13231" end="13236" title="Hanko, Finland" label="Hanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418246" start="13238" end="13247" title="Finnlines" label="Finnlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q738338" start="13282" end="13291" title="Nynashamn" label="Nynashamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150381" start="13302" end="13312" title="Polferries" label="Polferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="13369" end="13387" title="Kingdom of Denmark" label="Kingdom of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13411" end="13416" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="13440" end="13446" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="13474" end="13493" title="Republic of Belarus" label="Republic of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="13521" end="13548" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="13572" end="13579" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="13605" end="13644" title="Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" label="Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="13670" end="13684" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="13710" end="13728" title="Republic of Latvia" label="Republic of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="13754" end="13775" title="Republic of Lithuania" label="Republic of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="13801" end="13822" title="United Mexican States" label="United Mexican States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="13848" end="13874" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="13896" end="13900" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="13926" end="13942" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="13980" end="13997" title="Kingdom of Sweden" label="Kingdom of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="14021" end="14028" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="14054" end="14068" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="14094" end="14113" title="Republic of Finland" label="Republic of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="14135" end="14140" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="14162" end="14172" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="14198" end="14217" title="Republic of Austria" label="Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="14239" end="14244" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="14270" end="14288" title="Republic of Cyprus" label="Republic of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="14314" end="14350" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="14376" end="14393" title="Norway" label="Kingdom of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14415" end="14421" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="14458" end="14477" title="Republic of Iceland" label="Republic of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="14503" end="14523" title="Republic of Slovakia" label="Republic of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825339" start="14540" end="14568" title="Metropolitan areas in Poland" label="Metropolitan areas in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q147804" start="14571" end="14579" title="Kashubia" label="Kashubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q925971" start="14582" end="14606" title="Little Kashubian Tricity" label="Little Kashubian Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841135" start="14651" end="14673" title="Tricity Landscape Park" label="Tricity Landscape Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152752" wikidata="Q3687335" url="?curid=152752" title="Council of state">
<text>A council of state is a governmental body in a country, or a subdivision of a country, with a function that varies by jurisdiction. It may be the formal name for the cabinet or it may refer to a non-executive advisory body associated with a head of state. In some countries it functions as a supreme administrative court and is sometimes regarded as the equivalent of a privy council.

==Modern==
* Belgian Council of State is a judicial and advisory body that assists the executive with obligatory legal advice on each draft law and is the supreme court for administrative justice
* Chinese State Council is the country&#x27;s highest executive body
* Colombian Council of State
* Cuban Council of State
* Danish Council of State is similar to a privy council with a largely ceremonial role 
* Dutch Council of State is an advisory body that consists of one or two members of the royal family and other members appointed by the Crown
* Egyptian Council of State
* Finnish Government is literally referred to as council of state in Finnish () and Swedish ()
* French Council of State is a judicial and advisory body. It assists the executive with legal advice and is the supreme court for administrative justice
* Ghanaian Council of State advises the President of Ghana in the exercise of most of his/her reserve powers 
* Greek Council of State is the supreme administrative court of Greece and also examines all presidential decrees before they are issued
* Irish Council of State advises the President of Ireland in the exercise of most of his/her reserve powers
* Italian Council of State is a legal and administrative consultative body that ensures the legality of public administration.
* Luxembourg Council of State
* Nigerian Council of State
* North Carolina Council of State
* Norwegian Council of State
* South Korean State Council is a national council constituted by South Korean cabinet, constitutionally empowered to deliberate important policies of executive branch of South Korean government
* Spanish Council of State
* Swedish Council of State (1975-present)
* Philippine Council of State
* Portuguese Council of State is an advisory body of the President of the Republic
* Thai Council of State advises the executive branch on legal matters and until the establishment of the administrative courts in 1999, it also served as the supreme administrative court
* East Timorese Council of State is the political advisory body of the President of Timor-Leste
* Turkish Council of State is the supreme court for administrative justice

==Defunct==
* Brazilian Empire&#x27;s Council of State (1822–1889)
* Council of State of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma (1974-1988)
* Council of State of the People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea (1981–1993)
* Chilean Council of State (1976–1980)
* English Council of State (1649–1660)
* State Council of the German Democratic Republic (1960–1990)
* Indian Council of State (1919–1947)
* Ethiopian Council of State (1987–1991)
* Israeli Provisional State Council (1948–1949)
* Japanese Great Council of State (689–1885)
* Liberian Council of State was an interim governing body in the mid-1990s
* Manchukuon General Affairs State Council (1934–1945)
* (1879–1905)
* Ottoman Council of State (1868–1922)
* (1858–)
* Poland:
**Polish Kingdom&#x27;s Council of State (1815-1915) 
**Provisional Council of State (1917)
**Polish Council of State (1947–1989)
* Romanian State Council (1961–1989)
* Siamese Supreme Council of State (1925–1932)
* Swedish Council of State (1809–1974)
* Tunisian Council of State (1959–2014)
* Vietnamese Council of State (1980–1992)

==See also==
* Council of State Governments
* State Council
* Council of Ministers
* Privy council
* Counsellor of State

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3687335" start="2" end="18" title="Council of state" label="council of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="166" end="173" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="241" end="254" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="292" end="320" title="Administrative court" label="supreme administrative court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="370" end="383" title="privy council" label="privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761425" start="399" end="423" title="Council of State (Belgium)" label="Belgian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="584" end="605" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883901" start="653" end="679" title="Council of State of Colombia" label="Colombian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516390" start="682" end="704" title="Cuban Council of State" label="Cuban Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359613" start="707" end="730" title="Danish Council of State" label="Danish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155243" start="795" end="817" title="Dutch Council of State" label="Dutch Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303096" start="937" end="962" title="Egyptian Council of State" label="Egyptian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366737" start="965" end="983" title="Finnish Government" label="Finnish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="1060" end="1083" title="Council of State (France)" label="French Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176502" start="1214" end="1239" title="Council of State (Ghana)" label="Ghanaian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672728" start="1252" end="1270" title="President of Ghana" label="President of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984911" start="1324" end="1346" title="Council of State (Greece)" label="Greek Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152244" start="1461" end="1483" title="Council of State (Ireland)" label="Irish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="1496" end="1516" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057211" start="1569" end="1593" title="Italian Council of State" label="Italian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q246111" start="1696" end="1723" title="Council of State of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176507" start="1726" end="1751" title="Council of State (Nigeria)" label="Nigerian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054461" start="1754" end="1785" title="North Carolina Council of State" label="North Carolina Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770421" start="1788" end="1814" title="Norwegian Council of State" label="Norwegian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585780" start="1817" end="1843" title="State Council of South Korea" label="South Korean State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313715" start="2012" end="2036" title="Spanish Council of State" label="Spanish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782529" start="2039" end="2063" title="Council of State (Sweden)" label="Swedish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185027" start="2081" end="2108" title="Philippine Council of State" label="Philippine Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q964404" start="2111" end="2138" title="Portuguese Council of State" label="Portuguese Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q322459" start="2166" end="2191" title="President of Portugal" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13022669" start="2194" end="2215" title="Council of State of Thailand" label="Thai Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325194" start="2381" end="2411" title="Council of State (Timor-Leste)" label="East Timorese Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q586047" start="2450" end="2474" title="President of Timor-Leste" label="President of Timor-Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092595" start="2477" end="2501" title="Turkish Council of State" label="Turkish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="2565" end="2605" title="Council of State of the Empire of Brazil" label="Brazilian Empire&amp;#x27;s Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q108849808" start="2620" end="2684" title="Council of State (Myanmar)" label="Council of State of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2699" end="2758" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea#The Council of State" label="Council of State of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q20014198" start="2773" end="2797" title="Chilean Council of State" label="Chilean Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993731" start="2812" end="2836" title="English Council of State" label="English Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q652009" start="2851" end="2898" title="State Council of the German Democratic Republic" label="State Council of the German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050946" start="2913" end="2936" title="Council of State (India)" label="Indian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2951" end="2977" title="Ethiopian Council of State" label="Ethiopian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910097" start="2992" end="3025" title="Provisional State Council" label="Israeli Provisional State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192939" start="3040" end="3071" title="Daijō-kan" label="Japanese Great Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q19161825" start="3085" end="3110" title="Liberian Council of State" label="Liberian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330057" start="3160" end="3200" title="General Affairs State Council" label="Manchukuon General Affairs State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079571" start="3229" end="3253" title="Council of State (Ottoman Empire)" label="Ottoman Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176503" start="3288" end="3326" title="Council of State (Kingdom of Poland)" label="Polish Kingdom&amp;#x27;s Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252732" start="3342" end="3370" title="Provisional Council of State" label="Provisional Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687343" start="3380" end="3403" title="Polish Council of State" label="Polish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725418" start="3418" end="3440" title="State Council of Romania" label="Romanian State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897817" start="3455" end="3487" title="Supreme Council of State of Siam" label="Siamese Supreme Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412194" start="3502" end="3526" title="King in Council (Sweden)" label="Swedish Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3541" end="3566" title=":fr:Conseil d&amp;#x27;État (Tunisie)" label="Tunisian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843019" start="3581" end="3608" title="Vietnamese Council of State" label="Vietnamese Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176505" start="3637" end="3665" title="Council of State Governments" label="Council of State Governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813926" start="3668" end="3681" title="State Council (disambiguation)" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15105" start="3684" end="3704" title="Council of Ministers" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="3707" end="3720" title="Privy council" label="Privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325220" start="3723" end="3742" title="Counsellor of State" label="Counsellor of State"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152753" wikidata="Q92689" url="?curid=152753" title="Sopot">
<text>Sopot (; or ) is a seaside resort city in Pomerelia on the southern coast of the Baltic Sea in northern Poland, with a population of approximately 40,000. It is located in Pomerania Province and has the status of county – the smallest city in Poland to have that status. Sopot lies between the larger cities of Gdańsk to the southeast and Gdynia to the northwest. The three cities together form the Tricity metropolitan area.

Sopot is a major health-spa and resort destination. It has the longest wooden pier in Europe, at 511.5 metres, stretching out into the Bay of Gdańsk. The city is also famous for the Sopot International Song Festival, the largest such event in Europe after the Eurovision Song Contest. Among its other attractions is a fountain of bromide spring water, known as the &quot;inhalation mushroom&quot;.

== Etymology ==
The city&#x27;s name is thought to derive from an old Lechitic word, &quot;sopot&quot;, meaning &quot;stream&quot; or &quot;spring&quot;. The same root occurs in a number of other Lechitic toponyms; it is probably onomatopeic, imitating the murmur (&quot;Šepot&quot;) of running water.

The name is first recorded as &quot;Sopoth&quot; in 1283 and &quot;Sopot&quot; in 1291. The Germanized form &quot;Zoppot&quot; is derived from the original Polish name. In the 19th century and in the interwar years the German name was re-Polonized as &quot;Sopoty&quot; (a plural form). &quot;Sopot&quot; was made the official Polish name when the town returned under Polish rule in 1945.

== History ==
=== Early history ===

The area of today&#x27;s Sopot contains the site of a 7th-century Slavonic (Pomeranian) stronghold. Initially it was a commercial trade outpost for commerce extending both up the Vistula river and to cities north across the Baltic Sea. With time the significance of the stronghold diminished and by the 10th century it was reduced to a fishing village, eventually abandoned. However, a century later the area was settled again and two villages were founded within the borders of today&#x27;s city: Stawowie and Gręzowo. They were first mentioned in 1186 as being granted to the Cistercian abbey in Oliwa. Another of the villages that constitute today&#x27;s Sopot, Świemirowo, was first mentioned in 1212 in a document by Mestwin I, who granted it to the Premonstratensian (Norbertine) monastery in nearby Żukowo.

The village of Sopot, which later became the namesake for the whole city, was first mentioned in 1283 when it was granted to the Cistercians. At that time it was part of Poland until the 14th-century Teutonic invasion. By 1316, the abbey had bought all villages in the area and became the owners of all the area of the city. After the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) the area was reincorporated into the Kingdom of Poland.

=== Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth ===

The spa for the citizens of Gdańsk has been active since the 16th century. Until the end of that century most noble and magnate families from Gdańsk built their manor houses in Sopot. During the negotiations of the Treaty of Oliva King John II Casimir of Poland and his wife Queen Marie Louise Gonzaga lived in one of them, while Swedish negotiator Magnus de la Gardie resided in another — it has been known as the &quot;Swedish Manor&quot; (&quot;Dwór Szwedzki&quot;) ever since. The Swedish Manor was later the place of stay of Polish Kings Augustus II the Strong (in 1710) and Stanisław Leszczyński (in 1733).

During the 1733 War of the Polish Succession, Stanisław Leszczyński stayed in Sopot a few days before going to the nearby city of Gdańsk. Afterwards Imperial Russian troops besieged Gdańsk and a year later looted and burned the village of Sopot to the ground. Much of Sopot would remain abandoned during and in the following years after the conflict, as the patricians of Gdańsk, exhausted by the war, could not afford to rebuild the Sopot residences.

In the 1750s, Polish nobility of Pomerania began to rebuild the village. In 1757 and 1758 most of the ruined manors were bought by the magnate family of Przebendowski. General Józef Przebendowski bought nine of these palaces and in 1786 his widow, Bernardyna Przebendowska (née von Kleist), bought the remaining two. Also the Sierakowski family acquired some properties, including the destroyed Swedish Manor. After the Partitions of Poland, in the 1790s, Count built the Sierakowski Mansion at the site of the Swedish Manor, a typical Polish manor house, which remains one of the most distinctive buildings of pre-spa Sopot.

=== Kingdom of Prussia ===

Sopot was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1772 in the First Partition of Poland. Following the new laws imposed by King Frederick the Great, church property was confiscated by the state. The village was still being reconstructed and in 1806 the area was sold to the Danzig/Gdańsk merchant Carl Christoph Wegner. However, until 1819 it did not develop significantly, its population in 1819 was 350, compared to 301 in the year of Prussian annexation.
In 1819, Wegner opened the first public bath in Zoppot and tried to promote the newly established spa among the inhabitants of Danzig (Gdańsk), but the undertaking was a financial failure. However, in 1823 Jean Georg Haffner, a former medic of the French army, financed a new bath complex that gained significant popularity. In the following years, Haffner erected more facilities. By 1824, a sanatorium was opened to the public, as well as a 63-metre pier, cloakrooms, and a park. Haffner died in 1830, but his enterprise was continued by his stepson, Ernst Adolf Böttcher. The latter continued to develop the area and in 1842 opened a new theatre and sanatorium. By then the number of tourists coming to Zoppot every year had risen to almost 1,200.

In 1870 Zoppot saw the opening of its first rail line: the new Danzig-Kołobrzeg (then &quot;Kolberg&quot;) rail road that was later extended to Berlin. Good rail connections added to the popularity of the area and by 1900 the number of tourists had reached almost 12,500 a year.

In 1873, the village of Zoppot became an administrative centre of the Gemeinde. Soon other villages were incorporated into it and in 1874 the number of inhabitants of the village rose to over 2,800. In 1877, the self-government of the Gemeinde bought the village from the descendants of Haffner and started its further development. A second sanatorium was constructed in 1881 and the pier was extended to 85 metres. In 1885, the gas works were built. Two years later, tennis courts were built and the following year a horse-racing track was opened to the public. There were also several facilities built for the permanent inhabitants of Zoppot, not only for the tourists. Among those were two new churches: Protestant (September 17, 1901) and Catholic (December 21, 1901). From the late 19th century, there was a significant influx of German settlers with the slow growth of the Polish population, resulting in a change in ethnic proportions in favor of the former.
Since the late 19th century the city became a holiday resort for the inhabitants of nearby Danzig, as well as wealthy aristocrats from Berlin, Warsaw, and Königsberg. Poles visited the city in large numbers and the spa was very popular among the Polish intellectual elite, to the extent that the early 20th-century Polish writer named it &quot;the extension of Warsaw to the Baltic Sea&quot;. Germans and Russians also visited the city. At the beginning of the 20th century it was a favourite spa of Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany.
On October 8, 1901, Wilhelm II granted Zoppot city rights, spurring further rapid growth. In 1904 a new balneological sanatorium was opened, followed in 1903 by a lighthouse. In 1907, new baths south of the old ones were built in Viking style. In 1909 a new theatre was opened in the nearby forest within the city limits, in the place where today the Sopot Festival is held every year. By 1912, a third complex of baths, sanatoria, hotels, and restaurants was opened, attracting even more tourists. Shortly before World War I the city had 17,400 permanent inhabitants and over 20,000 tourists every year.

=== Free City of Danzig ===
Following the signing of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, Zoppot became a part of the Free City of Danzig in customs union with the re-established Polish Republic. Due to the proximity of the Polish and German borders, the economy of the town soon recovered. The new casino became one of the main sources of income of the free-city state. In 1927, the city authorities rebuilt the Kasino-Hotel, one of the most notable landmarks in Sopot today. After World War II, it was renamed as the Grand Hotel and continues to be one of the most luxurious hotels in Poland.

A Richard Wagner festival was held in the nearby Forest Opera in 1922. The festival&#x27;s success caused Zoppot to be sometimes referred to as the &quot;Bayreuth of the North&quot;. As a result of the influx of Germans in the previous decades, who took over the most important functions in the city, some Poles became Germanized, however a significant indigenous Polish community was still present in the city, and there was also a Jewish community. In 1928, the pier was extended to its present length of 512 metres. Since then it has remained the longest wooden pier in Europe and one of the longest in the world. In 1928, the city was visited by 29,192 visitors, mostly Poles and in the early 1930s it reached the peak of its popularity among foreign tourists — more than 30,000 annually (this number does not include tourists from Danzig itself). However, by the 1930s, tensions on the nearby Polish-German border and the rising popularity of Nazism in Germany and also among local Germans saw a decline in foreign tourism. The Nazi Party, supported by many local Germans, took power in the city. Local Poles and Jews were discriminated against and in 1938 local German Nazis burned down Zoppot&#x27;s synagogue.

=== World War II (1939–1945) ===

World War II broke out on September 1, 1939, after the German invasion of Poland. The following day the Free City of Danzig was annexed by Nazi Germany and most of the local Poles, Kashubians, and Jews were arrested and murdered during the &quot;Intelligenzaktion&quot;, imprisoned or expelled. Due to the war, the city&#x27;s tourist industry collapsed. The last Wagner Festival was held in 1942.

The city remained under German rule until early 1945. In March the Nazis began evacuating the German population along with forced laborers. On March 23, 1945, the Soviet Army took over the city after several days of fighting, in which Zoppot lost approximately 10% of its buildings; three days later, the Soviet 70th Army reached the Gdańsk Bay coast north of the city.

As per the Potsdam Conference, Zoppot was incorporated into the post-war Polish state and renamed Sopot. The authorities of Gdańsk Voivodeship were located in Sopot until the end of 1946. Most of the German inhabitants who had remained in the city (by 1 November 1945 6,000 Germans still lived in the town, after the evacuation before the advancing Soviet Army) were soon to be expelled, to make room for Polish settlers from former eastern Polish territories annexed by the Soviet Union.

=== Polish People&#x27;s Republic (1945–1989) ===

Sopot recovered rapidly after the war. A tramway line to Gdańsk was opened, as well as the School of Music, the School of Maritime Trade, a library, and an art gallery. During the city presidency of Jan Kapusta the town opened an annual Arts Festival in 1948. In 1952, the tramways were replaced by a heavy-rail commuter line connecting Gdańsk, Sopot, and Gdynia. Although in 1954 the School of Arts was moved to Gdańsk, Sopot remained an important centre of culture, and in 1956 the first Polish jazz festival was held there (until then jazz had been banned by the Communist authorities). This was the forerunner of the continuing annual Jazz Jamboree in Warsaw.

In 1961, the Sopot International Song Festival was inaugurated, although it was held in Gdańsk for its first three years – it moved to its permanent venue at Sopot&#x27;s Forest Opera in 1964. In 1963, the main street of Sopot (&quot;Bohaterów Monte Cassino&quot;, &quot;the Heroes of Monte Cassino&quot;) was turned into a pedestrian-only promenade.

New complexes of baths, sanatoria, and hotels were opened in 1972 and 1975. By 1977, Sopot had approximately 54,500 inhabitants, the highest ever in its history. In 1979, the historical town centre was declared a national heritage centre by the government of Poland.

=== Third Polish Republic (1989 onwards) ===
In 1995, the southern bath and sanatoria complex were extended significantly and the Saint Adalbert (in Polish &quot;Św. Wojciech&quot;) spring opened two years later, as a result in 1999 Sopot regained its official spa town status. In 1999, Pope John Paul II visited Sopot, about 800,000 pilgrims attended his mass.

In 2001, Sopot celebrated the 100th anniversary of its city charter.

Sopot is currently undergoing a period of intense development, including the building of a number of five star hotels and spa resorts on the waterfront. The main pedestrianized street, Monte Cassino, has also been extended by diverting traffic underneath it, meaning the whole street is now pedestrianized. Sopot, aside from Warsaw boasts the highest property prices in Poland.

==Population==
== Main sights==

Among the historic sights are:
* Bohaterów Monte Cassino Street (popular &quot;Monciak&quot;), main pedestrian zone of the city center, filled with restaurants, cafes, clubs and shops.
* Sopot Pier, the longest wooden pier in Europe, 450 metres from the edge of the shore, 650 m total
* Grand Hotel
* Balneotherapy Centre
* Sopot Lighthouse
* Grodzisko, a reconstructed early medieval Slavic stronghold
* Church of the Saviour
* Saint George Church and Saint Adalbert wayside shrine
* Old manor houses and villas, including the 18th-century Sierakowski Mansion and Spanish Manor, and the early 20th-century &quot;Sopot Belvedere&quot; (&quot;Sopocki Belwederek&quot;), place of stay of various Presidents and Prime Ministers of Poland during their visits to Sopot
* former Southern Baths (&quot;Łazienki Południowe&quot;)
* Sopot Hippodrome in the Karlikowo district

Other landmarks include:
* the Sopot beach
* &quot;Krzywy Domek&quot; (&quot;Crooked House&quot;) at the &quot;Monciak&quot;
* Forest Opera
* &quot;Dom Zdrojowy&quot; (&quot;Spa House&quot;) with the adjacent garden and the State Art Gallery (&quot;Państwowa Galeria Sztuki&quot;)
* Ergo Arena, a multi-purpose indoor arena
* &quot;Park Północny&quot; (&quot;Northern Park&quot;) with the statue of Jean Georg Haffner
* Home Army monument, statue of Wojtek the Bear and memorial stone dedicated to Danuta Siedzikówna
== People ==

* Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski (1888–1974), statesman and economist
* Karol Maria Splett (1898–1964), a German Roman Catholic priest and Bishop of Danzig
* Anton Plenikowski (1899–1971), a German communist politician of the Free City of Danzig and East Germany
* Fritz Houtermans (1903–1966), a Dutch-Austrian-German atomic and nuclear physicist
* Klaus Kinski (1926–1991), a German actor
* Janusz Christa (1934–2008 in Sopot), a Polish author of comic books
* Winfried Glatzeder (born 1945), a German television actor and playwright
* Lech Kaczyński (1949–2010), a Polish lawyer and politician, President of Poland from 2005 to 2010
* Jarosław Kaczyński (born 1949), a Polish politician and lawyer, former Prime Minister of Poland 2006–2007
* Janusz Lewandowski (born 1951), politician, economist, Commissioner for Budgetary Affairs of the European Commission
* Jacek Tylicki (born 1951), a Polish artist who settled in New York City in 1982
* Jurek Jatowitt (born 1952), an Austrian judoka, competed in the 1976 Summer Olympics
* Włodzimierz Julian Korab-Karpowicz (born 1953), a Polish philosopher and political theorist
* Janusz Śniadek (born 1955), a Polish labour and political leader, Chairman of Solidarity 2002–2010
* Donald Tusk (born 1957), a Polish politician, Prime Minister of Poland 2007-2014 and President of the European Council since 2014
* Marek Biernacki (born 1959), a Polish lawyer and politician
* Janusz Pawłowski (born 1959), a retired male judoka from Poland, bronze medallist at the 1980 Summer Olympics
* Leszek Możdżer (born 1971), a Polish jazz pianist, music producer and film music composer
* Joanna Zastróżna (born 1972), a Polish photographer and filmmaker
* Wojciech Kasperski (born 1981), a Polish screenwriter, film director and producer
== Transport ==

The city is covered by both the Gdynia and Gdańsk municipal bus lines, the regional commuter rail line (with three stops in the city: Sopot Wyścigi, Sopot, and Sopot Kamienny Potok), and the Polish national railway, PKP. Sopot is one of four Polish towns to have trolleybuses. The others are Lublin, Tychy and Gdynia.

== Sports ==
There are many popular professional sports teams in Sopot and the tri-city area. The most popular in Sopot today is probably basketball thanks to the award-winning Prokom Trefl Sopot. Amateur sports are played by thousands of Sopot citizens, as well as in schools of all levels (elementary, secondary, and university). Sopot held the IAAF World Indoor Championships in 2014.
* Prokom Trefl Sopot - men&#x27;s basketball team, six times Polish Champion, who played in the Euroleague, before relocating to Gdynia, since 2009 replaced by Trefl Sopot, also playing in the Polish Basketball League.
* Idea Prokom Open - ATP and WTA tennis tournament held in August. Rafael Nadal and Flavia Pennetta won in 2004.
* Ogniwo Sopot is a rugby club, founded in 1965. Since the 80s, Ogniwo is one of the most successful Polish rugby teams. They were undefeated since 1989 to 1993, with Edward Hodura as a coach.
* PDP Ogniwo Sopot - men&#x27;s football club.
* Sopot was the training base for the Republic of Ireland during the Euro 2012.

== Economy ==
Major corporations in the town include: 
* STU Ergo Hestia SA
* BEST SA

== Higher education ==
* Sopot University of Applied Sciences
* Faculty Economics of University of Gdańsk and Faculty Management of University of Gdańsk
* Faculty of Psychology in Sopot, SWPS University

== International relations ==

Sopot is twinned with:
* Ashkelon, Israel
* Frankenthal, Germany
* Karlshamn, Sweden
* Lake Worth, United States
* Næstved, Denmark
* Ratzeburg, Germany
* Southend-on-Sea, United Kingdom
* Zakopane, Poland

Former twin towns:
* Peterhof, Russia

On 10 March 2022, Sopot terminated its partnership with the Russian city of Peterhof as a response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

== See also ==
* Bohaterów Monte Cassino Street
* Grodzisko in Sopot
* Sports in Tricity

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* History of Sopot
* Tourist attractions of Sopot
* Sopot City Guide
* Top 10 beaches in Poland (Sopot in 3rd place)
* German Page about Sopot</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="0" end="5" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q317548" start="27" end="38" title="resort city" label="resort city"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="42" end="51" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="81" end="91" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="104" end="110" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="172" end="190" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomerania Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q925381" start="203" end="209" title="City with powiat rights" label="status"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="213" end="219" title="powiat" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="311" end="317" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="339" end="345" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="399" end="406" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="407" end="424" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q863454" start="505" end="509" title="pier" label="pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="562" end="575" title="Bay of Gdańsk" label="Bay of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638749" start="609" end="642" title="Sopot International Song Festival" label="Sopot International Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="687" end="710" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q422423" start="757" end="764" title="bromide" label="bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="896" end="904" title="Lechitic languages" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="1031" end="1038" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="1056" end="1067" title="onomatopeic" label="onomatopeic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328163" start="1083" end="1089" title="Breathy voice" label="murmur"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="1367" end="1376" title="Polonization" label="Polonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="1735" end="1742" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1780" end="1790" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="2134" end="2144" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775766" start="2145" end="2150" title="Oliwa Abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="2154" end="2159" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q572017" start="2278" end="2287" title="Mestwin I" label="Mestwin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q339332" start="2311" end="2328" title="Premonstratensian" label="Premonstratensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="2541" end="2547" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="2571" end="2579" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="2706" end="2734" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="2772" end="2789" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="2860" end="2866" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="2952" end="2959" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="2993" end="3004" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q17335" start="3047" end="3062" title="Treaty of Oliva" label="Treaty of Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q53452" start="3068" end="3093" title="John II Casimir of Poland" label="John II Casimir of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q232793" start="3113" end="3133" title="Marie Louise Gonzaga" label="Marie Louise Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="3162" end="3169" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q920243" start="3181" end="3200" title="Magnus de la Gardie" label="Magnus de la Gardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="3375" end="3397" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="3412" end="3433" title="Stanisław Leszczyński" label="Stanisław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="3462" end="3490" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="3492" end="3513" title="Stanisław Leszczyński" label="Stanisław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3595" end="3611" title="Russian Empire" label="Imperial Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="3619" end="3627" title="siege" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="3804" end="3814" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="3913" end="3928" title="szlachta" label="Polish nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="3932" end="3941" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q501844" start="4034" end="4041" title="Magnates of Poland and Lithuania" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4075" end="4094" title="Józef Przebendowski" label="Józef Przebendowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774021" start="4177" end="4187" title="von Kleist" label="von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="4319" end="4339" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974307" start="4435" end="4453" title="Manor houses of Polish nobility" label="Polish manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="4579" end="4597" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="4613" end="4638" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="4679" end="4698" title="Frederick II of Prussia" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="5136" end="5142" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q95877" start="5215" end="5233" title="Jean Georg Haffner" label="Jean Georg Haffner"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5257" end="5263" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="5402" end="5412" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q863454" start="5461" end="5465" title="pier" label="pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="5650" end="5657" title="theatre" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q110011" start="5831" end="5840" title="Kołobrzeg" label="Kołobrzeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="5868" end="5877" title="rail road" label="rail road"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="5905" end="5911" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="6082" end="6103" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6111" end="6119" title="States of Germany#Subdivisions" label="Gemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q741118" start="6509" end="6521" title="tennis court" label="tennis court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6748" end="6758" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6784" end="6792" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="6876" end="6882" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="6920" end="6926" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="7150" end="7156" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="7162" end="7172" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="7515" end="7536" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="7584" end="7595" title="city rights" label="city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016490" start="7642" end="7655" title="balneology" label="balneological"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112569" start="7701" end="7711" title="Sopot Lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="7768" end="7774" title="Vikings" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638749" start="7889" end="7903" title="Sopot Festival" label="Sopot Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8052" end="8063" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="8201" end="8221" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="8259" end="8278" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="8282" end="8295" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="8320" end="8335" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="8365" end="8371" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8376" end="8382" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="8440" end="8446" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8624" end="8636" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542600" start="8660" end="8671" title="Grand Hotel (Sopot)" label="Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="8739" end="8753" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445398" start="8786" end="8798" title="Opera Lesna" label="Forest Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q157596" start="8891" end="8899" title="Bayreuth Festival" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="9056" end="9066" title="Germanisation" label="Germanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177824" start="9201" end="9205" title="Pier in Sopot" label="pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="9685" end="9691" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="9695" end="9702" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="9770" end="9780" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="9944" end="9953" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9990" end="10002" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="10052" end="10070" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10129" end="10141" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="10164" end="10169" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="10171" end="10181" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="10187" end="10191" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044171" start="10236" end="10253" title="Intelligenzaktion Pommern" label="Intelligenzaktion"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="10512" end="10527" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced laborers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="10552" end="10563" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="10723" end="10733" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="10771" end="10789" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377174" start="10884" end="10902" title="Gdańsk Voivodeship (1945–1975)" label="Gdańsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="11138" end="11146" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="11186" end="11247" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="former eastern Polish territories annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="11342" end="11346" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11500" end="11511" title="Jan Kapusta" label="Jan Kapusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="11657" end="11663" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="11798" end="11802" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="11867" end="11876" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q337666" start="11940" end="11953" title="Jazz Jamboree" label="Jazz Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638749" start="11979" end="12012" title="Sopot International Song Festival" label="Sopot International Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445398" start="12137" end="12149" title="Forest Opera" label="Forest Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q335288" start="12251" end="12264" title="Battle of Monte Cassino" label="Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="12306" end="12315" title="promenade" label="promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q243427" start="12716" end="12730" title="Adalbert of Prague" label="Saint Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946461" start="12847" end="12855" title="spa town" label="spa town"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="12873" end="12890" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938012" start="13464" end="13494" title="Bohaterów Monte Cassino Street" label="Bohaterów Monte Cassino Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="13531" end="13546" title="pedestrian zone" label="pedestrian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177824" start="13618" end="13628" title="Pier in Sopot" label="Sopot Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542600" start="13718" end="13729" title="Grand Hotel (Sopot)" label="Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016490" start="13732" end="13745" title="Balneotherapy" label="Balneotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112569" start="13755" end="13771" title="Sopot Lighthouse" label="Sopot Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610072" start="13774" end="13783" title="Grodzisko in Sopot" label="Grodzisko"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="13816" end="13833" title="Gord (archaeology)" label="Slavic stronghold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318319" start="13972" end="13991" title="Dworek Sierakowskich" label="Sierakowski Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q959999" start="14350" end="14362" title="Krzywy Domek" label="Krzywy Domek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445398" start="14426" end="14438" title="Forest Opera" label="Forest Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247814" start="14582" end="14592" title="Ergo Arena" label="Ergo Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q95877" start="14698" end="14716" title="Jean Georg Haffner" label="Jean Georg Haffner"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="14719" end="14728" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055802" start="14749" end="14764" title="Wojtek (bear)" label="Wojtek the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q45379" start="14797" end="14815" title="Danuta Siedzikówna" label="Danuta Siedzikówna"/>
<link wikidata="Q609655" start="14832" end="14853" title="Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski" label="Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q95502" start="14893" end="14911" title="Karol Maria Splett" label="Karol Maria Splett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165775" start="14960" end="14976" title="Bishop of Danzig" label="Bishop of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q120502" start="14979" end="14996" title="Anton Plenikowski" label="Anton Plenikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="15047" end="15066" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q68516" start="15086" end="15102" title="Fritz Houtermans" label="Fritz Houtermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q55419" start="15171" end="15183" title="Klaus Kinski" label="Klaus Kinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156010" start="15214" end="15228" title="Janusz Christa" label="Janusz Christa"/>
<link wikidata="Q882919" start="15284" end="15302" title="Winfried Glatzeder" label="Winfried Glatzeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="15359" end="15373" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q55917" start="15459" end="15477" title="Jarosław Kaczyński" label="Jarosław Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q519793" start="15567" end="15585" title="Janusz Lewandowski" label="Janusz Lewandowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="15664" end="15683" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455360" start="15686" end="15699" title="Jacek Tylicki" label="Jacek Tylicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q53346992" start="15768" end="15782" title="Jurek Jatowitt" label="Jurek Jatowitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="15832" end="15852" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382661" start="15855" end="15889" title="Włodzimierz Julian Korab-Karpowicz" label="Włodzimierz Julian Korab-Karpowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q329262" start="15949" end="15963" title="Janusz Śniadek" label="Janusz Śniadek"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="16050" end="16061" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q364643" start="16182" end="16197" title="Marek Biernacki" label="Marek Biernacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766675" start="16244" end="16260" title="Janusz Pawłowski" label="Janusz Pawłowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="16333" end="16353" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387810" start="16356" end="16370" title="Leszek Możdżer" label="Leszek Możdżer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28528569" start="16448" end="16464" title="Joanna Zastróżna" label="Joanna Zastróżna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029124" start="16516" end="16534" title="Wojciech Kasperski" label="Wojciech Kasperski"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="16647" end="16653" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="16658" end="16664" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478985" start="16699" end="16717" title="Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity)" label="commuter rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q572961" start="16749" end="16762" title="Sopot Wyścigi (SKM stop)" label="Sopot Wyścigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563186" start="16764" end="16769" title="Sopot railway station" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063353" start="16775" end="16795" title="Sopot Kamienny Potok (SKM stop)" label="Sopot Kamienny Potok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="16878" end="16888" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="16907" end="16913" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11977" start="16915" end="16920" title="Tychy" label="Tychy"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="16925" end="16931" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q740058" start="17111" end="17129" title="Prokom Trefl Sopot" label="Prokom Trefl Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="17281" end="17312" title="IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics" label="IAAF World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814406" start="17316" end="17320" title="2014 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q740058" start="17324" end="17342" title="Prokom Trefl Sopot" label="Prokom Trefl Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q185982" start="17418" end="17428" title="Euroleague" label="Euroleague"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="17451" end="17457" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748232" start="17482" end="17493" title="Trefl Sopot" label="Trefl Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120378" start="17515" end="17539" title="Polish Basketball League" label="Polish Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="17562" end="17565" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q948442" start="17570" end="17573" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Tennis Association" label="WTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="17608" end="17620" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207528" start="17625" end="17640" title="Flavia Pennetta" label="Flavia Pennetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796690" start="17656" end="17668" title="Ogniwo Sopot" label="Ogniwo Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17849" end="17865" title="PDP Ogniwo Sopot" label="PDP Ogniwo Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="17932" end="17951" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="17963" end="17972" title="Euro 2012" label="Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18126" end="18167" title="Faculty Economics of University of Gdańsk" label="Faculty Economics of University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18172" end="18214" title="Faculty Management of University of Gdańsk" label="Faculty Management of University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970913" start="18217" end="18264" title="University of Social Sciences and Humanities" label="Faculty of Psychology in Sopot, SWPS University"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="18306" end="18313" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="18322" end="18330" title="Ashkelon" label="Ashkelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="18332" end="18338" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905" start="18341" end="18352" title="Frankenthal" label="Frankenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="18354" end="18361" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q54769" start="18364" end="18373" title="Karlshamn" label="Karlshamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="18375" end="18381" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q984358" start="18384" end="18394" title="Lake Worth, Florida" label="Lake Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21178" start="18412" end="18419" title="Næstved" label="Næstved"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="18421" end="18428" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q490025" start="18431" end="18440" title="Ratzeburg" label="Ratzeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="18452" end="18467" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q144786" start="18486" end="18494" title="Zakopane" label="Zakopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q178310" start="18525" end="18533" title="Petergof" label="Peterhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="18535" end="18541" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="18649" end="18681" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938012" start="18701" end="18731" title="Bohaterów Monte Cassino Street" label="Bohaterów Monte Cassino Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610072" start="18734" end="18752" title="Grodzisko in Sopot" label="Grodzisko in Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579491" start="18755" end="18772" title="Sports in Tricity" label="Sports in Tricity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152755" wikidata="Q87567" url="?curid=152755" title="Anton Rubinstein">
<text>Anton Grigoryevich Rubinstein (; ) was a Russian pianist, composer and conductor who founded the Saint Petersburg Conservatory. He was the elder brother of Nikolai Rubinstein, who founded the Moscow Conservatory.

As a pianist, Rubinstein ranks among the great 19th-century keyboard virtuosos. He became most famous for his series of historical recitals, seven enormous, consecutive concerts covering the history of piano music. Rubinstein played this series throughout Russia and Eastern Europe and in the United States when he toured there.

Although best remembered as a pianist and educator (most notably as the composition teacher of Tchaikovsky), Rubinstein was also a prolific composer; he wrote 20 operas, the best known of which is &quot;The Demon&quot;. He composed many other works, including five piano concertos, six symphonies and many solo piano works along with a substantial output of works for chamber ensemble.

==Early life and education==

Rubinstein was born to Jewish parents in the village of Vikhvatinets in the Podolia Governorate, Russian Empire (now known as Ofatinți in Transnistria, Republic of Moldova), on the Dniestr River, about northwest of Odessa. His sister was a chamber singer and teacher. Before he was 5 years old, his paternal grandfather ordered all members of the Rubinstein family to convert from Judaism to Russian Orthodoxy. Although he was raised as a Christian, Rubinstein would later become an atheist.

Rubinstein&#x27;s father opened a pencil factory in Moscow. His mother, a competent musician, began giving him piano lessons at five, until the teacher heard and accepted Rubinstein as a non-paying student. Rubinstein made his first public appearance at a charity benefit concert at the age of nine. Later that year Rubinstein&#x27;s mother sent him, accompanied by Villoing, to Paris where he sought unsuccessfully to enroll at the Paris Conservatoire.

Rubinstein and Villoing remained in Paris for a year. In December 1840, Rubinstein played in the Salle Érard for an audience that included Frédéric Chopin and Franz Liszt. Chopin invited Rubinstein to his studio and played for him. Liszt advised Villoing to take him to Germany to study composition; however, Villoing took Rubinstein on an extended concert tour of Europe and Western Russia. They finally returned to Moscow in June 1843. Determined to raise money to further the musical careers of both Anton and his younger brother Nikolai, their mother sent Rubinstein and Villoing on a tour of Russia, following which the brothers were dispatched to Saint Petersburg to play for Tsar Nicholas I and the Imperial family at the Winter Palace. Anton was 14 years old; Nikolai was eight.

==Travel and performance==
===Berlin===
In spring 1844, Rubinstein, Nikolai, his mother and his sister Luba travelled to Berlin. Here he met with, and was supported by, Felix Mendelssohn and Giacomo Meyerbeer.
Mendelssohn, who had heard Rubinstein when he had toured with Villoing, said he needed no further piano study but sent Nikolai to Theodor Kullak for instruction. Meyerbeer directed both boys to Siegfried Dehn for work in composition and theory.

Word came in the summer of 1846 that Rubinstein&#x27;s father was gravely ill. Rubinstein was left in Berlin while his mother, sister and brother returned to Russia. At first he continued his studies with Dehn, then with Adolf Bernhard Marx, while composing in earnest. Now 17, he knew he could no longer pass as a child prodigy. He sought out Liszt in Vienna, hoping Liszt would accept him as a pupil. However, after Rubinstein had played his audition, Liszt is reported to have said, &quot;A talented man must win the goal of his ambition by his own unassisted efforts.&quot; At this point, Rubinstein was living in acute poverty. Liszt did nothing to help him. Other calls Rubinstein made to potential patrons came to no avail. After an unsuccessful year in Vienna and a concert tour of Hungary, he returned to Berlin and continued giving lessons.

===Back to Russia===
The Revolution of 1848 forced Rubinstein back to Russia. Spending the next five years mainly in Saint Petersburg, Rubinstein taught, gave concerts and performed frequently at the Imperial court. The Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna, sister-in-law to Tsar Nicholas I, became his most devoted patroness. By 1852, he had become a leading figure in Saint Petersburg&#x27;s musical life, performing as a soloist and collaborating with some of the outstanding instrumentalists and vocalists who came to the Russian capital.

He also composed assiduously. After a number of delays, including some difficulties with the censor, Rubinstein&#x27;s first opera, &quot;Dmitry Donskoy&quot; (now lost except for the overture), was performed at the Bolshoy Theater in Saint Petersburg in 1852. Three one-act operas written for Elena Pavlovna followed. He also played and conducted several of his works, including the &quot;Ocean&quot; Symphony in its original four-movement form, his Second Piano Concerto and several solo works. It was partly his lack of success on the Russian opera stage that led Rubinstein to consider going abroad once more to secure his reputation as a serious artist.

===Abroad once more===

In 1854, Rubinstein began a four-year concert tour of Europe. This was his first major concert tour in a decade. Now 24, he felt ready to offer himself to the public as a fully developed pianist as well as a composer of worth. He very shortly reestablished his reputation as a virtuoso. Ignaz Moscheles wrote in 1855 what would become a widespread opinion about Rubinstein: &quot;In power and execution he is inferior to no one.&quot;

As was the penchant at the time, much of what Rubinstein played were his own compositions. At several concerts, Rubinstein alternated between conducting his orchestral works and playing as soloist in one of his piano concertos. One high point for him was leading the Leipzig Gewandhaus orchestra in his &quot;Ocean&quot; Symphony on 16 November 1854. Although reviews were mixed about Rubinstein&#x27;s merits as a composer, they were more favorable about him as a performer when he played a solo recital a few weeks later.

Rubinstein spent one tour break, in the winter of 1856–57, with Elena Pavlovna and much of the Imperial royal family in Nice. Rubinstein participated in discussions with Elena Pavlova on plans to raise the level of musical education in their homeland; these bore initial fruit with the founding of the Russian Musical Society (RMS) in 1859.

===Opening the St. Petersburg Conservatory===
The opening of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, the first music school in Russia and a development from the RMS per its charter, followed in 1862. Rubinstein not only founded it and was its first director but also recruited an imposing pool of talent for its faculty.

Some in Russian society were surprised that a Russian music school would actually attempt to be Russian. One &quot;fashionable lady&quot;, when told by Rubinstein that classes would be taught in Russian and not a foreign language, exclaimed, &quot;What, music in Russian! That is an original idea!&quot; Rubinstein adds, And surely it was surprising that the theory of Music was to be taught for the first time in the Russian language at our Conservatory... Hitherto, if any one wished to study it, he was obliged to take lessons from a foreigner, or to go to Germany.
There were also those who feared the school would not be Russian enough. Rubinstein drew a tremendous amount of criticism from the Russian nationalist music group known as The Five. Mikhail Tsetlin (aka Mikhail Zetlin), in his book on The Five, writes, The very idea of a conservatory implied, it is true, a spirit of academism which could easily turn it into a stronghold of routine, but then the same could be said of conservatories all over the world. Actually the Conservatory raise the level of musical culture in Russia. The unconventional way chosen by Balakirev and his friends was not necessarily the right one for everybody else.
It was during this period that Rubinstein drew his greatest success as a composer, beginning with his Fourth Piano Concerto in 1864 and culminating with his opera &quot;The Demon&quot; in 1871. Between these two works are the orchestral works &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, which Tchaikovsky found &quot;interesting and well done,&quot; though &quot;episodic,&quot; and the opera &quot;Ivan IV Grozniy&quot;, which was premiered by Balakirev. Borodin commented on &quot;Ivan IV&quot; that &quot;the music is good, you just cannot recognize that it is Rubinstein. There is nothing that is Mendelssohnian, nothing as he used to write formerly.&quot;

===American tour===
By 1867, ongoing tensions with the Balakirev camp, along with related matters, led to intense dissension within the Conservatory&#x27;s faculty. Rubinstein resigned and returned to touring throughout Europe. Unlike his previous tours, he began increasingly featuring the works of other composers. In previous tours, Rubinstein had played primarily his own works.
At the behest of the Steinway &amp; Sons piano company, Rubinstein toured the United States during the 1872–73 season. Steinway&#x27;s contract with Rubinstein called on him to give 200 concerts at the then unheard-of rate of 200 dollars per concert (payable in gold—Rubinstein distrusted both United States banks and United States paper money), plus all expenses paid. Rubinstein stayed in America 239 days, giving 215 concerts—sometimes two and three a day in as many cities.

Rubinstein wrote of his American experience, May Heaven preserve us from such slavery! Under these conditions there is no chance for art—one simply grows into an automaton, performing mechanical work; no dignity remains to the artist; he is lost... The receipts and the success were invariably gratifying, but it was all so tedious that I began to despise myself and my art. So profound was my dissatisfaction that when several years later I was asked to repeat my American tour, I refused pointblank...

Despite his misery, Rubinstein made enough money from his American tour to give him financial security for the rest of his life. Upon his return to Russia, he &quot;hastened to invest in real estate&quot;, purchasing a dacha in Peterhof, not far from Saint Petersburg, for himself and his family.

===Later life===
Rubinstein continued to make tours as a pianist and give appearances as a conductor. In 1887, he returned to the Saint Petersburg Conservatory with the goal of improving overall standards. He removed inferior students, fired and demoted many professors, made entrance and examination requirements more stringent, and revised the curriculum. He led semi-weekly teachers&#x27; classes through the whole keyboard literature and gave some of the more gifted piano students personal coaching. During the 1889–90 academic year he gave weekly lecture-recitals for the students. He resigned again and left Russia in 1891 over Imperial demands that Conservatory admittance, and later annual prizes to students, be awarded along ethnic quotas instead of purely by merit. These quotas were designed to effectively disadvantage Jews. Rubinstein resettled in Dresden and started giving concerts again in Germany and Austria. Nearly all of these concerts were charity benefit events.

Rubinstein also coached a few pianists and taught his only private piano student, Josef Hofmann. Hofmann would become one of the finest keyboard artists of the 20th century.

Despite his sentiments on ethnic politics in Russia, Rubinstein returned there occasionally to visit friends and family. He gave his final concert in Saint Petersburg on 14 January 1894. With his health failing rapidly, Rubinstein moved back to Peterhof in the summer of 1894. He died there on 20 November of that year, having suffered from heart disease for some time.

The former Troitskaya Street in Saint Petersburg where he lived is now named Rubinstein Street after him.

==Pianism==

===&quot;Van II&quot;===
Many contemporaries felt he bore a striking resemblance to Ludwig van Beethoven. Ignaz Moscheles, who had known Beethoven intimately, wrote, &quot;Rubinstein&#x27;s features and short, irrepressible hair remind me of Beethoven.&quot; Liszt referred to Rubinstein as &quot;Van II.&quot; This resemblance was also felt to be in Rubinstein&#x27;s keyboard playing. Under his hands, it was said, the piano erupted volcanically. Audience members wrote of going home limp after one of his recitals, knowing they had witnessed a force of nature.

Sometimes Rubinstein&#x27;s playing was too much for listeners to handle. American pianist Amy Fay, who wrote extensively on the European classical music scene, admitted that while Rubinstein &quot;has a gigantic spirit in him, and is extremely poetic and original ... for an entire evening he is too much. Give me Rubinstein for a few pieces, but Tausig for a whole evening.&quot; She heard Rubinstein play &quot;a terrific piece by Schubert,&quot; reportedly the &quot;Wanderer Fantasie.&quot; The performance gave her such a violent headache that the rest of the recital was ruined for her.

Clara Schumann proved especially vehement. After she heard him play the Mendelssohn C minor Trio in 1857, she wrote that &quot;he so rattled it off that I did not know how to control myself ... and often he so annihilated fiddle and cello that I ... could hear nothing of them.&quot; Nor had things improved in Clara&#x27;s view a few years later, when Rubinstein gave a concert in Breslau. She noted in her diary, &quot;I was furious, for he no longer plays. Either there is a perfectly wild noise or else a whisper with the soft pedal down. And a would-be cultured audience puts up with a performance like that!&quot;

On the other hand, when Rubinstein played Beethoven&#x27;s &quot;Archduke&quot; Trio with violinist Leopold Auer and cellist Alfredo Piatti in 1868, Auer recalls:
It was the first time I had heard this great artist play. He was most amiable at the rehearsal... To this day I can recall how Rubinstein sat down at the piano, his leonine head thrown back slightly, and began the five opening measures of the principal theme... It seemed to me I had never before heard the piano really played. The grandeur of style with which Rubinstein presented those five measures, the beauty of tone his softness of touch secured, the art with which he manipulated the pedal, are indescribable ...
Violinist and composer Henri Vieuxtemps adds:
His power over the piano is something undreamt of; he transports you into another world; all that is mechanical in the instrument is forgotten. I am still under the influence of the all-embracing harmony, the scintillating passages and thunder of Beethoven&#x27;s Sonata Op. 57 [&quot;Appassionata&quot;], which Rubinstein executed for us with unimagined mastery.
Viennese music critic Eduard Hanslick expressed what Schonberg calls &quot;the majority point of view&quot; in an 1884 review. After complaining of the over-three-hour length of Rubinstein&#x27;s recital, Hanslick admits that the sensual element of the pianist&#x27;s playing gives pleasure to listeners. Both Rubinstein&#x27;s virtues and flaws, Hanslick commented, spring from an untapped natural strength and elemental freshness. &quot;Yes, he plays like a god&quot;, Hanslick writes in closing, &quot;and we do not take it amiss if, from time to time, he changes, like Jupiter, into a bull&quot;.

Sergei Rachmaninoff&#x27;s fellow piano student Matvey Pressman adds, He enthralled you by his power, and he captivated you by the elegance and grace of his playing, by his tempestuous, fiery temperament and by his warmth and charm. His &quot;crescendo&quot; had no limits to the growth of the power of its sonority; his &quot;diminuendo&quot; reached an unbelievable &quot;pianissimo&quot;, sounding in the most distant corners of a huge hall. In playing, Rubinstein created, and he created inimitably and with genius. He often treated the same program absolutely differently when he played it the second time, but, more astoundingly still, everything came out wonderfully on both occasions.

Rubinstein was also adept at improvisation—a practice at which Beethoven had excelled. Composer Karl Goldmark wrote of one recital where Rubinstein improvised on a motive from the last movement of Beethoven&#x27;s Eighth Symphony:He counterpointed it in the bass; then developed it first as a canon, next as a four-voiced fugue, and again transformed it into a tender song. He then returned to Beethoven&#x27;s original form, later changing it to a gay Viennese waltz, with its own peculiar harmonies, and finally dashed into cascades of brilliant passages, a perfect storm of sound in which the original theme was still unmistakable. It was superb.&quot;

===Technique===

Villoing had worked with Rubinstein on hand position and finger dexterity. From watching Liszt, Rubinstein had learned about freedom of arm movement. Theodor Leschetizky, who taught piano at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory when it opened, likened muscular relaxation at the piano to a singer&#x27;s deep breathing. He would remark to his students about &quot;what deep breaths Rubinstein used to take at the beginning of long phrases, and also what repose he had and what dramatic pauses.&quot;

In his book &quot;The Great Pianists&quot;, former &quot;New York Times&quot; critic Harold C. Schonberg describes Rubinstein&#x27;s playing as that &quot;of extraordinary breadth, virility and vitality, immense sonority and technical grandeur in which all too often technical sloppiness asserted itself.&quot; When caught up in the moment of performance, Rubinstein did not seem to care how many wrong notes he played as long as his conception of the piece he was playing came through. Rubinstein himself admitted, after a concert in Berlin in 1875, &quot;If I could gather up all the notes that I let fall under the piano, I could give a second concert with them.&quot;

Part of the problem might have been the sheer size of Rubinstein&#x27;s hands. They were huge, and many observers commented on them. Josef Hofmann observed that Rubinstein&#x27;s fifth finger &quot;was as thick as my thumb—think of it! Then his fingers were square at the ends, with cushions on them. It was a wonderful hand.&quot; Pianist Josef Lhévinne described them as &quot;fat, pudgy ... with fingers so broad at the finger-tips that he often had difficulty in not striking two notes at once.&quot; The German piano teacher Ludwig Deppe advised American pianist Amy Fay to watch carefully how Rubinstein struck his chords: &quot;Nothing cramped about &quot;him&quot;! He spreads his hands as if he were going to take in the universe, and takes them up with the greatest freedom and &quot;abandon&quot;!&quot;

Because of the slap-dash moments in Rubinstein&#x27;s playing, some more academic, polished players, especially German-trained ones, seriously questioned Rubinstein&#x27;s greatness. Those who valued interpretation as much or more than pure technique found much to praise. Pianist and conductor Hans von Bülow called Rubinstein &quot;the Michelangelo of music.&quot; The German critic Ludwig Rellstab called him &quot;the Hercules of the piano; the Jupiter Tonans of the instrument.&quot;

===Tone===
Pressman attested to the singing quality of Rubinstein&#x27;s playing, and much more: &quot;His tone was strikingly full and deep. With him the piano sounded like a whole orchestra, not only as far as the power of sound was concerned but in the variety of timbres. With him, the piano sang as Patti sang, as Rubini sang.&quot;

Schonberg has assessed Rubinstein&#x27;s piano tone the most sensuous of any of the great pianists. Fellow pianist Rafael Joseffy compared it to &quot;a golden French horn.&quot; Rubinstein himself told an interviewer, &quot;Strength with lightness, that is one secret of my touch... I have sat hours trying to imitate the timbre of Rubini&#x27;s voice in my playing.&quot;

Rubinstein told the young Rachmaninoff how he achieved that tone. &quot;Just press upon the keys until the blood oozes from your fingertips&quot;. When he wanted to, Rubinstein could play with extreme lightness, grace and delicacy. He rarely displayed that side of his nature, however. He had learned quickly that audiences came to hear him thunder, so he accommodated them. Rubinstein&#x27;s forceful playing and powerful temperament made an especially strong impression during his American tour, where playing of this kind had never been heard before. During this tour, Rubinstein received more press attention than any other figure until the appearance of Ignacy Jan Paderewski a generation later.

===Programs===
Rubinstein&#x27;s concert programs were often gargantuan. Hanslick mentioned in his 1884 review that the pianist played more than 20 pieces in one concert in Vienna, including three sonatas (the Schumann F sharp minor sonata plus Beethoven&#x27;s D minor and Op. 101 in A). Rubinstein was a man with an extremely robust constitution and apparently never tired; audiences apparently stimulated his adrenals to the point where he acted like a superman. He had a colossal repertoire and an equally colossal memory until he turned 50, when he began to have memory lapses and had to play from the printed note.

Rubinstein was most famous for his series of historical recitals—seven consecutive concerts covering the history of piano music. Each of these programs was enormous. The second, devoted to Beethoven sonatas, consisted of the &quot;Moonlight&quot;, &quot;Tempest&quot;, &quot;Waldstein&quot;, &quot;Appassionata&quot;, E minor, A major (Op. 101), E major (Op. 109) and C minor (Op. 111). Again, this was all included in one recital. The fourth concert, devoted to Schumann, contained the Fantasy in C, &quot;Kreisleriana&quot;, &quot;Symphonic Studies&quot;, Sonata in F sharp minor, a set of short pieces and &quot;Carnaval&quot;. This did not include encores, which Rubinstein sprayed liberally at every concert.

Rubinstein concluded his American tour with this series, playing the seven recitals over a nine-day period in New York City in May 1873.

Rubinstein played this series of historical recitals in Russia and throughout Eastern Europe. In Moscow he gave this series on consecutive Tuesday evenings in the Hall of the Nobility, repeating each concert the following morning in the German Club for the benefit of students, free of charge.

===Rachmaninoff on Rubinstein===
Sergei Rachmaninoff first attended Rubinstein&#x27;s historical concerts as a twelve-year-old piano student. Forty-four years later he told his biographer Oscar von Riesemann, &quot;[His playing] gripped my whole imagination and had a marked influence on my ambition as a pianist.&quot;

Rachmaninoff explained to von Riesemann, &quot;It was not so much his magnificent technique that held one spellbound as the profound, spiritually refined musicianship, which spoke from every note and every bar he played and singled him out as the most original and unequalled pianist in the world.&quot;

Rachmaninoff&#x27;s detailed description to von Riesemann is of interest:

Once he repeated the whole finale of [Chopin&#x27;s] Sonata in B minor, perhaps he had not succeeded in the short crescendo at the end as he would have wished. One listened entranced, and could have heard the passage over and over again, so unique was the beauty of tone... I have never heard the virtuoso piece &quot;Islamey&quot; by Balakirev, as Rubinstein played it, and his interpretation of Schumann&#x27;s little fantasy &quot;The Bird as Prophet&quot; was inimitable in poetic refinement: to describe the diminuendo of the pianissimo at the end of the &quot;fluttering away of the little bird&quot; would be hopelessly inadequate. Inimitable, too, was the soul-stirring imagery in the &quot;Kreisleriana&quot;, the last (G minor) passage of which I have never heard anyone play in the same manner. One of Rubinstein&#x27;s greatest secrets was his use of the pedal. He himself very happily expressed his ideas on the subject when he said, &quot;The pedal is the soul of the piano.&quot; No pianist should ever forget this.

Rachmaninoff biographer Barrie Martyn suggests that it might not have been by chance that the two pieces Rachmaninoff singled out for praise from Rubinstein&#x27;s concerts—Beethoven&#x27;s &quot;Appassionata&quot; and Chopin&#x27;s &quot;Funeral March&quot; Sonata—both became cornerstones of Rachmaninoff&#x27;s own recital programs. Martyn also maintains that Rachmaninoff may have based his interpretation of the Chopin sonata on Rubinstein&#x27;s traversal, pointing out similarities between written accounts of Rubinstein&#x27;s version and Rachmaninoff&#x27;s audio recording of the work.

Rachmaninoff admitted that Rubinstein was not note-perfect at these concerts, remembering a memory lapse during Balakirev&#x27;s &quot;Islamey&quot;, where Rubinstein improvised in the style of the piece until remembering the rest of it four minutes later. In Rubinstein&#x27;s defense, however, Rachmaninoff said that &quot;for every possible mistake [Rubinstein] may have made, he gave, in return, ideas and musical tone pictures that would have made up for a million mistakes.&quot;

==Conducting==

Rubinstein conducted the Russian Musical Society programs from the organization&#x27;s inception in 1859 until his resignation from it and the Saint Petersburg Conservatory in 1867. He also did his share of guest conducting both before and after his tenure with the RMS. Rubinstein at the podium was as temperamental as when at the keyboard, provoking mixed reactions amongst both orchestral musicians and audiences.

==Teacher==
As a composition teacher, Rubinstein could inspire his students and was noted for his generosity in time and effort he spent working with them, even after a full day of administrative work. He could also be exacting and expected as much from them as he gave to them. According to one of Tchaikovsky&#x27;s fellow students, Alexandr Rubets, Rubinstein would sometimes begin class by reading some verses, then assign them to be set for either solo voice or chorus, depending on the student&#x27;s preference. This assignment would be due the following day. At other times, he would expect students to improvise a minuet, a rondo, a polonaise or some other musical form.

Rubinstein warned his students continually to guard against timidity, not to stop at a difficult place in a composition but to leave it and press ahead. He also encouraged them to write in sketches with indications of whatever form in which that piece would be written and to avoid composing at the piano. Notable students include pianists Josef Hofmann and Sandra Drouker.

==Composition==
By 1850, Rubinstein had decided that he did not want to be known solely as a pianist, &quot;but as a composer performing his symphonies, concertos, operas, trios, etc.&quot; Rubinstein was a prolific composer, writing no fewer than twenty operas (notably &quot;The Demon&quot;, written after Lermontov&#x27;s Romantic poem, and its successor &quot;The Merchant Kalashnikov&quot;), five piano concertos, six symphonies and many solo piano works along with a substantial output of works for chamber ensemble, two concertos for cello and one for violin, free-standing orchestral works and tone poems (including one entitled &quot;Don Quixote&quot;). Edward Garden writes in the &quot;New Grove&quot;,
Rubinstein composed assiduously during all periods of his life. He was able, and willing, to dash off for publication half a dozen songs or an album of piano pieces with all too fluent ease in the knowledge that his reputation would ensure a gratifying financial reward for the effort involved.
Rubinstein and Mikhail Glinka, considered the first important Russian classical composer, had both studied in Berlin with pedagogue Siegfried Dehn. Glinka, as Dehn&#x27;s student 12 years before Rubinstein, used the opportunity to amass greater reserves of compositional skill that he could use to open up a whole new territory of Russian music. Rubinstein, conversely, chose to exercise his compositional talents within the German styles illustrated in Dehn&#x27;s teaching. Robert Schumann and Felix Mendelssohn were the strongest influences on Rubinstein&#x27;s music.

Consequently, Rubinstein&#x27;s music demonstrates none of the nationalism of The Five. Rubinstein also had a tendency to rush in composing his pieces, resulting in good ideas such as those in his &quot;Ocean&quot; Symphony being developed in less-than-exemplary ways. As Paderewski was later to remark, &quot;He had not the necessary concentration of patience for a composer... He was prone to indulge in grandiloquent cliches at moments of climax, preceded by over-lengthy rising sequences which were subsequently imitated by Tchaikovsky in his less-inspired pieces.&quot; Nevertheless, Rubinstein&#x27;s Fourth Piano Concerto greatly influenced Tchaikovsky&#x27;s piano concertos, especially the first (1874–5), and the superb finale, with its introduction and scintillating principal subject, is the basis of very similar material at the beginning of the finale of Balakirev&#x27;s Piano Concerto in E-flat major ... The first movement of Balakirev&#x27;s concerto had been written, partially under the influence of Rubinstein&#x27;s Second Concerto, in the 1860s.

After Rubinstein&#x27;s death, his works began to lose popularity, although his piano concerti remained in the repertoire in Europe until the First World War, and his principal works have retained a toehold in the Russian concert repertoire. Perhaps somewhat lacking in individuality, Rubinstein&#x27;s music was unable to compete either with the established classics or with the new Russian style of Stravinsky and Prokofiev.

Over recent years, his work has been performed a little more often both in Russia and abroad, and has often met with positive criticism. Amongst his better known works are the opera &quot;The Demon&quot;, his Piano Concerto No. 4, and his Symphony No. 2, known as &quot;The Ocean&quot;.

==Rubinstein&#x27;s repartee==
Rubinstein was as well known during his lifetime for his sarcasm as well as his sometimes penetrating insight. During one of Rubinstein&#x27;s visits to Paris, French pianist Alfred Cortot played the first movement of Beethoven&#x27;s&quot; Appassionata&quot; for him. After a long silence, Rubinstein told Cortot, &quot;My boy, don&#x27;t you ever forget what I am going to tell you. Beethoven&#x27;s music must not be studied. It must be reincarnated.&quot; Cortot reportedly never forgot those words.

Rubinstein&#x27;s own piano students were held just as accountable: he wanted them to &quot;think&quot; about the music they were playing, matching the tone to the piece and the phrase. His manner with them was a combination of raw, sometimes violent criticism and good humor. Hofmann wrote of one such lesson:

Once I played a Liszt rhapsody pretty badly. After a little of it, Rubinstein said, &quot;The way you play this piece would be all right for Auntie or Mamma.&quot; Then rising and coming toward me, he said, &quot;Now let us see how play such things.&quot;

... I began again, but I had not played more than a few measures when Rubinstein said loudly, &quot;Have you begun?&quot; &quot;Yes, Master, I certainly have.&quot; &quot;Oh,&quot; said Rubinstein vaguely, &quot;I didn&#x27;t notice.&quot; ... Rubinstein did not so much instruct me. Merely he let me learn from him ... If a student, by his own study and mental force, reached the desired point which the musician&#x27;s wizardry had made him see, he gained reliance in his own strength, knowing he would always find that point again even though he should lose his way once or twice, as everyone with an honest aspiration is liable to do.

Rubinstein&#x27;s insistence on absolute fidelity to the printed note surprised Hofmann, since he had heard his teacher take liberties himself in his concerts. When he asked Rubinstein to reconcile this paradox, Rubinstein answered, as many teachers have through the ages, &quot;When you are as old as I am, you may do as I do.&quot; Then Rubinstein added, &quot;If you can&quot;.

Nor did Rubinstein adjust the tenor of his comments for those of high rank. After Rubinstein had reassumed the directorship of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, Tsar Alexander III donated the dilapidated old Bolshoi Theater as the Conservatory&#x27;s new home—without the funds needed to restore and restructure the facility. At a reception given in the monarch&#x27;s honor, the Tsar asked Rubinstein if he was pleased with this gift. Rubinstein replied bluntly, to the crowd&#x27;s horror, &quot;Your Imperial Majesty, if I gave you a beautiful cannon, all mounted and embossed, with no ammunition, would you like it?&quot;

==Rubinstein&#x27;s voice==
The following recording was made in Moscow in January 1890, by (1858–1934) on behalf of Thomas Edison. Rubinstein is heard to make a complimentary remark about the phonograph recorder.

==References==
===Sources===

In Russian
* (2 vol.)

In German
* (3 vol.)

In English
* 
* (29 vols.)
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Holden, Anthony, &quot;Tchaikovsky: A Biography&quot; (New York: Random House, 1995)
* Khoprova, Tatyana ed., &quot;Anton Grigorevich Rubinstein&quot;, (in Russian), (Saint Petersburg, 1997) 
* Poznansky, Alexander, &quot;Tchaikovsky: The Quest for the Inner Man&quot; (New York, Schirmer Books, 1991)
* Rubinstein, Anton Grigorevich, ed. L. Barenboim, &quot;Literaturnoye Naslediye&quot; (3 vol.), (in Russian), (Moscow, 1983)

==External links==

*Networking Rubinstein – his contacts in his early career
*Soundbites from String Quartet No.1 in G, Op.17 No.1
*Anton Rubinstein recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q87567" start="0" end="29" title="Anton Rubinstein" label="Anton Grigoryevich Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q178416" start="97" end="126" title="Saint Petersburg Conservatory" label="Saint Petersburg Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q311791" start="156" end="174" title="Nikolai Rubinstein" label="Nikolai Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215539" start="192" end="211" title="Moscow Conservatory" label="Moscow Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="639" end="650" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="706" end="711" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623107" start="747" end="756" title="The Demon (opera)" label="The Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746028" start="809" end="824" title="piano concertos" label="piano concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="830" end="840" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="984" end="990" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858764" start="1017" end="1029" title="Ofatinți" label="Vikhvatinets"/>
<link wikidata="Q277861" start="1037" end="1056" title="Podolia Governorate" label="Podolia Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1058" end="1072" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="1099" end="1111" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="1113" end="1132" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="1142" end="1149" title="Dniestr" label="Dniestr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="1176" end="1182" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="1353" end="1370" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1444" end="1451" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q463055" start="1887" end="1906" title="Paris Conservatoire" label="Paris Conservatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23497875" start="2006" end="2017" title="Salle Érard" label="Salle Érard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="2048" end="2063" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="2068" end="2079" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311791" start="2442" end="2449" title="Nikolai Rubinstein" label="Nikolai"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2562" end="2578" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="2596" end="2606" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="2638" end="2651" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="2866" end="2883" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="2888" end="2905" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q706082" start="3037" end="3051" title="Theodor Kullak" label="Theodor Kullak"/>
<link wikidata="Q62376" start="3101" end="3115" title="Siegfried Dehn" label="Siegfried Dehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q360945" start="3374" end="3393" title="Adolf Bernhard Marx" label="Adolf Bernhard Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="4030" end="4048" title="Revolution of 1848" label="Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q60232" start="4225" end="4253" title="Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna (Charlotte of Württemberg)" label="Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="4272" end="4276" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="4277" end="4287" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285707" start="4679" end="4693" title="Dmitry Donskoy (opera)" label="Dmitry Donskoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190105" start="4992" end="5013" title="Piano Concerto No. 2 (Rubinstein)" label="Second Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="5512" end="5527" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="6306" end="6310" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q275357" start="6488" end="6511" title="Russian Musical Society" label="Russian Musical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178416" start="6593" end="6622" title="Saint Petersburg Conservatory" label="Saint Petersburg Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190390" start="7586" end="7594" title="The Five (composers)" label="The Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505378" start="7596" end="7611" title="Mikhail Tsetlin" label="Mikhail Tsetlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991854" start="8156" end="8177" title="Piano Concerto No. 4 (Rubinstein)" label="Fourth Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q156391" start="9101" end="9120" title="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons" label="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q160169" start="10283" end="10288" title="dacha" label="dacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q178310" start="10292" end="10300" title="Petergof" label="Peterhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="11225" end="11232" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q505921" start="11432" end="11445" title="Josef Hofmann" label="Josef Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="11866" end="11879" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370657" start="11973" end="11990" title="Rubinstein Street (Saint Petersburg)" label="Rubinstein Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="12100" end="12120" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="12122" end="12137" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614738" start="12672" end="12679" title="Amy Fay" label="Amy Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q636941" start="12929" end="12935" title="Karl Tausig" label="Tausig"/>
<link wikidata="Q732784" start="13052" end="13069" title="Wanderer Fantasy" label="Wanderer Fantasie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132232" start="13176" end="13190" title="Clara Schumann" label="Clara Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="13248" end="13259" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q210232" start="13260" end="13272" title="Piano Trio No. 2 (Mendelssohn)" label="C minor Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q905677" start="13856" end="13881" title="Piano Trio No. 7 (Beethoven)" label="&amp;quot;Archduke&amp;quot; Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q368583" start="13897" end="13909" title="Leopold Auer" label="Leopold Auer"/>
<link wikidata="Q782832" start="13922" end="13936" title="Alfredo Piatti" label="Alfredo Piatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q312790" start="14503" end="14519" title="Henri Vieuxtemps" label="Henri Vieuxtemps"/>
<link wikidata="Q146614" start="14811" end="14823" title="Appassionata" label="Appassionata"/>
<link wikidata="Q84246" start="14912" end="14927" title="Eduard Hanslick" label="Eduard Hanslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656164" start="14943" end="14952" title="Harold C. Schonberg" label="Schonberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="15492" end="15511" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q239214" start="16282" end="16295" title="Karl Goldmark" label="Karl Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="16383" end="16392" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q270785" start="16400" end="16415" title="Symphony No. 8 (Beethoven)" label="Eighth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q362340" start="17010" end="17029" title="Theodor Leschetizky" label="Theodor Leschetizky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17415" end="17429" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656164" start="17443" end="17462" title="Harold C. Schonberg" label="Harold C. Schonberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q951486" start="18371" end="18385" title="Josef Lhévinne" label="Josef Lhévinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q543264" start="18561" end="18573" title="Ludwig Deppe" label="Ludwig Deppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614738" start="18599" end="18606" title="Amy Fay" label="Amy Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q155540" start="19142" end="19156" title="Hans von Bülow" label="Hans von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28858" start="19232" end="19247" title="Ludwig Rellstab" label="Ludwig Rellstab"/>
<link wikidata="Q234166" start="19641" end="19646" title="Adelina Patti" label="Patti"/>
<link wikidata="Q941040" start="19656" end="19662" title="Giovanni Battista Rubini" label="Rubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="20077" end="20089" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q191957" start="20710" end="20731" title="Ignacy Jan Paderewski" label="Ignacy Jan Paderewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="20963" end="20971" title="Robert Schumann" label="Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="20998" end="21007" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="21564" end="21573" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546995" start="21574" end="21581" title="piano sonata" label="sonatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12008" start="21600" end="21621" title="Piano Sonata No. 14 (Beethoven)" label="&amp;quot;Moonlight&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q146311" start="21623" end="21642" title="Piano Sonata No. 17 (Beethoven)" label="&amp;quot;Tempest&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q146535" start="21644" end="21665" title="Piano Sonata No. 21 (Beethoven)" label="&amp;quot;Waldstein&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q146614" start="21667" end="21691" title="Piano Sonata No. 23 (Beethoven)" label="&amp;quot;Appassionata&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q146692" start="21693" end="21700" title="Piano Sonata No. 27 (Beethoven)" label="E minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q146712" start="21702" end="21719" title="Piano Sonata No. 28 (Beethoven)" label="A major (Op. 101)"/>
<link wikidata="Q146752" start="21721" end="21738" title="Piano Sonata No. 30 (Beethoven)" label="E major (Op. 109)"/>
<link wikidata="Q146793" start="21743" end="21760" title="Piano Sonata No. 32 (Beethoven)" label="C minor (Op. 111)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="21838" end="21846" title="Robert Schumann" label="Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395862" start="21862" end="21874" title="Fantasie in C (Schumann)" label="Fantasy in C"/>
<link wikidata="Q741180" start="21882" end="21894" title="Kreisleriana" label="Kreisleriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q374316" start="21908" end="21925" title="Symphonic Studies (Schumann)" label="Symphonic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043926" start="21990" end="21998" title="Carnaval (Schumann)" label="Carnaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="22556" end="22575" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q146614" start="24452" end="24464" title="Appassionata" label="Appassionata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="24475" end="24481" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q284448" start="24489" end="24521" title="Piano Sonata No. 2 (Chopin)" label="&amp;quot;Funeral March&amp;quot; Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q185040" start="24965" end="24974" title="Mily Balakirev" label="Balakirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192074" start="24988" end="24995" title="Islamey" label="Islamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q275357" start="25381" end="25404" title="Russian Musical Society" label="Russian Musical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q505921" start="26795" end="26808" title="Josef Hofmann" label="Josef Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220978" start="26813" end="26827" title="Sandra Drouker" label="Sandra Drouker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="27085" end="27090" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623107" start="27107" end="27116" title="The Demon (opera)" label="The Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46599" start="27138" end="27147" title="Mikhail Lermontov" label="Lermontov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751038" start="27194" end="27218" title="The Merchant Kalashnikov (opera)" label="The Merchant Kalashnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746028" start="27232" end="27247" title="piano concertos" label="piano concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="27253" end="27263" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q871420" start="27371" end="27376" title="cello concerto" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q633441" start="27389" end="27395" title="violin concerto" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="27432" end="27441" title="tone poem" label="tone poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q181885" start="27854" end="27868" title="Mikhail Glinka" label="Mikhail Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="28315" end="28330" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="28335" end="28352" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190390" start="28490" end="28498" title="The Five (composers)" label="The Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q934895" start="29316" end="29328" title="E-flat major" label="E-flat major"/>
<link wikidata="Q116057" start="30404" end="30417" title="Alfred Cortot" label="Alfred Cortot"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="30447" end="30456" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q146614" start="30470" end="30482" title="Piano Sonata No. 23 (Beethoven)" label="Appassionata"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="32487" end="32491" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="32492" end="32505" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="33069" end="33082" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q691783" start="33145" end="33164" title="Phonograph cylinder" label="phonograph recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772725" start="33301" end="33316" title="Anthony Holden" label="Holden, Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q47169540" start="33495" end="33515" title="Alexander Poznansky" label="Poznansky, Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="33898" end="33943" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152758" wikidata="Q6041863" url="?curid=152758" title="Instrument of Accession (Jammu and Kashmir)">
<text>The Jammu and Kashmir Instrument of Accession is a legal document executed by Maharaja Hari Singh, ruler of the princely state of Jammu and Kashmir, on 26 October 1947.

==Parties==
By executing an Instrument of Accession under the provisions of the Indian Independence Act 1947, Maharaja Hari Singh agreed to accede his state to the Dominion of India.

On 27 October 1947, the then Governor-General of India, Lord Mountbatten accepted the accession. In a letter sent to Maharaja Hari Singh on the same day, he said, &quot;it is my Government&#x27;s wish that as soon as law and order have been restored in Jammu and Kashmir and her soil cleared of the invader, the question of the State&#x27;s accession should be settled by a reference to the people.&quot;

Islamic Republic of Pakistan&#x27;s founder Mohammad Ali Jinnah stated that the accession was &quot;fraudulent&quot;, and that the Maharaja &quot;betrayed&quot; trust by acceding to India at a time when a standstill agreement signed as per his personal request to the Maharaja was still in force.

The accession to India is celebrated on Accession Day, which is held annually on 26 October.

==Text==

The text of the Instrument of Accession, excluding the schedule mentioned in its third point, is as follows:

==Schedule==
The Schedule referred to in paragraph 3 of the Instrument of Accession reads as follows:

==Date==
While the Instrument of Accession carries the date of 26 October, some scholars believe that it was actually signed on 27 October. However, the fact that the Governor General accepted the accession on 27 October, the day the Indian troops were airlifted into Kashmir, is generally accepted.

An Indian commentator, Prem Shankar Jha, has argued that the accession was actually signed by Hari Singh on 25 October 1947, just before he left Srinagar for Jammu.

Before taking any action on the Maharaja&#x27;s request for help, the Government of India decided to send V. P. Menon, representing it, who flew to Srinagar on 25 October. On realizing the state of emergency, Menon advised the Maharaja to leave immediately for Jammu, for his own safety. He followed this advice and left Srinagar for Jammu that night, while Menon and Prime Minister Mahajan flew to Delhi early the next morning, 26 October. When they reached there, the Indian Government promised Menon and Mahajan military assistance for Jammu and Kashmir, but only after the Instrument of Accession had been signed. Hence, Menon immediately flew back to Jammu with the Instrument. The official version of events is that on his arrival, he contacted the Maharaja, who was asleep after a long journey, but who at once signed the Instrument. Menon then flew back immediately to Delhi with the legal documents on 26 October.

== Commentary ==
In 1950, a United States Department of State memorandum prepared by American diplomats George C. McGhee and John D. Hickerson, approved by Secretary of State Dean Acheson, stated on the basis of an Office of Legal Counsel opinion that the Instrument of Accession could not finalize the accession to either dominion. According to this memorandum, the Attorney General for England and Wales and Foreign Office legal advisors felt that the accession was inconsistent with Kashmir&#x27;s obligations to Pakistan, and for that reason it was &quot;perhaps invalid&quot;.

==See also==
* Instrument of Accession
* Instrument of Accession of Junagadh
* History of Kashmir
* Jammu and Kashmir Constitution Act 1939

==References and notes==
;Notes
;Citations
;Bibliography
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Venkatesh Nayak, Exclusive: For the First Time, a True Copy of Jammu &amp; Kashmir&#x27;s Instrument of Accession, The Wire, 26 October 2016.
* Proclamation of 1 May 1951 on Jammu &amp; Kashmir Constituent Assembly by Yuvraj (Crown Prince) Karan Singh from the Official website of Government of Jammu and Kashmir, India
* Conflict in Kashmir: Selected Internet Resources by the Library, University of California, Berkeley, USA; University of California, Berkeley Library Bibliographies and Web-Bibliographies list</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6041863" start="4" end="45" title="Instrument of Accession (Jammu and Kashmir)" label="Jammu and Kashmir Instrument of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041863" start="51" end="65" title="Instrument of Accession (Jammu and Kashmir)" label="legal document"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="78" end="86" title="Maharaja" label="Maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q12446053" start="87" end="97" title="Hari Singh" label="Hari Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="112" end="126" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571484" start="130" end="147" title="Jammu and Kashmir (princely state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056679" start="198" end="221" title="Instrument of Accession" label="Instrument of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661579" start="250" end="278" title="Indian Independence Act 1947" label="Indian Independence Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q12446053" start="289" end="299" title="Hari Singh" label="Hari Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="334" end="351" title="Dominion of India" label="Dominion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="383" end="408" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="410" end="426" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q208270" start="649" end="660" title="Federally Administered Tribal Areas" label="the invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598681" start="965" end="985" title="standstill agreement" label="standstill agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672508" start="1098" end="1111" title="Accession Day (Jammu and Kashmir)" label="Accession Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645580" start="1699" end="1715" title="Prem Shankar Jha" label="Prem Shankar Jha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505272" start="1948" end="1959" title="V. P. Menon" label="V. P. Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="2794" end="2827" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q822438" start="2870" end="2886" title="George C. McGhee" label="George C. McGhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228198" start="2891" end="2908" title="John D. Hickerson" label="John D. Hickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="2941" end="2953" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079258" start="2981" end="3004" title="Office of Legal Counsel" label="Office of Legal Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="3133" end="3171" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General for England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="3176" end="3190" title="Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056679" start="3364" end="3387" title="Instrument of Accession" label="Instrument of Accession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3390" end="3425" title="Indian integration of Junagadh#Instrument of accession" label="Instrument of Accession of Junagadh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3428" end="3446" title="History of Jammu and Kashmir#1947" label="History of Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q109905308" start="3449" end="3488" title="Jammu and Kashmir Constitution Act 1939" label="Jammu and Kashmir Constitution Act 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4044" end="4078" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152759" wikidata="Q13424667" url="?curid=152759" title="Hilbert's second problem">
<text>In mathematics, Hilbert&#x27;s second problem was posed by David Hilbert in 1900 as one of his 23 problems. It asks for a proof that arithmetic is consistent – free of any internal contradictions. Hilbert stated that the axioms he considered for arithmetic were the ones given in , which include a second order completeness axiom.

In the 1930s, Kurt Gödel and Gerhard Gentzen proved results that cast new light on the problem. Some feel that Gödel&#x27;s theorems give a negative solution to the problem, while others consider Gentzen&#x27;s proof as a partial positive solution.

== Hilbert&#x27;s problem and its interpretation ==

In one English translation, Hilbert asks:

&quot;When we are engaged in investigating the foundations of a science, we must set up a system of axioms which contains an exact and complete description of the relations subsisting between the elementary ideas of that science. ... But above all I wish to designate the following as the most important among the numerous questions which can be asked with regard to the axioms: To prove that they are not contradictory, that is, that a definite number of logical steps based upon them can never lead to contradictory results. In geometry, the proof of the compatibility of the axioms can be effected by constructing a suitable field of numbers, such that analogous relations between the numbers of this field correspond to the geometrical axioms. ... On the other hand a direct method is needed for the proof of the compatibility of the arithmetical axioms.&quot; 

Hilbert&#x27;s statement is sometimes misunderstood, because by the &quot;arithmetical axioms&quot; he did not mean a system equivalent to Peano arithmetic, but a stronger system with a second-order completeness axiom. The system Hilbert asked for a completeness proof of is more like second-order arithmetic than first-order Peano arithmetic.

As a nowadays common interpretation, a positive solution to Hilbert&#x27;s second question would in particular provide a proof that Peano arithmetic is consistent.

There are many known proofs that Peano arithmetic is consistent that can be carried out in strong systems such as Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. These do not provide a resolution to Hilbert&#x27;s second question, however, because someone who doubts the consistency of Peano arithmetic is unlikely to accept the axioms of set theory (which are much stronger) to prove its consistency. Thus a satisfactory answer to Hilbert&#x27;s problem must be carried out using principles that would be acceptable to someone who does not already believe PA is consistent. Such principles are often called finitistic because they are completely constructive and do not presuppose a completed infinity of natural numbers. Gödel&#x27;s second incompleteness theorem (see Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorems) places a severe limit on how weak a finitistic system can be while still proving the consistency of Peano arithmetic.

== Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorem ==
Gödel&#x27;s second incompleteness theorem shows that it is not possible for any proof that Peano Arithmetic is consistent to be carried out within Peano arithmetic itself. This theorem shows that if the only acceptable proof procedures are those that can be formalized within arithmetic then Hilbert&#x27;s call for a consistency proof cannot be answered. However, as explain, there is still room for a proof that cannot be formalized in arithmetic:

:&quot;This imposing result of Godel&#x27;s analysis should not be misunderstood: it does not exclude a meta-mathematical proof of the consistency of arithmetic. What it excludes is a proof of consistency that can be mirrored by the formal deductions of arithmetic. Meta-mathematical proofs of the consistency of arithmetic have, in fact, been constructed, notably by Gerhard Gentzen, a member of the Hilbert school, in 1936, and by others since then. ... But these meta-mathematical proofs cannot be represented within the arithmetical calculus; and, since they are not finitistic, they do not achieve the proclaimed objectives of Hilbert&#x27;s original program. ... The possibility of constructing a finitistic absolute proof of consistency for arithmetic is not excluded by Gödel’s results. Gödel showed that no such proof is possible that can be represented within arithmetic. His argument does not eliminate the possibility of strictly finitistic proofs that cannot be represented within arithmetic. But no one today appears to have a clear idea of what a finitistic proof would be like that is not capable of formulation within arithmetic.&quot;

== Gentzen&#x27;s consistency proof ==

In 1936, Gentzen published a proof that Peano Arithmetic is consistent. Gentzen&#x27;s result shows that a consistency proof can be obtained in a system that is much weaker than set theory.

Gentzen&#x27;s proof proceeds by assigning to each proof in Peano arithmetic an ordinal number, based on the structure of the proof, with each of these ordinals less than ε0. He then proves by transfinite induction on these ordinals that no proof can conclude in a contradiction. The method used in this proof can also be used to prove a cut elimination result for Peano arithmetic in a stronger logic than first-order logic, but the consistency proof itself can be carried out in ordinary first-order logic using the axioms of primitive recursive arithmetic and a transfinite induction principle. gives a game-theoretic interpretation of Gentzen&#x27;s method.

Gentzen&#x27;s consistency proof initiated the program of ordinal analysis in proof theory. In this program, formal theories of arithmetic or set theory are assigned ordinal numbers that measure the consistency strength of the theories. A theory will be unable to prove the consistency of another theory with a higher proof theoretic ordinal.

== Modern viewpoints on the status of the problem ==

While the theorems of Gödel and Gentzen are now well understood by the mathematical logic community, no consensus has formed on whether (or in what way) these theorems answer Hilbert&#x27;s second problem. argues that Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorem shows that it is not possible to produce finitistic consistency proofs of strong theories. states that although Gödel&#x27;s results imply that no finitistic syntactic consistency proof can be obtained, semantic (in particular, second-order) arguments can be used to give convincing consistency proofs. argues that Gödel&#x27;s theorem does not prevent a consistency proof because its hypotheses might not apply to all the systems in which a consistency proof could be carried out. calls the belief that Gödel&#x27;s theorem eliminates the possibility of a persuasive consistency proof &quot;erroneous&quot;, citing the consistency proof given by Gentzen and a later one given by Gödel in 1958.

==See also==
* Takeuti conjecture

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .


==External links==
* Original text of Hilbert&#x27;s talk, in German
* English translation of Hilbert&#x27;s 1900 address</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424667" start="16" end="45" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s second problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s second problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="59" end="72" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273167" start="95" end="106" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s problems" label="23 problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="147" end="157" title="consistency proof" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="346" end="356" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60502" start="361" end="376" title="Gerhard Gentzen" label="Gerhard Gentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442973" start="1830" end="1853" title="second-order arithmetic" label="second-order arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="2022" end="2038" title="Peano arithmetic" label="Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="2169" end="2196" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory" label="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417326" start="2644" end="2654" title="finitism" label="finitistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="2807" end="2843" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="3019" end="3048" title="second incompleteness theorem" label="second incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q60502" start="3826" end="3841" title="Gerhard Gentzen" label="Gerhard Gentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="4923" end="4937" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403155" start="5014" end="5016" title="epsilon numbers (mathematics)" label="ε0"/>
<link wikidata="Q840810" start="5036" end="5057" title="transfinite induction" label="transfinite induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q376166" start="5181" end="5196" title="cut elimination" label="cut elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="5208" end="5224" title="Peano arithmetic" label="Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243580" start="5371" end="5401" title="primitive recursive arithmetic" label="primitive recursive arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100782" start="5564" end="5580" title="ordinal analysis" label="ordinal analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="5672" end="5687" title="ordinal numbers" label="ordinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384443" start="5705" end="5725" title="consistency strength" label="consistency strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548746" start="6386" end="6398" title="Second-order logic" label="second-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270518" start="6817" end="6851" title="Dialectica interpretation" label="a later one given by Gödel in 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678179" start="6869" end="6887" title="Takeuti conjecture" label="Takeuti conjecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152760" wikidata="Q3893331" url="?curid=152760" title="Hilbert's fifth problem">
<text>Hilbert&#x27;s fifth problem is the fifth mathematical problem from the problem list publicized in 1900 by mathematician David Hilbert, and concerns the characterization of Lie groups.

The theory of Lie groups describes continuous symmetry in mathematics; its importance there and in theoretical physics (for example quark theory) grew steadily in the twentieth century. In rough terms, Lie group theory is the common ground of group theory and the theory of topological manifolds. The question Hilbert asked was an acute one of making this precise: is there any difference if a restriction to smooth manifolds is imposed?

The expected answer was in the negative (the classical groups, the most central examples in Lie group theory, are smooth manifolds). This was eventually confirmed in the early 1950s. Since the precise notion of &quot;manifold&quot; was not available to Hilbert, there is room for some debate about the formulation of the problem in contemporary mathematical language.

== Formulation of the problem ==
A modern formulation of the problem (in its simplest interpretation) is as follows:

An equivalent formulation of this problem closer to that of Hilbert, in terms of composition laws, goes as follows:

In this form the problem was solved by Montgomery–Zippin and Gleason.

A stronger interpretation (viewing as a transformation group rather than an abstract group) results in the Hilbert–Smith conjecture about group actions on manifolds, which in full generality is still open. It is known classically for actions on 2-dimensional manifolds and has recently been solved for three dimensions by John Pardon.

== Solution ==
The first major result was that of John von Neumann in 1933, giving an affirmative answer for compact groups. The locally compact abelian group case was solved in 1934 by Lev Pontryagin. The final resolution, at least in the interpretation of what Hilbert meant given above, came with the work of Andrew Gleason, Deane Montgomery and Leo Zippin in the 1950s.

In 1953, Hidehiko Yamabe obtained further results about topological groups that may not be manifolds:

It follows that every locally compact group contains an open subgroup that is a projective limit of Lie groups, by van Dantzig&#x27;s theorem (this last statement is called the Gleason–Yamabe Theorem in ).

== No small subgroups ==
An important condition in the theory is no small subgroups. A topological group , or a partial piece of a group like above, is said to have &quot;no small subgroups&quot; if there is a neighbourhood of containing no subgroup bigger than . For example, the circle group satisfies the condition, while the -adic integers as additive group does not, because will contain the subgroups: , for all large integers . This gives an idea of what the difficulty is like in the problem. In the Hilbert–Smith conjecture case it is a matter of a known reduction to whether can act faithfully on a closed manifold. Gleason, Montgomery and Zippin characterized Lie groups amongst locally compact groups, as those having no small subgroups.

== Infinite dimensions ==
Researchers have also considered Hilbert&#x27;s fifth problem without supposing finite dimensionality. This was the subject of Per Enflo&#x27;s doctoral thesis; his work is discussed in .

== See also ==
* Totally disconnected group

== Notes ==

== References ==
* 
* 
* Yamabe, Hidehiko, &quot;On an arcwise connected subgroup of a Lie group&quot;, Osaka Mathematical Journal v.2, no. 1 Mar. (1950),  13–14.
* Irving Kaplansky, &quot;Lie Algebras and Locally Compact Groups&quot;, Chicago Lectures in Mathematics, 1971.
* Enflo, Per. (1970) Investigations on Hilbert’s fifth problem for non locally compact groups. (Ph.D. thesis of five articles of Enflo from 1969 to 1970)
** Enflo, Per; 1969a: Topological groups in which multiplication on one side is differentiable or linear. &quot;Math. Scand.,&quot; 24,  195–197.
** Enflo, Per; 1969b: On a problem of Smirnov. &quot;Ark. Mat.&quot; 8,  107–109.
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3893331" start="0" end="28" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s fifth problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s fifth problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q273167" start="72" end="84" title="Hilbert problems" label="problem list"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="121" end="134" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="173" end="182" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996344" start="221" end="240" title="continuous symmetry" label="continuous symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="285" end="304" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="318" end="330" title="quark theory" label="quark theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="429" end="441" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721559" start="460" end="480" title="topological manifold" label="topological manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="595" end="610" title="smooth manifold" label="smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285809" start="670" end="685" title="classical group" label="classical group"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790315" start="1340" end="1360" title="transformation group" label="transformation group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761258" start="1407" end="1431" title="Hilbert–Smith conjecture" label="Hilbert–Smith conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="1438" end="1450" title="group action" label="group action"/>
<link wikidata="Q21558134" start="1622" end="1633" title="John Pardon" label="John Pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="1686" end="1702" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="1745" end="1758" title="compact group" label="compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122103" start="1765" end="1794" title="locally compact abelian group" label="locally compact abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q451319" start="1822" end="1836" title="Lev Pontryagin" label="Lev Pontryagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504857" start="1948" end="1962" title="Andrew Gleason" label="Andrew Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q931348" start="1964" end="1980" title="Deane Montgomery" label="Deane Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423262" start="1985" end="1995" title="Leo Zippin" label="Leo Zippin"/>
<link wikidata="Q472713" start="2020" end="2035" title="Hidehiko Yamabe" label="Hidehiko Yamabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828252" start="2229" end="2255" title="Totally disconnected group" label="van Dantzig&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045262" start="2386" end="2403" title="no small subgroup" label="no small subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356493" start="2602" end="2614" title="circle group" label="circle group"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="2650" end="2664" title="p-adic integers" label="-adic integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="2668" end="2682" title="Abelian group" label="additive group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517914" start="2930" end="2945" title="closed manifold" label="closed manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147620" start="3011" end="3032" title="locally compact group" label="locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3178" end="3199" title="Lie groups#Infinite dimensional Lie groups" label="finite dimensionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q354095" start="3225" end="3234" title="Per Enflo" label="Per Enflo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828252" start="3304" end="3330" title="Totally disconnected group" label="Totally disconnected group"/>
<link wikidata="Q129368" start="3510" end="3526" title="Irving Kaplansky" label="Irving Kaplansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q354095" start="3622" end="3632" title="Per Enflo" label="Enflo, Per"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3641" end="3713" title="Per Enflo#Hilbert&amp;#x27;s fifth problem and embeddings" label="Investigations on Hilbert’s fifth problem for non locally compact groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q354095" start="3749" end="3754" title="Per Enflo" label="Enflo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3886" end="3898" title="Math. Scand." label="Math. Scand."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152763" wikidata="Q25455" url="?curid=152763" title="Marlborough Sounds">
<text>The Marlborough Sounds (te reo Māori: &quot;Te Tauihu-o-te-Waka&quot;) are an extensive network of sea-drowned valleys at the northern end of the South Island of New Zealand. The Marlborough Sounds were created by a combination of land subsidence and rising sea levels. According to Māori mythology, the sounds are the prows of the many sunken waka of Aoraki.

==Overview==
Covering some of sounds, islands, and peninsulas, the Marlborough Sounds lie at the South Island&#x27;s north-easternmost point, between Tasman Bay in the west and Cloudy Bay in the south-east. The almost fractal coastline has 1/10 of the length of New Zealand&#x27;s coasts.

The steep, wooded hills and small quiet bays of the sounds are sparsely populated, as access is difficult. Many of the small settlements and isolated houses are only accessible by boat. The main large port is Picton on the mainland, at the head of Queen Charlotte Sound. It is at the northern terminus of the South Island&#x27;s main railway and state highway networks. The main small-boat port, Waikawa, is one of New Zealand&#x27;s largest and provides a base for leisure sailors and vacationers.

The main sounds, other than Queen Charlotte Sound, are Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere and Kenepuru Sound. Havelock is a small port town at the head of Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere. Tory Channel is a major arm of Queen Charlotte Sound, and between them, the Channel and the Sound isolate the hills of Arapaoa Island from the mainland. Other major islands in the sounds include D&#x27;Urville Island.

The Sounds are home to the entire breeding population of the rare and vulnerable rough-faced shag (also known as the New Zealand king cormorant) which nests on a small number of rocky islets there. The Department of Conservation manages a total of over 50 reserves in the area.

== History ==

===Pre-modern era===
The sounds were extensively travelled and partly inhabited by Māori groups before the coming of the Europeans, using the sounds as shelter from bad weather and partaking of the rich food sources. Māori were also known to carry their canoes over some stretches of land on portage paths. However, as in most areas of the South Island, populations were smaller than in the North Island.

European history of the area is considered to start with Captain Cook&#x27;s visit to the sounds in the 1770s, discovering a plant (Cook&#x27;s scurvy grass) high in vitamin C which helped to cure scurvy amongst his crew. On Motuara Island, Cook also proclaimed British sovereignty over the South Island. Some parts of the sounds also later developed a significant whaling history, and much of the sounds was (thinly) settled by European farmers in the late 19th and early 20th century.

===Ferries and marine farms===
The Marlborough Sounds are connected to Cook Strait at the north-east extreme. At this point, the North Island is at its closest to the South Island, and the inter-island road, rail, and passenger ferry service between Picton and Wellington travels through the sounds.

Marine farming, especially of salmon and mussels, is increasingly common, having started in the 1960s. However, the wakes caused by fast catamaran vehicular ferry services to the North Island have allegedly damaged farms and destroyed crab grounds. They were also blamed for stripping the local beaches bare of sand, and damaging landings and other facilities built close to the water&#x27;s edge. This resulted in a dispute heard in the New Zealand Environment Court in the early 1990s, brought forward by the &#x27;Guardians of the Sounds&#x27; group. The court, however, not only refused to restrict the fast ferries but also awarded NZ$300,000 in court costs against the citizen group which had brought the case. This was seen as a strong blow against civic action, and a curtailing of the powers of the Resource Management Act.

However, as damage increasingly became visible, and protests continued, the fast ferries (which only operated for the summer season) were eventually restricted to a lower speed of 18 knots in the sounds (officially for safety reasons), reducing their time advantage over the conventional ferries. They have since been discontinued.

In July/August 2007, the &#x27;Guardians of the Sounds&#x27; environmentalist group planned a 100-ship flotilla protest against scallop dredging in the sounds, which they consider damages the ecosystem of the sounds similar to bottom trawling in the open sea. The protest was intended to call attention to what they allege is the Ministry of Fisheries ignoring the detrimental effect of the practice. Commercial scallops harvesting companies have warned that protests could endanger lives if the protesters engaged in dangerous manoeuvres, while the Ministry of Fisheries has also noted that only 6% of the sounds are set aside for the dredging, though this had been much more extensive in the past.

==Dangerous waters==
The main channels of the Marlborough Sounds have calm water and are popular for sailing. Cook Strait, however, is infamous for its strong currents and rough waters, especially when the wind is from the south or north. Because of this, some of the narrow channels closer to the Strait are dangerous to navigate. Notable amongst these is French Pass at the southern end of D&#x27;Urville Island, which has several vortices.

The most notable shipwreck in the sounds is that of the Russian cruise liner MS &quot;Mikhail Lermontov&quot;, which sank in 1986 in Port Gore, close to the mouth of Queen Charlotte Sound, after colliding with rocks. One crew member was killed in the disaster. The ship herself is now a popular dive wreck.

==References==
==External links==

* NZ Maritime Museum&#x27;s article on the &quot;Mikhail Lermontov&quot;
* Marlborough Sounds Restoration Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25455" start="4" end="22" title="Marlborough Sounds" label="Marlborough Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="24" end="36" title="Māori language" label="te reo Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="99" end="117" title="ria" label="sea-drowned valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="146" end="158" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="231" end="246" title="subsidence" label="land subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="251" end="268" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q546879" start="283" end="298" title="Māori mythology" label="Māori mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="319" end="324" title="Bow (watercraft)" label="prows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710791" start="344" end="348" title="waka (canoe)" label="waka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="352" end="358" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook#Māori history, legends and traditions" label="Aoraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362310" start="511" end="521" title="Tasman Bay" label="Tasman Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102663" start="538" end="548" title="Cloudy Bay" label="Cloudy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="579" end="586" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362879" start="860" end="866" title="Picton, New Zealand" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25473" start="899" end="920" title="Queen Charlotte Sound (New Zealand)" label="Queen Charlotte Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q444222" start="997" end="1010" title="New Zealand state highway network" label="state highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960010" start="1047" end="1054" title="Waikawa, Marlborough" label="Waikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068304" start="1206" end="1231" title="Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere" label="Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738731" start="1236" end="1250" title="Kenepuru Sound" label="Kenepuru Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q151982" start="1252" end="1260" title="Havelock, New Zealand" label="Havelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068304" start="1297" end="1322" title="Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere" label="Pelorus Sound / Te Hoiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491641" start="1324" end="1336" title="Tory Channel" label="Tory Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q626154" start="1443" end="1457" title="Arapaoa Island" label="Arapaoa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273040" start="1519" end="1540" title="D&amp;#x27;Urville Island, New Zealand" label="D&amp;#x27;Urville Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="1613" end="1623" title="vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q25626" start="1624" end="1640" title="rough-faced shag" label="rough-faced shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q25452" start="1705" end="1733" title="Marlborough Sounds Important Bird Areas" label="small number of rocky islets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="1745" end="1771" title="Department of Conservation (New Zealand)" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1920" end="1925" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q120638097" start="2129" end="2136" title="portage" label="portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2300" end="2312" title="Captain Cook" label="Captain Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118528" start="2375" end="2399" title="Lepidium oleraceum" label="Cook&amp;#x27;s scurvy grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="2409" end="2418" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="2440" end="2446" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32283285" start="2468" end="2482" title="Motuara Island" label="Motuara Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="2608" end="2615" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="2802" end="2813" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="2860" end="2872" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="2959" end="2964" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="2992" end="3002" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="3062" end="3068" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="3073" end="3079" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362362" start="3148" end="3152" title="Wake (physics)" label="wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="3169" end="3178" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="3267" end="3271" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381019" start="3482" end="3499" title="Environment Court" label="Environment Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427744" start="3840" end="3863" title="Resource Management Act 1991" label="Resource Management Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160830" start="4327" end="4343" title="Scallop dredge" label="scallop dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729329" start="4426" end="4441" title="trawling" label="bottom trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q192520" start="5001" end="5008" title="sailing" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="5010" end="5021" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646189" start="5257" end="5268" title="Te Aumiti / French Pass" label="French Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q607538" start="5333" end="5341" title="whirlpool" label="vortices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143472" start="5421" end="5453" title="MS Mikhail Lermontov" label="MS &amp;quot;Mikhail Lermontov&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230650" start="5477" end="5486" title="Port Gore, New Zealand" label="Port Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268313" start="5639" end="5649" title="dive wreck" label="dive wreck"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152771" wikidata="Q219484" url="?curid=152771" title="Theocritus">
<text>Theocritus (; , &quot;Theokritos&quot;; born c. 300 BC, died after 260 BC) was a Greek poet from Sicily, Magna Graecia, and the creator of Ancient Greek pastoral poetry.

==Life==
Little is known of Theocritus beyond what can be inferred from his writings. We must, however, handle these with some caution, since some of the poems (&quot;Idylls&quot;; ) commonly attributed to him have little claim to authenticity. It is clear that at a very early date two collections were made: one consisting of poems whose authorship was doubtful yet formed a corpus of bucolic poetry, the other a strict collection of those works considered to have been composed by Theocritus himself.

Theocritus was from Sicily, as he refers to Polyphemus, the Cyclops in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, as his &quot;countryman.&quot; He also probably lived in Alexandria for a while, where he wrote about everyday life, notably &quot;Pharmakeutria&quot;. It is also speculated that Theocritus was born in Syracuse, lived on the island of Kos, and lived in Egypt during the time of Ptolemy II.

The record of these recensions is preserved by two epigrams, one of which proceeds from Artemidorus of Tarsus, a grammarian, who lived in the time of Sulla and is said to have been the first editor of these poems. He says, &quot;The Muses of country song were once scattered, but now they are all together in one pen, in one flock.&quot; The second epigram is anonymous, and runs as follows: &quot;The Chian is another man, but I, Theocritus, who wrote these poems, am one of the great populace of Syracuse, the son of Praxagoras and renowned Philinna; and the Muse I have adopted is no alien.&quot; The last line may mean that he wrote nothing but bucolic poems, or that he only wrote in Doric. The assertion that he was from Syracuse appears to be upheld by allusions in the &quot;Idylls&quot; (7.7, 28.16–18).

The information concerning his parentage bears the stamp of authenticity, and disposes of a rival theory based upon a misinterpretation of &quot;Idyll&quot; 7—which made him the son of one Simichus. A larger collection, possibly more extensive than that of Artemidorus, and including poems of doubtful authenticity, was known to the author of the &quot;Suda&quot;, who says: &quot;Theocritus wrote the so-called bucolic poems in the Doric dialect. Some persons also attribute to him the following: Daughters of Proetus, Hopes, Hymns, Heroines, Dirges, Lyrics, Elegies, Iambics, Epigrams.&quot;

The first of these may have been known to Virgil, who refers to the Proetides at &quot;Eclogue&quot; 6.48. The spurious poem 21 may have been one of the &quot;Hopes&quot;, and poem 26 may have been one of the &quot;Heroines&quot;; elegiacs are found in 8.33—60, and the spurious epitaph on Bion may have been one of the &quot;Dirges&quot;. The other classes are all represented in the larger collection which has come down to us.

==Works==
===Bucolics and mimes===

The distinction between these is that the scenes of the former are laid in the country and those of the latter in a town. The most famous of the Bucolics are 1, 6, 7 and 11.

In &quot;Idyll 1&quot; Thyrsis sings to a goatherd about how Daphnis, the mythical herdsman, having defied the power of Aphrodite, dies rather than yielding to a passion the goddess has inflicted on him. In the poem, a series of divine figures from classical mythology, including Hermes, Priapus, and Aphrodite herself, interrogate the shepherd about his lovesickness. As Daphnis lies dying, Priapus asks: &quot;Wretched Daphnis, why pinest thou?&quot;; Hermes inquires: &quot;Daphnis, who wastes thee away?&quot; Alongside these mythological figures appear shepherds and goatherds, who likewise wonder &quot;what harm had befallen&quot; Daphnis. Finally, Aphrodite, the goddess of love, appears to taunt Daphnis for his hubris: &quot;Thou indeed, Daphnis, didst boast that thou wouldst bend Love! Hast not thou, in thine own person, been bent by grievous love?&quot; The failure of these figures to comfort Daphnis in his dying moments thematizes classical beliefs about the folly of mortals who challenge the gods.

In &quot;Idyll 11&quot; Polyphemus is depicted as in love with the sea-nymph Galatea and finding solace in song. In &quot;Idyll 6,&quot; he is cured of his passion and naively relates how he repulses the overtures now made to him by Galatea. The monster of Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot; has been &quot;written up to date&quot; after the Alexandrian manner and has become a gentle simpleton.

&quot;Idyll 7,&quot; the &quot;Harvest Feast&quot;, is the most important of the bucolic poems. The scene is laid in the isle of Kos. The poet speaks in the first person and is called Simichidas by his friends. Other poets are introduced under feigned names. Ancient critics identified the character Sicelidas of Samos with Asclepiades of Samos, and the character Lycidas, &quot;the goatherd of Cydonia,&quot; with the poet Astacides, whom Callimachus calls &quot;the Cretan, the goatherd.&quot; Theocritus speaks of himself as having already gained fame, and says that his songs have been brought by report even unto the throne of Zeus. He praises Philitas, the veteran poet of Kos, and criticizes &quot;the fledgelings of the Muse, who cackle against the Chian bard and find their labour lost.&quot; Other persons mentioned are Nicias, a physician of Miletus, whose name occurs in other poems, and Aratus, whom the scholiasts identify with the author of the &quot;Phenomena&quot;.

Several of the other bucolic poems consist of singing-matches, conducted according to the rules of amoebaean poetry, in which the second singer takes the subject chosen by the first and contributes a variation on the same theme. It may be noted that Theocritus&#x27; rustic characters differ greatly in refinement. Those in &quot;Idyll 5&quot; are low fellows who indulge in coarse abuse. Idylls 4 and 5 are laid in the neighborhood of Croton, and we may infer that Theocritus was personally acquainted with Magna Graecia.

Suspicion has been cast upon idylls 8 and 9 on various grounds. An extreme view holds that within &quot;Idyll 9&quot; there exist two genuine Theocritean fragments, ll.7-13 and 15–20, describing the joys of summer and winter respectively, which have been provided with a clumsy preface, ll.1-6, while an early editor of a bucolic collection has appended an epilogue in which he takes leave of the Bucolic Muses. On the other hand, it is clear that both poems were in Virgil&#x27;s Theocritus, and that they passed the scrutiny of the editor who formed the short collection of Theocritean Bucolics.

The mimes are three in number: 2, 14, and 15. In 2 Simaetha, deserted by Delphis, tells the story of her love to the moon; in 14 Aeschines narrates his quarrel with his sweetheart, and is advised to go to Egypt and enlist in the army of Ptolemy Philadelphus; in 15 Gorgo and Praxinoë go to the festival of Adonis. In the best manuscript 2 comes immediately before 14, an arrangement which is obviously right, since it places the three mimes together. The second place in the manuscripts is occupied by Idyll 7, the &quot;Harvest Feast.&quot; Chisholm praises the mimes, saying &quot;These three mimes are wonderfully natural and lifelike. There is nothing in ancient literature so vivid and real as the chatter of Gorgo and Praxinoë, and the in 15&quot;.

In addition to the Bucolics and Mimes, there are three poems which cannot be brought into any other class:
* 12, a poem to a beautiful youth
* 18, the marriage-song of Helen;
* 26, the murder of Pentheus.
The genuineness of the last was attacked by Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff on account of the crudity of the language, which sometimes degenerates into doggerel. However, Chisholm considered it genuine, arguing that Theocritus had intentionally used realistic language for the sake of dramatic effect and that the manuscript evidence supported its genuineness. Eustathius quotes from it as the work of Theocritus.

===Epics===

Three of these are Hymns: 16, 17, and 22. In 16, the poet praises Hiero II of Syracuse, in 17 Ptolemy Philadelphus, and in 22 the Dioscuri. The other poems are 13, the story of &quot;Hylas and the Nymphs&quot;, and 24 the youthful Heracles. In 13 he makes use of word-painting; in 16 there is some delicate fancy in the description of his poems as &quot;Charites&quot;, and a passage at the end, where he foretells the joys of peace after the enemy have been driven out of Sicily, has the true bucolic ring. The most that can be said of 22 and 24 is that they are very dramatic. Otherwise they differ little from work done by other poets, such as Callimachus and Apollonius Rhodius.

From another point of view, however, these two poems 16 and 17 are supremely interesting, since they are the only ones which can be dated. In 17 Theocritus celebrates the incestuous marriage of Ptolemy Philadelphus with his sister Arsinoë. This marriage is held to have taken place in 277 BC, and a recently discovered inscription shows that Arsinoë died in 270, in the fifteenth year of her brother&#x27;s reign. This poem, therefore, together with xv, which Theocritus wrote to please Arsinoë must fall within this period. The encomium upon Hiero II would seem prior to that upon Ptolemy, since in it Theocritus is a hungry poet seeking for a patron, while in the other he is well satisfied with the world. Now Hiero first came to the front in 275 when he was made General: Theocritus speaks of his achievements as still to come, and the silence of the poet would show that Hiero&#x27;s marriage to Phulistis, his victory over the Mamertines at the Longanus and his election as &quot;King&quot;, events which are ascribed to 270, had not yet taken place. If so, 17 and 15 can only have been written within 275 and 270.

===Lyrics===

Two of these are certainly by Theocritus, 28 and 29, composed in Aeolic verse and in the Aeolic dialect. The first is a very graceful poem presented together with a distaff to Theugenis, wife of Nicias, a doctor of Miletus, on the occasion of a voyage thither undertaken by the poet. The theme of 29 is similar to that of 12. A very corrupt poem, only found in one very late manuscript, was discovered by Ziegler in 1864. As the subject and style very closely resemble that of 29, it is assigned to Theocritus by recent editors.

===Spurious works===

The following poems are now generally considered to be spurious:

19. &quot;Love stealing Honey&quot;. The poem is anonymous in the manuscripts and the conception of Love is not Theocritean.

20. &quot;Herdsman&quot;, 21. &quot;Fishermen&quot;, 23. &quot;Passionate Lover&quot;. These three poems are remarkable for the corrupt state of their text, which makes it likely that they have come from the same source and possibly are by the same author. The &quot;Fishermen&quot; has been much admired. It is addressed to Diophantus and conveys a moral, that one should work and not dream, illustrated by the story of an old fisherman who dreams that he has caught a fish of gold and narrates his vision to his mate. As Leonidas of Tarentum wrote epigrams on fishermen, and one of them is a dedication of his tackle to Poseidon by Diophantus, the fisher, it is likely that the author of this poem was an imitator of Leonidas. It can hardly be by Leonidas himself, who was a contemporary of Theocritus, as it bears marks of lateness.

25. &quot;Heracles the Lion-slayer&quot;, which is anonymous in the manuscript and appears to be by a later writer.

24. Epigrams are also attributed to Theocritus, many of them considered to be of doubtful authenticity.

==Editions==
* Theocritus, Bion and Moschus: Rendered into English Prose with an Introductory Essay by Andrew Lang, (1880), London.
* Theocritus Bion and Moschus (1913) Translated into English Verse by Arthur S. Way. Cambridge University Press.
* Theocritus, &quot;The Idylls of Theocritus&quot;, translated by R.C. Trevelyan (1925 Albert &amp; Charles Boni, New York)
* Theocritus, &quot;The Second and Seventh Idylls&quot; (1927), translated by Charles Stuart Calverley. Illustrated with woodcuts by Elizabeth Rivers (John Lane, London).
* Theocritus, &quot;Theocritus. The Greek text with translation and commentary by A.S.F. Gow&quot; (2nd ed. 1952, Cambridge)
* &quot;Theocritus: Select Poems&quot;, (1971) commentary by K.J. Dover, London.
* &quot;Theocritus: Idylls and Epigrams&quot;, (1982) translated by Daryl Hine, Atheneum, New York.
* &quot;Theocritus - A Selection&quot;, (1999) commentary by Richard Hunter, Cambridge.
* Theocritus, &quot;The Idylls of Theocritus&quot;, tr. Robert Wells (1988)
* &quot;Theocritus: Idylls&quot;, (2003) translated by Anthony Verity with an introduction and notes by Richard Hunter, Oxford University Press.
* &quot;Theocritus, Moschus, Bion&quot;, edited and translated by Neil Hopkinson, Cambridge MA - London (2015).

==References==

==Bibliography==

==Further reading==
* Bowie, Ewen L. 1985. &quot;Theocritus&#x27; Seventh Idyll, Philetas and Longus.&quot; &quot;Classical Quarterly&quot; 35:67–91.
* Burton, Joan B. 1995. &quot;Theocritus&#x27;s Urban Mimes: Mobility, Gender, and Patronage.&quot; Berkeley: University of California Press.
* Damon, Cynthia. 1995. &quot;Narrative and Mimesis in the Idylls of Theocritus.&quot; &quot;Quaderni urbinati di cultura classica&quot; 51:101–123.
* Garson, R. W. 1971. &quot;Theocritean Elements in Virgil&#x27;s Eclogues.&quot; &quot;Classical Quarterly&quot; 21:188–203.
* Griffiths, Frederick T. 1979. &quot;Theocritus at Court.&quot; Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
* Gutzwiller, Kathryn J. 1996. &quot;The Evidence for Theocritean Poetry Books.&quot; In &quot;Theocritus&quot;. Edited by Annette Harder, R. F. Regtuit, and G. C. Wakker, 119–148. Groningen, The Netherlands: E. Forsten.
* Fantuzzi, Marco, and Theodore D. Papanghelis, eds. 2006. &quot;Brill&#x27;s Companion to Greek and Latin Pastoral.&quot; Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
* Hubbard, Thomas K. 1998. &quot;The Pipes of Pan: Intertextuality and Literary Filiation in the Pastoral Tradition from Theocritus to Milton.&quot; Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
* Hunter, Richard L. 1996. &quot;Theocritus and the Archaeology of Greek Poetry.&quot; Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
* Köhnken, Adolf. 2001. &quot;Hellenistic Chronology: Theocritus, Callimachus, and Apollonius Rhodes.&quot; In &quot;Companion to Apollonius Rhodius.&quot; Edited by Theodore D. Papanghelis and Antonios Rengakos, 73–92. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
* Mastronarde, Donald. J. 1968. &quot;Theocritus&#x27; Idyll 13: Love and the Hero.&quot; &quot;Transactions of the American Philological Association&quot; 99:273–290.
* Nelson, Thomas J. 2020. &quot;Penelopean Simaetha: A Flawed Paradigm of Femininity in Theocritus’ Second &quot;Idyll&quot;&quot;, in C. Cusset, P. Belenfant and C.-E. Nardone (eds), &quot;Féminités hellénistiques: Voix, genre, représentations&quot; (Hellenistica Groningana 25) (Leuven) 387–405
* Pfeiffer, Rudolf. 1968. &quot;History of Classical Scholarship from the Beginnings to the End of the Hellenistic Age.&quot; Oxford: Clarendon.
* Rosenmeyer, Thomas G. 1969. &quot;The Green Cabinet: Theocritus and the European Pastoral Lyric.&quot; Berkeley: University of California Press.
* Rossi, Laura. 2001. &quot;The Epigrams Ascribed to Theocritus: A Method of Approach.&quot; Louvain, Belgium: Peeters.
* Walsh, George B. 1990. &quot;Surprised by Self: Audible Thought in Hellenistic Poetry.&quot; &quot;Classical Philology&quot; 85:1–21.

== External links ==


* Works by Theocritus at Perseus Digital Library
* A Hellenistic Bibliography:Theocritus
*&quot;Suda&quot;, Theocritus
*Poems by Theocritus English translations
*Online text: Theocritus translation by J. M. Edmonds, 1912
* 
*An ancient life of Theocritus, from the scholia
* &quot;Theocritus, Bion et Moschus graece et latine. Accedunt virorum doctorum animadversiones scholia, indices&quot;, T. Kiessling (ed.), Londini, sumtibus Whittaker, Treacher, et Arnot, 1829, vol. 1 pp. 1-440.
*&quot;Poetae bucolici et didactici. Theocritus, Bion, Moschus, Nicander, Oppianus, Marcellus de piscibus, poeta de herbis&quot;, C. Fr. Ameis, F. S. Lehrs (ed.), Parisiis, editore Ambrosio Firmin Didot, 1862, pp. 1-66.

:Scholia:
* Scholia at Theocritus: &quot;Theocritus, Bion et Moschus graece et latine. Accedunt virorum doctorum animadversiones scholia, indices&quot;, T. Kiessling (ed.), Londini, sumtibus Whittaker, Treacher, et Arnot, 1829, vol. 2 pp. 15-133.
* &quot;Scholia in Theocritum. Scholia et paraphrases in Nicandrum et Oppianum&quot;, Fr. Dübner, U. Cats Bussemaker (ed.), Parisiis, editore Ambrosio Firmin Didot, 1849, pp. 1-170.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="0" end="10" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="81" end="86" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="97" end="103" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="105" end="118" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="139" end="152" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="153" end="168" title="pastoral poetry" label="pastoral poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q742530" start="338" end="343" title="Idyll" label="Idyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="696" end="702" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="720" end="730" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="757" end="764" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="829" end="839" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q120122344" start="903" end="916" title="Pharmakeutria" label="Pharmakeutria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="974" end="982" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q187027" start="1007" end="1010" title="Kos" label="Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="1050" end="1060" title="Ptolemy II" label="Ptolemy II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753032" start="1083" end="1092" title="recension" label="recension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624183" start="1151" end="1172" title="Artemidorus of Tarsus" label="Artemidorus of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="1213" end="1218" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="1752" end="1757" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="2230" end="2234" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2514" end="2520" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q546203" start="2559" end="2566" title="Eclogues" label="Eclogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q463364" start="2762" end="2766" title="Bion of Smyrna" label="Bion"/>
<link wikidata="Q120115671" start="3097" end="3098" title="Idyll I" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989905" start="3100" end="3101" title="Idyll VI (Theocritus)" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989908" start="3109" end="3111" title="Idyll XI" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q741627" start="3175" end="3182" title="Daphnis" label="Daphnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="3234" end="3243" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="3394" end="3400" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206878" start="3402" end="3409" title="Priapus" label="Priapus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="4156" end="4166" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757460" start="4209" end="4216" title="Galatea (mythology)" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="4408" end="4415" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q187027" start="4656" end="4659" title="Kos" label="Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q471464" start="4851" end="4871" title="Asclepiades of Samos" label="Asclepiades of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="4967" end="4978" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="5159" end="5163" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q739812" start="5176" end="5184" title="Philitas" label="Philitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="5255" end="5259" title="Muse" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q180671" start="5427" end="5433" title="Aratus" label="Aratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956219" start="5610" end="5626" title="Amoebaean singing" label="amoebaean poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="6019" end="6032" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="6871" end="6891" title="Ptolemy Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="6940" end="6946" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61863" start="7639" end="7673" title="Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff" label="Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q453465" start="7959" end="7969" title="Eustathius of Thessalonica" label="Eustathius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313675" start="8092" end="8112" title="Hiero II of Syracuse" label="Hiero II of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="8120" end="8140" title="Ptolemy Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="8156" end="8164" title="Dioscuri" label="Dioscuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="8257" end="8265" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184353" start="8380" end="8388" title="Charites" label="Charites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="8499" end="8505" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="8673" end="8684" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="8689" end="8707" title="Apollonius Rhodius" label="Apollonius Rhodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="8881" end="8887" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q40234" start="8941" end="8948" title="Arsinoe II of Egypt" label="Arsinoë"/>
<link wikidata="Q255308" start="9911" end="9923" title="Aeolic verse" label="Aeolic verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q406373" start="9935" end="9949" title="Aeolic dialect" label="Aeolic dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q927009" start="11113" end="11133" title="Leonidas of Tarentum" label="Leonidas of Tarentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="11212" end="11220" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="11548" end="11555" title="Epigram" label="Epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743249" start="11960" end="11974" title="R.C. Trevelyan" label="R.C. Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209191" start="12096" end="12120" title="Charles Stuart Calverley" label="Charles Stuart Calverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21457348" start="12151" end="12167" title="Elizabeth Rivers" label="Elizabeth Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q644406" start="12271" end="12281" title="A.S.F. Gow" label="A.S.F. Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738862" start="12375" end="12385" title="K.J. Dover" label="K.J. Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226186" start="12463" end="12473" title="Daryl Hine" label="Daryl Hine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149858" start="12556" end="12570" title="Richard L. Hunter" label="Richard Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773642" start="12714" end="12728" title="Anthony Verity" label="Anthony Verity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149858" start="12763" end="12777" title="Richard L. Hunter" label="Richard Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105581399" start="12870" end="12884" title="Neil Hopkinson" label="Neil Hopkinson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152772" wikidata="Q1148482" url="?curid=152772" title="Intensive farming">
<text>Intensive agriculture, also known as intensive farming (as opposed to extensive farming), conventional, or [[industrial agriculture]], is a type of agriculture, both of crop plants and of animals, with higher levels of input and output per unit of agricultural land area. It is characterized by a low fallow ratio, higher use of inputs such as capital, labour, agrochemicals and water, and higher crop yields per unit land area.

Most commercial agriculture is intensive in one or more ways. Forms that rely heavily on industrial methods are often called industrial agriculture, which is characterized by technologies designed to increase yield. Techniques include planting multiple crops per year, reducing the frequency of fallow years, improving cultivars, mechanised agriculture, controlled by increased and more detailed analysis of growing conditions, including weather, soil, water, weeds, and pests. Modern methods frequently involve increased use of non-biotic inputs, such as fertilizers, plant growth regulators, pesticides, and antibiotics for livestock. Intensive farms are widespread in developed nations and increasingly prevalent worldwide. Most of the meat, dairy products, eggs, fruits, and vegetables available in supermarkets are produced by such farms.

Some intensive farms can use sustainable methods, although this typically necessitates higher inputs of labor or lower yields. Sustainably increasing agricultural productivity, especially on smallholdings, is an important way to decrease the amount of land needed for farming and slow and reverse environmental degradation caused by processes such as deforestation.

Intensive animal farming involves large numbers of animals raised on a relatively small area of land, for example by rotational grazing, or sometimes as concentrated animal feeding operations. These methods increase the yields of food and fiber per unit land area compared to those of extensive animal husbandry; concentrated feed is brought to seldom-moved animals, or, with rotational grazing, the animals are repeatedly moved to fresh forage.

==History==

Agricultural development in Britain between the 16th century and the mid-19th century saw a massive increase in agricultural productivity and net output. This in turn contributed to unprecedented population growth, freeing up a significant percentage of the workforce, and thereby helped enable the Industrial Revolution. Historians cited enclosure, mechanization, four-field crop rotation, and selective breeding as the most important innovations.

Industrial agriculture arose in the Industrial Revolution. By the early 19th century, agricultural techniques, implements, seed stocks, and cultivars had so improved that yield per land unit was many times that seen in the Middle Ages.

The first phase involved a continuing process of mechanization. Horse-drawn machinery such as the McCormick reaper revolutionized harvesting, while inventions such as the cotton gin reduced the cost of processing. During this same period, farmers began to use steam-powered threshers and tractors. In 1892, the first gasoline-powered tractor was successfully developed, and in 1923, the International Harvester Farmall tractor became the first all-purpose tractor, marking an inflection point in the replacement of draft animals with machines. Mechanical harvesters (combines), planters, transplanters, and other equipment were then developed, further revolutionizing agriculture. These inventions increased yields and allowed individual farmers to manage increasingly large farms.

The identification of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium (NPK) as critical factors in plant growth led to the manufacture of synthetic fertilizers, further increasing crop yields. In 1909, the Haber-Bosch method to synthesize ammonium nitrate was first demonstrated. NPK fertilizers stimulated the first concerns about industrial agriculture, due to concerns that they came with side effects such as soil compaction, soil erosion, and declines in overall soil fertility, along with health concerns about toxic chemicals entering the food supply.

The discovery of vitamins and their role in nutrition, in the first two decades of the 20th century, led to vitamin supplements, which in the 1920s allowed some livestock to be raised indoors, reducing their exposure to adverse natural elements.

Following World War II synthetic fertilizer use increased rapidly.

The discovery of antibiotics and vaccines facilitated raising livestock by reducing diseases. Developments in logistics and refrigeration as well as processing technology made long-distance distribution feasible. Integrated pest management is the modern method to minimize pesticide use to more sustainable levels.

There are concerns over the sustainability of industrial agriculture, and the environmental effects of fertilizers and pesticides, which has given rise to the organic movement and has built a market for sustainable intensive farming, as well as funding for the development of appropriate technology.

==Techniques and technologies==

===Livestock===
====Pasture intensification====
Pasture intensification is the improvement of pasture soils and grasses to increase the food production potential of livestock systems. It is commonly used to reverse pasture degradation, a process characterized by loss of forage and decreased animal carrying capacity which results from overgrazing, poor nutrient management, and lack of soil conservation. This degradation leads to poor pasture soils with decreased fertility and water availability and increased rates of erosion, compaction, and acidification. Degraded pastures have significantly lower productivity and higher carbon footprints compared to intensified pastures.

Management practices which improve soil health and consequently grass productivity include irrigation, soil scarification, and the application of lime, fertilizers, and pesticides. Depending on the productivity goals of the target agricultural system, more involved restoration projects can be undertaken to replace invasive and under-productive grasses with grass species that are better suited to the soil and climate conditions of the region. These intensified grass systems allow higher stocking rates with faster animal weight gain and reduced time to slaughter, resulting in more productive, carbon-efficient livestock systems.

Another technique to optimize yield while maintaining the carbon balance is the use of integrated crop-livestock (ICL) and crop-livestock-forestry (ICLF) systems, which combine several ecosystems into one optimized agricultural framework. Correctly performed, such production systems are able to create synergies potentially providing benefits to pastures through optimal plant usage, improved feed and fattening rates, increased soil fertility and quality, intensified nutrient cycling, integrated pest control, and improved biodiversity. The introduction of certain legume crops to pastures can increase carbon accumulation and nitrogen fixation in soils, while their digestibility helps animal fattening and reduces methane emissions from enteric fermentation. ICLF systems yield beef cattle productivity up to ten times that of degraded pastures; additional crop production from maize, sorghum, and soybean harvests; and greatly reduced greenhouse gas balances due to forest carbon sequestration.

In the Twelve Aprils grazing program for dairy production, developed by the USDA-SARE, forage crops for dairy herds are planted into a perennial pasture.

====Rotational grazing====

Rotational grazing is a variety of foraging in which herds or flocks are regularly and systematically moved to fresh, rested grazing areas (sometimes called paddocks) to maximize the quality and quantity of forage growth. It can be used with cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, chickens, turkeys, ducks, and other animals. The herds graze one portion of pasture, or a paddock, while allowing the others to recover. Resting grazed lands allows the vegetation to renew energy reserves, rebuild shoot systems, and deepen root systems, resulting in long-term maximum biomass production. Pasture systems alone can allow grazers to meet their energy requirements, but rotational grazing is especially effective because grazers thrive on the more tender younger plant stems. Parasites are also left behind to die off, minimizing or eliminating the need for de-wormers. With the increased productivity of rotational systems, the animals may need less supplemental feed than in continuous grazing systems. Farmers can therefore increase stocking rates.

==== Concentrated animal feeding operations ====

Intensive livestock farming or &quot;factory farming&quot;, is the process of raising livestock in confinement at high stocking density. &quot;Concentrated animal feeding operations&quot; (CAFO), or &quot;intensive livestock operations&quot;, can hold large numbers (some up to hundreds of thousands) of cows, hogs, turkeys, or chickens, often indoors. The essence of such farms is the concentration of livestock in a given space. The aim is to provide maximum output at the lowest possible cost and with the greatest level of food safety. The term is often used pejoratively. CAFOs have dramatically increased the production of food from animal husbandry worldwide, both in terms of total food produced and efficiency.

Food and water is delivered to the animals, and therapeutic use of antimicrobial agents, vitamin supplements, and growth hormones are often employed. Growth hormones are not used on chickens nor on any animal in the European Union. Undesirable behaviors often related to the stress of confinement led to a search for docile breeds (e.g., with natural dominant behaviors bred out), physical restraints to stop interaction, such as individual cages for chickens, or physical modification such as the debeaking of chickens to reduce the harm of fighting.

The CAFO designation resulted from the 1972 U.S. Federal Clean Water Act, which was enacted to protect and restore lakes and rivers to a &quot;fishable, swimmable&quot; quality. The United States Environmental Protection Agency identified certain animal feeding operations, along with many other types of industry, as &quot;point source&quot; groundwater polluters. These operations were subjected to regulation.

In 17 states in the U.S., isolated cases of groundwater contamination were linked to CAFOs. The U.S. federal government acknowledges the waste disposal issue and requires that animal waste be stored in lagoons. These lagoons can be as large as . Lagoons not protected with an impermeable liner can leak into groundwater under some conditions, as can runoff from manure used as fertilizer. A lagoon that burst in 1995 released 25 million gallons of nitrous sludge in North Carolina&#x27;s New River. The spill allegedly killed eight to ten million fish.

The large concentration of animals, animal waste, and dead animals in a small space poses ethical issues to some consumers. Animal rights and animal welfare activists have charged that intensive animal rearing is cruel to animals.

===Crops===
The Green Revolution transformed farming in many developing countries. It spread technologies that had already existed, but had not been widely used outside of industrialized nations. These technologies included &quot;miracle seeds&quot;, pesticides, irrigation, and synthetic nitrogen fertilizer.

==== Seeds ====
In the 1970s, scientists created high-yielding varieties of maize, wheat, and rice. These have an increased nitrogen-absorbing potential compared to other varieties. Since cereals that absorbed extra nitrogen would typically lodge (fall over) before harvest, semi-dwarfing genes were bred into their genomes. Norin 10 wheat, a variety developed by Orville Vogel from Japanese dwarf wheat varieties, was instrumental in developing wheat cultivars. IR8, the first widely implemented high-yielding rice to be developed by the International Rice Research Institute, was created through a cross between an Indonesian variety named &quot;Peta&quot; and a Chinese variety named &quot;Dee Geo Woo Gen&quot;.

With the availability of molecular genetics in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; and rice the mutant genes responsible (&quot;reduced height (rht)&quot;, &quot;gibberellin insensitive (gai1)&quot; and &quot;slender rice (slr1)&quot;) have been cloned and identified as cellular signalling components of gibberellic acid, a phytohormone involved in regulating stem growth via its effect on cell division. Photosynthate investment in the stem is reduced dramatically in shorter plants and nutrients become redirected to grain production, amplifying in particular the yield effect of chemical fertilizers.

High-yielding varieties outperformed traditional varieties several fold and responded better to the addition of irrigation, pesticides, and fertilizers. Hybrid vigour is utilized in many important crops to greatly increase yields for farmers. However, the advantage is lost for the progeny of the F1 hybrids, meaning seeds for annual crops need to be purchased every season, thus increasing costs and profits for farmers.

====Crop rotation====

Crop rotation or crop sequencing is the practice of growing a series of dissimilar types of crops in the same space in sequential seasons for benefits such as avoiding pathogen and pest buildup that occurs when one species is continuously cropped. Crop rotation also seeks to balance the nutrient demands of various crops to avoid soil nutrient depletion. A traditional component of crop rotation is the replenishment of nitrogen through the use of legumes and green manure in sequence with cereals and other crops. Crop rotation can also improve soil structure and fertility by alternating deep-rooted and shallow-rooted plants. A related technique is to plant multi-species cover crops between commercial crops. This combines the advantages of intensive farming with continuous cover and polyculture.

====Irrigation====

Crop irrigation accounts for 70% of the world&#x27;s fresh water use. Flood irrigation, the oldest and most common type, is typically unevenly distributed, as parts of a field may receive excess water in order to deliver sufficient quantities to other parts. Overhead irrigation, using center-pivot or lateral-moving sprinklers, gives a much more equal and controlled distribution pattern. Drip irrigation is the most expensive and least-used type, but delivers water to plant roots with minimal losses.

Water catchment management measures include recharge pits, which capture rainwater and runoff and use it to recharge groundwater supplies. This helps in the replenishment of groundwater wells and eventually reduces soil erosion. Dammed rivers creating reservoirs store water for irrigation and other uses over large areas. Smaller areas sometimes use irrigation ponds or groundwater.

====Weed control====
In agriculture, systematic weed management is usually required, often performed by machines such as cultivators or liquid herbicide sprayers. Herbicides kill specific targets while leaving the crop relatively unharmed. Some of these act by interfering with the growth of the weed and are often based on plant hormones. Weed control through herbicide is made more difficult when the weeds become resistant to the herbicide. Solutions include:
* Cover crops (especially those with allelopathic properties) that out-compete weeds or inhibit their regeneration
* Multiple herbicides, in combination or in rotation
* Strains genetically engineered for herbicide tolerance
* Locally adapted strains that tolerate or out-compete weeds
* Tilling
* Ground cover such as mulch or plastic
* Manual removal
* Mowing
* Grazing
* Burning

====Terracing====

In agriculture, a terrace is a leveled section of a hilly cultivated area, designed as a method of soil conservation to slow or prevent the rapid surface runoff of irrigation water. Often such land is formed into multiple terraces, giving a stepped appearance. The human landscapes of rice cultivation in terraces that follow the natural contours of the escarpments, like contour ploughing, are a classic feature of the island of Bali and the Banaue Rice Terraces in Banaue, Ifugao, Philippines. In Peru, the Inca made use of otherwise unusable slopes by building drystone walls to create terraces known as Andéns.

====Rice paddies====
A paddy field is a flooded parcel of arable land used for growing rice and other semiaquatic crops. Paddy fields are a typical feature of rice-growing countries of east and southeast Asia, including Malaysia, China, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Taiwan, Indonesia, India, and the Philippines. They are also found in other rice-growing regions such as Piedmont (Italy), the Camargue (France), and the Artibonite Valley (Haiti). They can occur naturally along rivers or marshes, or can be constructed, even on hillsides. They require large water quantities for irrigation, much of it from flooding. It gives an environment favourable to the strain of rice being grown, and is hostile to many species of weeds. As the only draft animal species which is comfortable in wetlands, the water buffalo is in widespread use in Asian rice paddies.

A recent development in the intensive production of rice is the System of Rice Intensification. Developed in 1983 by the French Jesuit Father Henri de Laulanié in Madagascar, by 2013 the number of smallholder farmers using the system had grown to between 4 and 5 million.

===Aquaculture===
Aquaculture is the cultivation of the natural products of water (fish, shellfish, algae, seaweed, and other aquatic organisms). Intensive aquaculture takes place on land using tanks, ponds, or other controlled systems, or in the ocean, using cages.

===Sustainability===
Intensive farming practices which are thought to be sustainable have been developed to slow the deterioration of agricultural land and even regenerate soil health and ecosystem services. These developments may fall in the category of organic farming, or the integration of organic and conventional agriculture.

Pasture cropping involves planting grain crops directly into grassland without first applying herbicides. The perennial grasses form a living mulch understory to the grain crop, eliminating the need to plant cover crops after harvest. The pasture is intensively grazed both before and after grain production. This intensive system yields equivalent farmer profits (partly from increased livestock forage) while building new topsoil and sequestering up to 33 tons of CO2/ha/year.

Biointensive agriculture focuses on maximizing efficiency such as per unit area, energy input and water input.

Agroforestry combines agriculture and orchard/forestry technologies to create more integrated, diverse, productive, profitable, healthy and sustainable land-use systems.

Intercropping can increase yields or reduce inputs and thus represents (potentially sustainable) agricultural intensification. However, while total yield per unit land area is often increased, yields of any single crop often decrease. There are also challenges to farmers who rely on farming equipment optimized for monoculture, often resulting in increased labor inputs.

Vertical farming is intensive crop production on a large scale in urban centers, in multi-story, artificially-lit structures, for the production of low-calorie foods like herbs, microgreens, and lettuce.

An integrated farming system is a progressive, sustainable agriculture system such as zero waste agriculture or integrated multi-trophic aquaculture, which involves the interactions of multiple species. Elements of this integration can include:
* Intentionally introducing flowering plants into agricultural ecosystems to increase pollen-and nectar-resources required by natural enemies of insect pests
* Using crop rotation and cover crops to suppress nematodes in potatoes
* Integrated multi-trophic aquaculture is a practice in which the by-products (wastes) from one species are recycled to become inputs (fertilizers, food) for another.

==Challenges==
=== Environmental impact ===
Industrial agriculture uses huge amounts of water, energy, and industrial chemicals, increasing pollution in the arable land, usable water, and atmosphere. Herbicides, insecticides, and fertilizers accumulate in ground and surface waters. Industrial agricultural practices are one of the main drivers of global warming, accounting for 14–28% of net greenhouse gas emissions.

Many of the negative effects of industrial agriculture may emerge at some distance from fields and farms. Nitrogen compounds from the Midwest, for example, travel down the Mississippi to degrade coastal fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico, causing so-called oceanic dead zones.

Many wild plant and animal species have become extinct on a regional or national scale, and the functioning of agro-ecosystems has been profoundly altered. Agricultural intensification includes a variety of factors, including the loss of landscape elements, increased farm and field sizes, and increase usage of insecticides and herbicides. The large scale of insecticides and herbicides lead to the rapid developing resistance among pests renders herbicides and insecticides increasingly ineffective. Agrochemicals have may be involved in colony collapse disorder, in which the individual members of bee colonies disappear. (Agricultural production is highly dependent on bees to pollinate many varieties of fruits and vegetables.)

Intensive farming creates conditions for parasite growth and transmission that are vastly different from what parasites encounter in natural host populations, potentially altering selection on a variety of traits such as life-history traits and virulence. Some recent epidemic outbreaks have highlighted the association with intensive agricultural farming practices. For example the infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) virus is causing significant economic loss for salmon farms. The ISA virus is an orthomyxovirus with two distinct clades, one European and one North American, that diverged before 1900 (Krossøy et al. 2001). This divergence suggests that an ancestral form of the virus was present in wild salmonids prior to the introduction of cage-cultured salmonids. As the virus spread from vertical transmission (parent to offspring).

Intensive monoculture increases the risk of failures due to pests, adverse weather and disease.

=== Social impact ===

A study for the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment concluded that regarding industrial agriculture, there is a &quot;negative relationship between the trend toward increasing farm size and the social conditions in rural communities&quot; on a &quot;statistical level&quot;. Agricultural monoculture can entail social and economic risks.

==See also==

* Convertible husbandry
* Dryland farming
* Environmental impact of agriculture
* Green Revolution
* Industrial crop
* Pekarangan
* Small-scale agriculture
* Intensive animal farming

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="0" end="21" title="Intensive farming" label="Intensive agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="37" end="54" title="Intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643366" start="70" end="87" title="extensive farming" label="extensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="90" end="102" title="Intensive farming" label="conventional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="107" end="133" title="Intensive farming" label="[[industrial agriculture]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="148" end="159" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="169" end="180" title="arable farming" label="crop plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="188" end="195" title="Animal husbandry" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="248" end="265" title="agricultural land" label="agricultural land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="307" title=":wikt:fallow" label="fallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="344" end="351" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="353" end="359" title="Labour (economics)" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746959" start="361" end="373" title="agrochemical" label="agrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="397" end="407" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="435" end="445" title="commerce" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="519" end="537" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347753" start="555" end="577" title="industrial agriculture" label="industrial agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="749" end="757" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520981" start="760" end="782" title="mechanised agriculture" label="mechanised agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="877" end="881" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="986" end="996" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="1024" end="1033" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1040" end="1050" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1101" end="1117" title="developed nation" label="developed nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="1175" end="1188" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="1191" end="1195" title="Egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="1233" end="1244" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="1304" end="1323" title="Sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816336" start="1425" end="1450" title="agricultural productivity" label="agricultural productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="1466" end="1478" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="1572" end="1597" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="1626" end="1639" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="1642" end="1666" title="Intensive animal farming" label="Intensive animal farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746648" start="1759" end="1777" title="rotational grazing" label="rotational grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158308" start="1795" end="1832" title="concentrated animal feeding operation" label="concentrated animal feeding operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="1937" end="1953" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18293488" start="2102" end="2187" title="British Agricultural Revolution" label="Agricultural development in Britain between the 16th century and the mid-19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2401" end="2422" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="2441" end="2450" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520981" start="2452" end="2465" title="mechanised agriculture" label="mechanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191258" start="2467" end="2491" title="four-field crop rotation" label="four-field crop rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="2497" end="2515" title="selective breeding" label="selective breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="2692" end="2700" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2775" end="2786" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q131724785" start="2887" end="2903" title="McCormick reaper" label="McCormick reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="2960" end="2970" title="cotton gin" label="cotton gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="3049" end="3062" title="Traction engine" label="steam-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q506839" start="3063" end="3072" title="threshing machine" label="threshers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="3077" end="3084" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q502048" start="3106" end="3122" title="gasoline engine" label="gasoline-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q263800" start="3176" end="3199" title="International Harvester" label="International Harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066951" start="3200" end="3207" title="Farmall" label="Farmall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="3356" end="3364" title="combine harvester" label="combines"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="3594" end="3602" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="3604" end="3614" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="3620" end="3629" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="3708" end="3718" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="3740" end="3751" title="crop yields" label="crop yields"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="3766" end="3777" title="Haber-Bosch" label="Haber-Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="3799" end="3815" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18907302" start="3973" end="3988" title="Soil compaction (agriculture)" label="soil compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="3990" end="4002" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="4028" end="4042" title="soil fertility" label="soil fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="4093" end="4117" title="food chain" label="entering the food supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="4137" end="4144" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="4164" end="4173" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4377" end="4389" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="4452" end="4462" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="4468" end="4475" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q525309" start="4648" end="4674" title="Integrated pest management" label="Integrated pest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="4779" end="4793" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073374" start="4910" end="4926" title="organic movement" label="organic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q537823" start="5027" end="5049" title="appropriate technology" label="appropriate technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="5179" end="5186" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="5308" end="5319" title="Land degradation" label="degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377214" start="5356" end="5362" title="forage" label="forage"/>
<link wikidata="Q866283" start="5384" end="5401" title="carrying capacity" label="carrying capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="5421" end="5432" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142554" start="5439" end="5458" title="nutrient management" label="nutrient management"/>
<link wikidata="Q889669" start="5472" end="5489" title="soil conservation" label="soil conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568221" start="5565" end="5583" title="Soil water (retention)" label="water availability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152039" start="5632" end="5645" title="Soil acidification" label="acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816336" start="5690" end="5702" title="Agricultural productivity" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="5714" end="5730" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="5831" end="5836" title="Poaceae" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="5858" end="5868" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550861" start="5913" end="5917" title="Agricultural lime" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="5936" end="5945" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="6083" end="6091" title="Invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="6170" end="6174" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="6179" end="6186" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523135" start="6258" end="6272" title="Livestock grazing comparison" label="stocking rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="6382" end="6391" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="6432" end="6437" title="Crop yield" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="6460" end="6474" title="Carbon cycle re-balancing" label="carbon balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="6796" end="6800" title="Fodder" label="feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="6872" end="6888" title="Nutrient cycle" label="nutrient cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="6901" end="6913" title="pest control" label="pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="6928" end="6940" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="6970" end="6976" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="7008" end="7027" title="Carbon sequestration" label="carbon accumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="7032" end="7049" title="nitrogen fixation" label="nitrogen fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672844" start="7121" end="7138" title="methane emissions" label="methane emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380203" start="7144" end="7164" title="enteric fermentation" label="enteric fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="7285" end="7290" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="7292" end="7299" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="7305" end="7312" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="7343" end="7357" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="7480" end="7484" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649565" start="7485" end="7489" title="Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education" label="SARE"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="7539" end="7548" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q188869" start="7744" end="7752" title="Paddock (field)" label="paddocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="8142" end="8149" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158308" start="8817" end="8855" title="Concentrated animal feeding operations" label="Concentrated animal feeding operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9611" end="9625" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655938" start="9893" end="9902" title="debeaking" label="debeaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="9997" end="10020" title="Federal Clean Water Act" label="Federal Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="10130" end="10175" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="10291" end="10302" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113712" start="10406" end="10431" title="groundwater contamination" label="groundwater contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="10499" end="10513" title="waste disposal" label="waste disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="10538" end="10550" title="animal waste" label="animal waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750800" start="10564" end="10571" title="manure lagoon" label="lagoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109827" start="10850" end="10859" title="New River (eastern North Carolina)" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="11040" end="11053" title="Animal rights" label="Animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="11058" end="11072" title="animal welfare" label="animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="11164" end="11180" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="11542" end="11547" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907437" start="11784" end="11798" title="Norin 10 wheat" label="Norin 10 wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105258" start="11823" end="11836" title="Orville Vogel" label="Orville Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="11851" end="11862" title="dwarf wheat" label="dwarf wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454639" start="11922" end="11925" title="IR8" label="IR8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204921" start="11998" end="12035" title="International Rice Research Institute" label="International Rice Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q157892" start="12229" end="12240" title="Arabidopsis" label="Arabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q411138" start="12469" end="12485" title="gibberellic acid" label="gibberellic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192949" start="12489" end="12501" title="phytohormone" label="phytohormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111215" start="12570" end="12594" title="Photosynthate partitioning" label="Photosynthate investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q339051" start="12923" end="12936" title="Heterosis" label="Hybrid vigour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293576" start="13067" end="13077" title="F1 hybrids" label="F1 hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="13308" end="13313" title="crops" label="crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="13547" end="13560" title="soil nutrient" label="soil nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q954381" start="13677" end="13689" title="green manure" label="green manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q889539" start="13763" end="13777" title="soil structure" label="soil structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001783" start="13892" end="13903" title="cover crops" label="cover crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739133" start="14006" end="14017" title="polyculture" label="polyculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645983" start="14110" end="14126" title="Surface irrigation" label="Flood irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14299" end="14318" title="Irrigation#Overhead (sprinkler) irrigation" label="Overhead irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746694" start="14430" end="14445" title="Drip irrigation" label="Drip irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="14545" end="14560" title="Water catchment" label="Water catchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="14797" end="14807" title="reservoirs" label="reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="15093" end="15103" title="Herbicides" label="Herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="15260" end="15268" title="hormones" label="hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739141" start="15270" end="15282" title="Weed control" label="Weed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="15291" end="15300" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190334" start="15430" end="15442" title="allelopathic" label="allelopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q889491" start="15691" end="15703" title="Ground cover" label="Ground cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="15712" end="15717" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="15798" end="15809" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="15813" end="15820" title="Terrace (agriculture)" label="terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="15847" end="15851" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="15941" end="15955" title="surface runoff" label="surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710448" start="16167" end="16184" title="contour ploughing" label="contour ploughing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="16225" end="16229" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q826551" start="16238" end="16258" title="Banaue Rice Terraces" label="Banaue Rice Terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q806138" start="16262" end="16276" title="Banaue, Ifugao" label="Banaue, Ifugao"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="16278" end="16289" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="16294" end="16298" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="16304" end="16308" title="Tahuantinsuyu" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608878" start="16359" end="16372" title="drystone wall" label="drystone wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826718" start="16402" end="16407" title="Andén" label="Andén"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="16469" end="16480" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="16513" end="16530" title="Aquatic plant" label="semiaquatic crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="16596" end="16600" title="East Asia" label="east"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="16605" end="16619" title="southeast Asia" label="southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16720" end="16725" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="16806" end="16814" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q218151" start="16828" end="16836" title="Camargue" label="Camargue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800833" start="16855" end="16872" title="Artibonite Valley" label="Artibonite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="16913" end="16918" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="16923" end="16930" title="marshes" label="marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="17145" end="17152" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="17156" end="17160" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q228534" start="17175" end="17187" title="draft animal" label="draft animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="17220" end="17228" title="wetlands" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="17234" end="17247" title="water buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q745882" start="17357" end="17387" title="System of Rice Intensification" label="System of Rice Intensification"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="17414" end="17420" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="17421" end="17427" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="17428" end="17434" title="Priest" label="Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606054" start="17435" end="17452" title="Henri de Laulanie" label="Henri de Laulanié"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="17456" end="17466" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="17642" end="17647" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="17649" end="17653" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="17655" end="17664" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="17666" end="17671" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="17673" end="17680" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="17907" end="17918" title="Sustainable farming" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554920" start="18006" end="18017" title="soil health" label="soil health"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="18022" end="18040" title="ecosystem services" label="ecosystem services"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="18089" end="18104" title="organic farming" label="organic farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001783" start="18375" end="18385" title="cover crop" label="cover crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="18393" end="18400" title="harvest" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247456" start="18591" end="18598" title="topsoil" label="topsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="18603" end="18615" title="Carbon sequestration" label="sequestering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898495" start="18647" end="18659" title="Biointensive" label="Biointensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="18759" end="18771" title="Agroforestry" label="Agroforestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q853859" start="18930" end="18943" title="Intercropping" label="Intercropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="19246" end="19257" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070535" start="19303" end="19319" title="Vertical farming" label="Vertical farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839576" start="19481" end="19492" title="microgreens" label="microgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="19555" end="19578" title="sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069620" start="19594" end="19616" title="zero waste agriculture" label="zero waste agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q294991" start="19620" end="19656" title="integrated multi-trophic aquaculture" label="integrated multi-trophic aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="20118" end="20128" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="20131" end="20135" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="20239" end="20244" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853339" start="20246" end="20252" title="World energy resources and consumption" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="20258" end="20278" title="Chemical industry" label="industrial chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="20291" end="20300" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="20308" end="20319" title="Land pollution" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="20321" end="20333" title="Water pollution" label="usable water"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="20339" end="20349" title="Air pollution" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="20351" end="20360" title="Herbicide" label="Herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="20363" end="20374" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="20381" end="20391" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="20407" end="20413" title="Groundwater" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q752112" start="20418" end="20431" title="surface water" label="surface water"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="20499" end="20513" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="20544" end="20568" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20825" end="20843" title="oceanic dead zones" label="oceanic dead zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746959" start="21348" end="21360" title="Agrochemical" label="Agrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q497841" start="21386" end="21410" title="colony collapse disorder" label="colony collapse disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="21527" end="21536" title="pollinate" label="pollinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q547421" start="21963" end="22000" title="infectious salmon anaemia virus" label="infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="22429" end="22440" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="22479" end="22484" title="Pest (agriculture)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684791" start="22560" end="22591" title="Office of Technology Assessment" label="Office of Technology Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402500" start="22895" end="22916" title="Convertible husbandry" label="Convertible husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q926906" start="22919" end="22934" title="Dryland farming" label="Dryland farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381236" start="22937" end="22972" title="Environmental impact of agriculture" label="Environmental impact of agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="22975" end="22991" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q583924" start="22994" end="23009" title="Industrial crop" label="Industrial crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q66171223" start="23012" end="23022" title="Pekarangan" label="Pekarangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="23025" end="23048" title="Small-scale agriculture" label="Small-scale agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="23051" end="23075" title="Intensive animal farming" label="Intensive animal farming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152773" wikidata="Q952161" url="?curid=152773" title="Eustathios Makrembolites">
<text>Eustathios Makrembolites (; &quot;fl. c.&quot; 1150–1200), Latinized as Eustathius Macrembolites, was a Byzantine revivalist of the ancient Greek romance, flourished in the second half of the 12th century CE. He is sometimes conflated/equated with his contemporary, the Eparch of the City Eumathios Makrembolites ().

His title &quot;Protonobilissimus&quot; shows him to have been a person of distinction and, if he is also correctly described in the manuscripts as chief keeper of the ecclesiastical archives, he must have been a Christian. He was the author of a Byzantine novel, &quot;The Story of Hysmine and Hysminias&quot;, in eleven books. Although he borrowed from Homer and other Attic poets, the chief source of his phraseology was the rhetorician Choricius of Gaza. The style is remarkable for the absence of hiatus and a laboured use of antithesis. The digressions on works of art, apparently the result of personal observation, are considered by some scholars the best part of the work. The novel enjoyed a later influence in connection with the story tradition of Apollonius of Tyre—Eustathius&#x27; scene of the storm at sea and the heroine offered as a sacrifice being adapted in Book 8 of the Confessio Amantis of John Gower and, by way of that, forming a portion of the plot of William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Pericles, Prince of Tyre&quot; (particularly in Act III).

A collection of eleven &quot;Riddles&quot;, of which solutions were written by the grammarian Manuel Holobolos, is also attributed to Eustathius.

==Editions==
*Isidor Hilberg (1876), edition of both romance and riddles, with critical apparatus and prolegomena, including the solutions. He fixes the date of Eustathius between 850 and 988.
*M. Treu (1893), edition of the &quot;Riddles&quot; alone.
*&quot;Four Byzantine Novels&quot;, translated with introductions and notes by Elizabeth Jeffreys, Liverpool University Press, 2012. Includes English translation of &quot;Hysmine and Hyminias&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
* This work in turn cites:
**J. C. Dunlop, &quot;History of Fiction&quot; (1888), new ed. in Bohn&#x27;s Standard Library
**E. Rohde, &quot;Der griechische Roman&quot; (1900)
**Karl Krumbacher, &quot;Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur&quot; (1897)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q952161" start="0" end="24" title="Eustathios Makrembolites" label="Eustathios Makrembolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="59" end="68" title="latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q952161" start="72" end="96" title="Eustathios Makrembolites" label="Eustathius Macrembolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="104" end="113" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="132" end="145" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="205" end="207" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="270" end="288" title="Eparch of the City (Constantinople)" label="Eparch of the City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="289" end="312" title="Eumathios Makrembolites" label="Eumathios Makrembolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q63487" start="334" end="351" title="Protonobilissimus" label="Protonobilissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="531" end="540" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599412" start="565" end="580" title="Byzantine novel" label="Byzantine novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="673" end="678" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="689" end="694" title="Attic Greek" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q510659" start="758" end="775" title="Choricius of Gaza" label="Choricius of Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q487994" start="849" end="859" title="antithesis" label="antithesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620761" start="1078" end="1096" title="Apollonius of Tyre" label="Apollonius of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992424" start="1210" end="1227" title="Confessio Amantis" label="Confessio Amantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q365133" start="1231" end="1241" title="John Gower" label="John Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1296" end="1315" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q584729" start="1329" end="1353" title="Pericles, Prince of Tyre" label="Pericles, Prince of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286849" start="1482" end="1498" title="Manuel Holobolos" label="Manuel Holobolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673934" start="1549" end="1563" title="Isidor Hilberg" label="Isidor Hilberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226668" start="2041" end="2053" title="J. C. Dunlop" label="J. C. Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="2136" end="2144" title="E. Rohde" label="E. Rohde"/>
<link wikidata="Q61463" start="2189" end="2204" title="Karl Krumbacher" label="Karl Krumbacher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152774" wikidata="Q122407" url="?curid=152774" title="MTA">
<text>MTA may refer to:

==Organizations==
===Transportation===
* Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the public transport agency in the metropolitan area of New York City, United States
* Metropolitan Transit Authority (disambiguation), which may refer to several public transport/transit agencies
* Flint Mass Transportation Authority, Genesee County, Michigan
* Maine Turnpike Authority, Maine
* Manchester Transit Authority, New Hampshire
* Maryland Transit Administration
* Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, formerly Metropolitan Transit Authority
* Massachusetts Turnpike Authority
* Mendocino Transit Authority, California
* Mountain Ash railway station, Wales, National Rail station code
* Nashville Metropolitan Transit Authority, doing business as WeGo Public Transit, Tennessee
* San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency, California
* Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority
* Mersin-Tarsus-Adana Railway, a defunct Ottoman railway company
* Master Top Airlines, a defunct Brazilian airline company

===Education===
* Hungarian Academy of Sciences (&quot;Magyar Tudományos Akadémia&quot;), Budapest, Hungary
* Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy, an Orthodox Jewish private high school in New York, New York, US
* Mount Allison University, a university in Sackville, New Brunswick, Canada
* Musical Theatre Academy, a drama college based in London, UK

===Other===
* Metrolina Theatre Association, an organization which advocates performing arts in Charlotte, North Carolina, US
* MTA Records, More Than Alot Records, a record label
* Muslim Television Ahmadiyya International, a satellite television network
* Move to Amend, a U.S. political advocacy organization that seeks to amend the Constitution
* Manufacturing Technologies Association, a UK trade association
* Market Technicians Association, a non-profit organization of technical analysts
* General Directorate of Mineral Research and Exploration (Turkey), known as MTA
* Michigan Townships Association, an association of US township governments
* Mong Tai Army, an armed rebel group
* Metro Transit Assassins, a graffiti collective

==Sports==
* Maccabi Tel Aviv, a sports club in Israel
** Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C., basketball team
** Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C., football (soccer) team
* Maximum time aloft, a sporting event with a boomerang

==Science and technology==
* methylthioadenosine, a cofactor in biochemistry
* 4-Methylthioamphetamine, a designer drug of the substituted amphetamine class developed in the 1990s
* Material transfer agreement, governing the transfer of research materials between two organizations
* Mineral trioxide aggregate, dental material, used in endodontics and vital pulp therapy
* MTA (Swedish: &quot;Mobiltelefonisystem A&quot;), a former manual mobile network in Sweden
* &quot;Medial temporal lobe&quot; type of brain atrophy.
* Mousterian of Acheulean tradition (fr), a cultural and technological facies of the Mousterian

===Computing===
* Cray MTA-2, a supercomputer based on the design of the never-built Tera MTA
* Message transfer agent or mail transfer agent, software that transfers e-mail between computers
* Multi-touch attribution is a form of attribution (marketing)
* Multimedia terminal adapter, a combination cable modem and telephone adapter
* Multi-Threaded Apartment, a concept used in Microsoft&#x27;s Component Object Model programming architecture
* Microsoft Technology Associate, a certification scheme run by Microsoft

==Gaming==
* &quot;Multi Theft Auto&quot;, a mod for computer games in the PC game series &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;M.T.A.&quot; (song), or &quot;Charlie on the M.T.A.&quot;, a 1959 hit song by The Kingston Trio
* Major trading area, a geographic region of the US surrounding a major city; See List of Basic Trading Areas
* Mall Taman Anggrek, a shopping center in West Jakarta, Indonesia
* Mid-term adjustment, a change in an insurance policy
* Military Technical Agreement, treaty ending the Kosovo War in June 1999
* Milk Tea Alliance, an online democracy and human rights movement
* Farmall M-TA, a widely-used model in the Farmall M tractor series
* UAC/HAL Il-214 Multirole Transport Aircraft, a planned medium-lift military transport

==See also==
* Metastasis-associated protein:
** MTA1
** MTA2
** MTA3</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122407" start="0" end="3" title="MTA" label="MTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="60" end="97" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q26220620" start="186" end="233" title="Metropolitan Transit Authority (disambiguation)" label="Metropolitan Transit Authority (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459534" start="298" end="333" title="Flint Mass Transportation Authority" label="Flint Mass Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="362" end="386" title="Maine Turnpike Authority" label="Maine Turnpike Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981629" start="396" end="424" title="Manchester Transit Authority" label="Manchester Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863801" start="442" end="473" title="Maryland Transit Administration" label="Maryland Transit Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="476" end="518" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="562" end="594" title="Massachusetts Turnpike Authority" label="Massachusetts Turnpike Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816698" start="597" end="624" title="Mendocino Transit Authority" label="Mendocino Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978271" start="639" end="667" title="Mountain Ash railway station" label="Mountain Ash railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966980" start="765" end="784" title="WeGo Public Transit" label="WeGo Public Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414072" start="798" end="843" title="San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency" label="San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259702" start="858" end="914" title="Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680625" start="917" end="944" title="Mersin-Tarsus-Adana Railway" label="Mersin-Tarsus-Adana Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q290158" start="982" end="1001" title="Master Top Airlines" label="Master Top Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q265058" start="1058" end="1087" title="Hungarian Academy of Sciences" label="Hungarian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773401" start="1150" end="1181" title="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy" label="Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q742150" start="1250" end="1274" title="Mount Allison University" label="Mount Allison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895589" start="1327" end="1350" title="Musical Theatre Academy" label="Musical Theatre Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824841" start="1403" end="1432" title="Metrolina Theatre Association" label="Metrolina Theatre Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953936" start="1517" end="1528" title="MTA Records" label="MTA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q444233" start="1571" end="1612" title="Muslim Television Ahmadiyya International" label="Muslim Television Ahmadiyya International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926556" start="1647" end="1660" title="Move to Amend" label="Move to Amend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753104" start="1740" end="1778" title="Manufacturing Technologies Association" label="Manufacturing Technologies Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770769" start="1805" end="1835" title="Market Technicians Association" label="Market Technicians Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531837" start="1887" end="1951" title="General Directorate of Mineral Research and Exploration (Turkey)" label="General Directorate of Mineral Research and Exploration (Turkey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837767" start="1968" end="1998" title="Michigan Townships Association" label="Michigan Townships Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q647677" start="2044" end="2057" title="Mong Tai Army" label="Mong Tai Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222593" start="2082" end="2105" title="Metro Transit Assassins" label="Metro Transit Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389899" start="2143" end="2159" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv" label="Maccabi Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q819694" start="2188" end="2209" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q223728" start="2230" end="2251" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6795921" start="2278" end="2296" title="Maximum time aloft" label="Maximum time aloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3599216" start="2362" end="2381" title="methylthioadenosine" label="methylthioadenosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q230013" start="2412" end="2435" title="4-Methylthioamphetamine" label="4-Methylthioamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786570" start="2515" end="2542" title="Material transfer agreement" label="Material transfer agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864388" start="2617" end="2643" title="Mineral trioxide aggregate" label="Mineral trioxide aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2766" end="2787" title="MTD (mobile network)#MTA" label="manual mobile network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620193" start="2841" end="2854" title="brain atrophy" label="brain atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2858" end="2891" title="Mousterian of Acheulean tradition" label="Mousterian of Acheulean tradition"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2893" end="2895" title=":fr:Moustérien de tradition acheuléenne" label="fr"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="2941" end="2951" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696726" start="2971" end="2981" title="Cray MTA-2" label="Cray MTA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q859477" start="3049" end="3071" title="Message transfer agent" label="Message transfer agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835200" start="3184" end="3207" title="attribution (marketing)" label="attribution (marketing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q383978" start="3210" end="3237" title="Multimedia terminal adapter" label="Multimedia terminal adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q662200" start="3289" end="3313" title="Multi-Threaded Apartment" label="Multi-Threaded Apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044237" start="3400" end="3430" title="Microsoft Technology Associate" label="Microsoft Technology Associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q265656" start="3492" end="3508" title="Multi Theft Auto" label="Multi Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712274" start="3610" end="3635" title="M.T.A. (song)" label="&amp;quot;M.T.A.&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867008" start="3794" end="3821" title="List of Basic Trading Areas" label="List of Basic Trading Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195759" start="3824" end="3842" title="Mall Taman Anggrek" label="Mall Taman Anggrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840866" start="3891" end="3910" title="Mid-term adjustment" label="Mid-term adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28479" start="3946" end="3974" title="Military Technical Agreement" label="Military Technical Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q98473331" start="4020" end="4037" title="Milk Tea Alliance" label="Milk Tea Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23637344" start="4087" end="4099" title="Farmall M" label="Farmall M-TA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537114" start="4155" end="4169" title="UAC/HAL Il-214" label="UAC/HAL Il-214"/>
<link wikidata="Q18033835" start="4291" end="4295" title="MTA1" label="MTA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18033924" start="4299" end="4303" title="MTA2" label="MTA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18043092" start="4307" end="4311" title="MTA3" label="MTA3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152776" wikidata="Q712378" url="?curid=152776" title="Organ (biology)">
<text>In a multicellular organism, an organ is a collection of tissues joined in a structural unit to serve a common function. In the hierarchy of life, an organ lies between tissue and an organ system. Tissues are formed from same type cells to act together in a function. Tissues of different types combine to form an organ which has a specific function. The intestinal wall for example is formed by epithelial tissue and smooth muscle tissue. Two or more organs working together in the execution of a specific body function form an organ system, also called a biological system or body system.

An organ&#x27;s tissues can be broadly categorized as parenchyma, the functional tissue, and stroma, the structural tissue with supportive, connective, or ancillary functions. For example, the gland&#x27;s tissue that makes the hormones is the parenchyma, whereas the stroma includes the nerves that innervate the parenchyma, the blood vessels that oxygenate and nourish it and carry away its metabolic wastes, and the connective tissues that provide a suitable place for it to be situated and anchored. The main tissues that make up an organ tend to have common embryologic origins, such as arising from the same germ layer. Organs exist in most multicellular organisms. In single-celled organisms such as members of the eukaryotes, the functional analogue of an organ is known as an organelle. In plants, there are three main organs.

The number of organs in any organism depends on the definition used. There are approximately 79 organs in the human body; the precise count is debated.

==Animals==
Except for placozoans, multicellular animals including humans have a variety of organ systems. These specific systems are widely studied in human anatomy. The functions of these organ systems often share significant overlap. For instance, the nervous and endocrine system both operate via a shared organ, the hypothalamus. For this reason, the two systems are combined and studied as the neuroendocrine system. The same is true for the musculoskeletal system because of the relationship between the muscular and skeletal systems.
* Cardiovascular system: pumping and channeling blood to and from the body and lungs with heart, blood and blood vessels.
* Digestive system: digestion and processing food with salivary glands, esophagus, stomach, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, intestines, colon, mesentery, rectum and anus.
* Endocrine system: communication within the body using hormones made by endocrine glands such as the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, pineal body or pineal gland, thyroid, parathyroids and adrenals, i.e., adrenal glands.
* Excretory system: kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra involved in fluid balance, electrolyte balance and excretion of urine.
* Lymphatic system: structures involved in the transfer of lymph between tissues and the blood stream, the lymph and the nodes and vessels that transport it including the immune system: defending against disease-causing agents with leukocytes, tonsils, adenoids, thymus and spleen.
* Integumentary system: skin, hair and nails of mammals. Also scales of fish, reptiles, and birds, and feathers of birds.
* Muscular system: movement with muscles.
* Nervous system: collecting, transferring and processing information with brain, spinal cord and nerves.
* Reproductive system: the sex organs, such as ovaries, oviducts, uterus, vulva, vagina, testicles, vasa deferentia, seminal vesicles, prostate and penis.
* Respiratory system: the organs used for breathing, the pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, lungs and diaphragm.
* Skeletal system: structural support and protection with bones, cartilage, ligaments and tendons.

===Viscera===

In the study of anatomy, viscera (: viscus) refers to the internal organs of the abdominal, thoracic, and pelvic cavities. The abdominal organs may be classified as solid organs or hollow organs. The solid organs are the liver, pancreas, spleen, kidneys, and adrenal glands. The hollow organs of the abdomen are the stomach, intestines, gallbladder, bladder, and rectum. In the thoracic cavity, the heart is a hollow, muscular organ. Splanchnology is the study of the viscera. The term &quot;visceral&quot; is contrasted with the term &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;of or relating to the wall of a body part, organ or cavity&quot;. The two terms are often used in describing a membrane or piece of connective tissue, referring to the opposing sides.

===Origin and evolution===

The organ level of organisation in animals can be first detected in flatworms and the more derived phyla, i.e. the bilaterians. The less-advanced taxa (i.e. &quot;Placozoa&quot;, &quot;Porifera&quot;, &quot;Ctenophora&quot; and &quot;Cnidaria&quot;) do not show unification of their tissues into organs.

More complex animals are composed of different organs, which have evolved over time. For example, the liver and heart evolved in the chordates about 550-500 million years ago, while the gut and brain are even more ancient, arising in the ancestor of vertebrates, insects, molluscs, and worms about 700–650 million years ago.

Given the ancient origin of most vertebrate organs, researchers have looked for model systems, where organs have evolved more recently, and ideally have evolved multiple times independently. An outstanding model for this kind of research is the placenta, which has evolved more than 100 times independently in vertebrates, has evolved relatively recently in some lineages, and exists in intermediate forms in extant taxa. Studies on the evolution of the placenta have identified a variety of genetic and physiological processes that contribute to the origin and evolution of organs, these include the re-purposing of existing animal tissues, the acquisition of new functional properties by these tissues, and novel interactions of distinct tissue types.

==Plants== 

The study of plant organs is covered in plant morphology. Organs of plants can be divided into vegetative and reproductive. Vegetative plant organs include roots, stems, and leaves. The reproductive organs are variable. In flowering plants, they are represented by the flower, seed and fruit. In conifers, the organ that bears the reproductive structures is called a cone. In other divisions (phyla) of plants, the reproductive organs are called strobili, in &quot;Lycopodiophyta&quot;, or simply gametophores in mosses. Common organ system designations in plants include the differentiation of shoot and root. All parts of the plant above ground (in non-epiphytes), including the functionally distinct leaf and flower organs, may be classified together as the shoot organ system.

The vegetative organs are essential for maintaining the life of a plant. While there can be 11 organ systems in animals, there are far fewer in plants, where some perform the vital functions, such as photosynthesis, while the reproductive organs are essential in reproduction. However, if there is asexual vegetative reproduction, the vegetative organs are those that create the new generation of plants (see clonal colony).

==Society and culture==
Many societies have a system for organ donation, in which a living or deceased donor&#x27;s organ are transplanted into a person with a failing organ. The transplantation of larger solid organs often requires immunosuppression to prevent organ rejection or graft-versus-host disease.

There is considerable interest throughout the world in creating laboratory-grown or artificial organs.

===Organ transplants===
Beginning in the 20th century, organ transplants began to take place as scientists knew more about the anatomy of organs. These came later in time as procedures were often dangerous and difficult. Both the source and method of obtaining the organ to transplant are major ethical issues to consider, and because organs as resources for transplant are always more limited than demand for them, various notions of justice, including distributive justice, are developed in the ethical analysis. This situation continues as long as transplantation relies upon organ donors rather than technological innovation, testing, and industrial manufacturing.

==History==
The English word &quot;organ&quot; dates back to the twelfth century and refers to any musical instrument. By the late 14th century, the musical term&#x27;s meaning had narrowed to refer specifically to the keyboard-based instrument. At the same time, a second meaning arose, in reference to a &quot;body part adapted to a certain function&quot;.

Plant organs are made from tissue composed of different types of tissue. The three tissue types are ground, vascular, and dermal. When three or more organs are present, it is called an organ system.

The adjective &quot;&quot;, also &quot;splanchnic&quot;, is used for anything pertaining to the internal organs. Historically, viscera of animals were examined by Roman pagan priests like the haruspices or the augurs in order to divine the future by their shape, dimensions or other factors. This practice remains an important ritual in some remote, tribal societies.

The term &quot;visceral&quot; is contrasted with the term &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;of or relating to the wall of a body part, organ or cavity&quot; The two terms are often used in describing a membrane or piece of connective tissue, referring to the opposing sides.

===Antiquity===
Aristotle used the word frequently in his philosophy, both to describe the organs of plants or animals (e.g. the roots of a tree, the heart or liver of an animal) because, in ancient Greek, the word &quot;&#x27;organon&quot;&#x27; means &#x27;tool&#x27;, and Aristotle believed that the organs of the body were tools for us by means of which we can do things. For similar reasons, his logical works, taken as a whole, are referred to as the &quot;Organon&quot; because logic is a &quot;tool&quot; for philosophical thinking. Earlier thinkers, such as those who wrote texts in the Hippocratic corpus, generally did not believe that there were organs of the body but only different &quot;parts&quot; of the body.

Some alchemists (e.g. Paracelsus) adopted the Hermetic Qabalah assignment between the seven vital organs and the seven classical planets as follows:

Chinese traditional medicine recognizes eleven organs, associated with the five Chinese traditional elements and with yin and yang, as follows:

The Chinese associated the five elements with the five planets (Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Saturn, and Mercury) similar to the way the classical planets were associated with different metals. The &quot;yin&quot; and &quot;yang&quot; distinction approximates the modern notion of solid and hollow organs.

==See also==

* List of organs of the human body
* Organoid
* Organ-on-a-chip
* Situs inversus

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="19" end="27" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="32" end="37" title="Organ (biology)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="57" end="64" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q803888" start="128" end="145" title="biological organization" label="hierarchy of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="169" end="175" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188193" start="183" end="195" title="organ system" label="organ system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="231" end="236" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="355" end="370" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="intestinal wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="396" end="413" title="epithelial tissue" label="epithelial tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="418" end="438" title="smooth muscle tissue" label="smooth muscle tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q30336093" start="557" end="574" title="biological system" label="biological system"/>
<link wikidata="Q270524" start="646" end="656" title="parenchyma" label="parenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q558313" start="685" end="691" title="stroma (tissue)" label="stroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753035" start="747" end="756" title="ancillary" label="ancillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9647" start="785" end="790" title="gland" label="gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="820" end="827" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q270524" start="836" end="846" title="parenchyma" label="parenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q203850" start="880" end="886" title="nerve tissue" label="nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="922" end="934" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="985" end="994" title="Metabolism" label="metabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="1011" end="1028" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q131683" start="1155" end="1166" title="embryology" label="embryologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q660498" start="1206" end="1216" title="germ layer" label="germ layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="1253" end="1261" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="1267" end="1290" title="unicellular organism" label="single-celled organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="1314" end="1324" title="eukaryotes" label="eukaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="1330" end="1349" title="analogy (biology)" label="functional analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="1377" end="1386" title="organelle" label="organelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131040" start="1605" end="1613" title="placozoa" label="placozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="1617" end="1630" title="multicellular" label="multicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="1631" end="1637" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188193" start="1674" end="1686" title="organ system" label="organ system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999" start="1734" end="1747" title="human anatomy" label="human anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="1837" end="1844" title="nervous system" label="nervous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="1849" end="1865" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="1903" end="1915" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335366" start="1982" end="2003" title="neuroendocrine system" label="neuroendocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q726543" start="2030" end="2052" title="musculoskeletal system" label="musculoskeletal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060553" start="2093" end="2101" title="muscular system" label="muscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="2106" end="2121" title="skeletal system" label="skeletal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="2126" end="2147" title="Cardiovascular system" label="Cardiovascular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="2172" end="2177" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="2194" end="2198" title="human body" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="2203" end="2207" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="2214" end="2219" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="2221" end="2226" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="2231" end="2243" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="2248" end="2264" title="Digestion" label="Digestive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="2266" end="2275" title="digestion" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134938" start="2301" end="2315" title="salivary gland" label="salivary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="2318" end="2327" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="2329" end="2336" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="2338" end="2343" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q64386" start="2345" end="2356" title="gallbladder" label="gallbladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="2358" end="2366" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2368" end="2377" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="2380" end="2385" title="Colon (anatomy)" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135563" start="2387" end="2396" title="mesentery" label="mesentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="2398" end="2404" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="2409" end="2413" title="anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="2417" end="2433" title="Endocrine system" label="Endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="2471" end="2478" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q324663" start="2488" end="2503" title="endocrine gland" label="endocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="2517" end="2529" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="2531" end="2540" title="pituitary" label="pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="2548" end="2559" title="pineal body" label="pineal body"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="2577" end="2584" title="thyroid" label="thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q650401" start="2586" end="2597" title="parathyroid" label="parathyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="2603" end="2610" title="adrenal" label="adrenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112860" start="2637" end="2653" title="Excretory system" label="Excretory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q112262537" start="2655" end="2662" title="Kidney (vertebrates)" label="kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385" start="2664" end="2670" title="ureter" label="ureter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="2673" end="2680" title="urinary bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="2685" end="2692" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="2720" end="2731" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="2757" end="2762" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="2766" end="2782" title="Lymphatic system" label="Lymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q179422" start="2823" end="2828" title="lymph" label="lymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="2837" end="2844" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="2853" end="2865" title="blood stream" label="blood stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="2885" end="2890" title="lymph node" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11238641" start="2895" end="2902" title="lymph vessel" label="vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="2935" end="2948" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="2968" end="2975" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="2996" end="3005" title="leukocyte" label="leukocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q180569" start="3008" end="3014" title="tonsil" label="tonsil"/>
<link wikidata="Q552087" start="3017" end="3024" title="adenoid" label="adenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q163987" start="3027" end="3033" title="thymus" label="thymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="3038" end="3044" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483213" start="3048" end="3068" title="Integumentary system" label="Integumentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="3070" end="3074" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="3076" end="3080" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q36864" start="3085" end="3090" title="nail (anatomy)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="3094" end="3100" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188488" start="3108" end="3114" title="scale (anatomy)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="3118" end="3122" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="3124" end="3131" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="3138" end="3142" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="3149" end="3156" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060553" start="3170" end="3185" title="Muscular system" label="Muscular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="3201" end="3207" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="3212" end="3226" title="Nervous system" label="Nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="3285" end="3290" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="3292" end="3303" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="3308" end="3313" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895" start="3318" end="3337" title="Reproductive system" label="Reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="3343" end="3352" title="sex organ" label="sex organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="3363" end="3370" title="ovary" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q36857" start="3372" end="3379" title="oviduct" label="oviduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="3382" end="3388" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="3390" end="3395" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="3397" end="3403" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="3405" end="3413" title="testicle" label="testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q735505" start="3416" end="3431" title="vasa deferentia" label="vasa deferentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217259" start="3433" end="3448" title="seminal vesicle" label="seminal vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="3451" end="3459" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="3464" end="3469" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="3473" end="3491" title="Respiratory system" label="Respiratory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="3513" end="3522" title="breathing" label="breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="3528" end="3535" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637" start="3537" end="3543" title="larynx" label="larynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="3545" end="3552" title="Vertebrate trachea" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181602" start="3554" end="3561" title="bronchi" label="bronchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="3563" end="3567" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="3573" end="3582" title="thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="3586" end="3601" title="Skeleton" label="Skeletal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="3642" end="3646" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="3649" end="3658" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q39888" start="3660" end="3668" title="ligament" label="ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="3674" end="3680" title="tendon" label="tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="3715" end="3722" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q682466" start="3780" end="3789" title="abdominal cavity" label="abdominal"/>
<link wikidata="Q994554" start="3791" end="3799" title="thoracic cavity" label="thoracic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547362" start="3805" end="3820" title="Pelvic cavity" label="pelvic cavities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="3920" end="3925" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="3927" end="3935" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="3937" end="3943" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="3945" end="3951" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="3958" end="3971" title="adrenal gland" label="adrenal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="4015" end="4022" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="4024" end="4034" title="intestines" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q64386" start="4036" end="4047" title="gallbladder" label="gallbladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="4049" end="4056" title="bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="4062" end="4068" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q994554" start="4077" end="4092" title="thoracic cavity" label="thoracic cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="4098" end="4103" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437968" start="4133" end="4146" title="Splanchnology" label="Splanchnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q629138" start="4305" end="4320" title="Body cavity" label="organ or cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="4510" end="4516" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q124900" start="4543" end="4551" title="flatworm" label="flatworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="4574" end="4579" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173" start="4590" end="4599" title="bilateria" label="bilateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="4621" end="4625" title="taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131040" start="4638" end="4646" title="Placozoa" label="Placozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="4660" end="4668" title="Porifera" label="Porifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q102778" start="4682" end="4692" title="Ctenophora" label="Ctenophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="4709" end="4717" title="Cnidaria" label="Cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10915" start="4913" end="4921" title="chordate" label="chordate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="5052" end="5060" title="Mollusca" label="molluscs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="5351" end="5359" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q655362" start="5914" end="5930" title="plant morphology" label="plant morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="5942" end="5947" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="6030" end="6034" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="6037" end="6042" title="plant stem" label="stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="6048" end="6054" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="6097" end="6112" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="6143" end="6149" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="6151" end="6155" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="6160" end="6165" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="6170" end="6178" title="Pinophyta" label="conifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="6241" end="6245" title="conifer cone" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="6267" end="6272" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653441" start="6320" end="6328" title="strobili" label="strobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q215370" start="6339" end="6353" title="Lycopodiophyta" label="Lycopodiophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="6387" end="6391" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="6529" end="6537" title="epiphyte" label="epiphyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="6856" end="6870" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="6919" end="6931" title="plant sexuality" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="6954" end="6961" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="6962" end="6985" title="vegetative reproduction" label="vegetative reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q611804" start="7065" end="7078" title="clonal colony" label="clonal colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q849032" start="7139" end="7153" title="organ donation" label="organ donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="7208" end="7220" title="Organ transplant" label="transplanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455316" start="7315" end="7332" title="immunosuppression" label="immunosuppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765748" start="7344" end="7359" title="Transplant rejection" label="organ rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194520" start="7363" end="7388" title="graft-versus-host disease" label="graft-versus-host disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540285" start="7455" end="7471" title="Tissue engineering" label="laboratory-grown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353169" start="7475" end="7491" title="artificial organ" label="artificial organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="7550" end="7567" title="Organ transplantation" label="organ transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q552284" start="7949" end="7969" title="distributive justice" label="distributive justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="8384" end="8409" title="Organ (music)" label="keyboard-based instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121920" start="8764" end="8774" title="splanchnic" label="splanchnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8888" end="8893" title="Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="8900" end="8906" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="8917" end="8927" title="haruspices" label="haruspices"/>
<link wikidata="Q215909" start="8935" end="8940" title="augur" label="augur"/>
<link wikidata="Q629138" start="9223" end="9238" title="Body cavity" label="organ or cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9380" end="9389" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q500930" start="9827" end="9834" title="Organon" label="Organon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="9960" end="9978" title="Hippocratic corpus" label="Hippocratic corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="10114" end="10124" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613576" start="10138" end="10154" title="Hermetic Qabalah" label="Hermetic Qabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="10211" end="10228" title="classical planets" label="classical planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="10242" end="10270" title="Chinese traditional medicine" label="Chinese traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="10317" end="10350" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="five Chinese traditional elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="10360" end="10372" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098763" start="10703" end="10735" title="List of organs of the human body" label="List of organs of the human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293125" start="10738" end="10746" title="Organoid" label="Organoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101746" start="10749" end="10764" title="Organ-on-a-chip" label="Organ-on-a-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456383" start="10767" end="10781" title="Situs inversus" label="Situs inversus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="152777" wikidata="Q214788" url="?curid=152777" title="London Paddington station">
<text>Paddington, also known as London Paddington, is a London railway station and London Underground station complex, located on Praed Street in the Paddington area. The site has been the London terminus of services provided by the Great Western Railway and its successors since 1838. Much of the main line station dates from 1854 and was designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel. As of the 2023–24 Office of Rail &amp; Road Statistics, it is the second busiest station in the United Kingdom, after London Liverpool Street, with 66.9 million entries and exits.

Paddington is the London terminus of the Great Western Main Line; passenger services are primarily operated by Great Western Railway, which provides commuter and regional passenger services to west London and the Thames Valley region, as well as long-distance intercity services to South West England and South Wales. The station is also the eastern terminus for Heathrow Express and the western terminus for Elizabeth line services from Shenfield. Elizabeth line services also run through Paddington westwards to Reading, Heathrow Terminal 5, and Heathrow Terminal 4, and eastwards to Abbey Wood. Situated in fare zone 1, it has two separate London Underground stations: one for the Bakerloo, Circle and District lines; the other for the Circle and Hammersmith &amp; City lines. It is one of 11 London stations managed directly by Network Rail.

The station has been perennially popular for passengers and goods, particularly milk and parcels. Major upgrades took place in the 1870s, the 1910s and the 1960s, each trying to add additional platforms and space while trying to preserve the existing services and architecture as much as possible. Paddington was first served by London Underground trains in 1863, as the original western terminus of the Metropolitan Railway, the world&#x27;s first underground railway. In the 20th century, suburban and commuter services appeared at Paddington as the urban sprawl of London moved westwards. Despite the numerous upgrades and rebuilding, plus damage sustained in particular during World War II, Brunel&#x27;s original design is still recognisable.

==Location==

The station complex is bounded at the front by Praed Street and at the rear by Bishop&#x27;s Bridge Road, which crosses the station throat on Bishop&#x27;s Bridge. On the west side of the station is Eastbourne Terrace, while the east side is bounded by the Paddington arm of the Grand Union Canal. The station is in a shallow cutting, a fact obscured at the front by a hotel building, but which can be clearly seen from the other three sides. To the north of the station is the Westway, to the northeast is Edgware Road, and to the east and southeast is the London Inner Ring Road.

The surrounding area is partly residential, and includes the major St Mary&#x27;s Hospital, restaurants and hotels. Until recently there was little office accommodation in the area, and most commuters interchanged between National Rail and the London Underground to reach workplaces in the West End or the City. However, recent redevelopment of derelict railway and canal land, marketed as Paddington Waterside, has resulted in new office complexes nearby.

The station is in London fare zone 1. In addition to the Underground stations at Paddington, Lancaster Gate station on the Central line is a short walk away to the south. A little further to the south lie the conjoined parks of Hyde Park and Kensington Gardens.

The narrow busy section of the incoming main railway line between Ladbroke Grove and Paddington station is known as Paddington Throat among some engineers.

==History==

The National Rail station is officially named London Paddington, a name commonly used outside London but rarely by Londoners, who call it just Paddington, as on the London Underground map. This same practice applies to all the London mainline rail termini, except London Bridge. Parts of the station, including the main train shed, date from 1854, when it was built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel as the London terminus for the Great Western Railway (GWR). It is one of eleven stations in London managed by Network Rail.

===Great Western Railway===
After several false starts, Brunel announced the construction of a railway from Bristol to London on 30 July 1833. This became the GWR, and he intended it to be the best railway in the country. The GWR had originally planned to terminate London services at as this allowed them to use part of the London and Birmingham Railway&#x27;s track into the station, which would have been cost effective. This received government approval in 1835, but was rejected as a long-term solution by Brunel as he was concerned it would also allow Liverpool to compete as a port with Bristol if the railway from Birmingham was extended.

The first station was a temporary terminus for the GWR on the west side of Bishop&#x27;s Bridge Road, opened on 4 June 1838. The first GWR service from London to Taplow, near Maidenhead, ran from Paddington in 1838. After the main station opened, this became the site of the goods depot. Brunel did not consider that anything less than a grand terminus dedicated to the GWR would be acceptable, and consequently this was approved in February 1853.
The main station between Bishop&#x27;s Bridge Road and Praed Street was designed by Brunel, who was enthusiastic at the idea of being able to design a railway station himself, although much of the architectural detailing was by his associate Matthew Digby Wyatt. He took inspiration from Joseph Paxton&#x27;s Crystal Palace and the München Hauptbahnhof. The glazed roof is supported by wrought iron arches in three spans, respectively spanning , and . The roof is long, and the original roof spans had two transepts connecting the three spans.

It is commonly believed that these were provided by Brunel to accommodate traversers to carry coaches between the tracks within the station. However recent research, using early documents and photographs, does not seem to support this belief, and their actual purpose is unknown. The original station used four platforms, -wide and -wide departure platforms, a arrival platform, and a combined arrival platform and cab road. A series of nineteen turnplates were sited beyond the ends of the platforms for horse and coach traffic.

The first GWR service from the new station departed on 16 January 1854, though the roof had not been finished at this point and there were no arrivals. It was formally opened on 29 May, and the older temporary station was demolished the following year.
The Great Western Hotel was built on Praed Street in front of the station from 1851 to 1854 by architect Philip Charles Hardwick, son of Philip Hardwick (designer of the Euston Arch) in a classical and French-chateau design. It opened on 9 June 1854, and had 103 bedrooms and 15 sitting rooms. Each corner contained a tower containing two additional floors beyond the five storeys of the main block. It was originally run by a consortium of GWR shareholders and staff, before the company took over operations completely in 1896.

The station was substantially enlarged in 1906–1915 and a fourth span of was added on the north side, parallel to the others. The new span was built in a similar style to the original three spans, but the detailing is different and it has no transepts. The area between the rear of the hotel and the concourse is called the Lawn. It was originally unroofed and occupied by sidings, but was later built up to form part of the station&#x27;s first concourse.

Paddington&#x27;s capacity was doubled to four tracks in the 1870s. The quadrupling was completed to on 30 October 1871, in June 1879 and in September 1884. An additional platform (later to become No. 9) opened in June 1878, while two new departure platforms (later Nos. 4 and 5) were added in 1885. One of the lines between what is now platform 5 and 7 was removed, in order that the latter could be moved to a more southerly position. Aside from the June 1878 work, Brunel&#x27;s original roof structure remained untouched throughout the improvements.

The GWR began experimenting with the electric lighting in 1880, leading to Paddington being decorated with Christmas lights that year. Although the system was unreliable, it spurred the GWR on to a more ambitious lighting scheme in 1886, in which a 145V AC supply could light the terminus, office, goods yard and Royal Oak and Westbourne Park stations. It was praised for its scale and showing that electricity could compete with gas lighting on the same scale.

Paddington became an important milk depot towards the end of the 19th century. A milk dock was built 1881, and by the 20th century over 3,000 churns were being handled at the station every day. Other goods such as meat, fish, horses and flowers were also transported through Paddington. Passenger traffic continued to improve as well. In March 1906, the goods depot at Westbourne Park was moved to Old Oak Common. The main departure platform was extended in 1908 and used for milk and parcels.

In 1911, work began to separate light and empty carriage traffic from running trains between Paddington to Old Oak Common, which involved the rebuilding of Westbourne Park station. The work was halted because of World War I but resumed in 1926, to be completed the following year. Three new platforms were added; platform 12 in November 1913, platform 11 in December 1915, and platform 10 the following year. The roof was completely reconstructed between 1922 and 1924, replacing Brunel&#x27;s original cast-iron columns with steel replicas.
Unlike several other London termini, Paddington saw no damage during World War I. Although Victoria and were the main stations for military movement during the war, Paddington was used for some of this traffic.

On Armistice Day 1922, a memorial to the employees of the GWR who died during the war was unveiled by Viscount Churchill. The bronze memorial, depicting a soldier reading a letter, was sculpted by Charles Sargeant Jagger and stands on platform 1.

===Big Four and British Rail===
The GWR was the only railway company that continued through the Big Four grouping in 1923. A tube railway for the Post Office, opened in December 1927, could cater for around 10,000 mailbags every day.

Paddington was extended again from 1930 to 1934. Platforms 2 to 11 were extended past the Bishop&#x27;s Road bridge and a new parcel depot was built. Suburban services, which had never been considered important at Paddington, were increased as new housing estates in the Home Counties started being built. Bishop&#x27;s Road station was rebuilt, giving an extra four platforms to Paddington (Nos. 13–16) and providing a new ticket office and entrance for suburban services next to the bridge. A public address system was introduced in 1936. By this time, around 22,000 parcels a day were being forwarded from Paddington, with the Royal Mail service processing around 4,500 mailbags and 2,400 parcel bags every day.

The station came under attack several times during World War II. On 17 April 1941, the departure side of the station was hit by a parachute mine, while on 22 March 1944, the roof between platforms 6 and 7 was destroyed by two bombs. Passenger traffic greatly increased through Paddington during the war, partly by evacuation to the relatively quiet Thames Valley, and because holidaymakers chose to travel west as large areas of the south and east coasts had been taken over for military purposes. On 29 July 1944, the station was closed for three hours because the platforms were saturated with passenger traffic, while on the subsequent August bank holiday, crowds were controlled in tight queues along Eastbourne Terrace by mounted police.
Steam traffic began to be replaced in the late 1950s. Between 1959 and 1961, suburban services switched to diesel multiple units, while the last regular long-distance steam train left Paddington on 11 June 1965. The track layout was reorganised in 1967, abolishing the distinction between arrival and departure platforms that had been a feature of Paddington since opening. A new set of sidings was built south of Royal Oak, and the track curve into Paddington was eased. Services to the Midlands were rerouted via during this time.

The station concourse was enlarged in 1970, and the ticket office was rebuilt in the same year. By this time, public opinion had turned against wholesale demolition and redevelopment of stations such as Euston, and consequently the rebuilding work was done with an eye towards preserving Brunel and Wyatt&#x27;s original station design. Special steam services began to be run from Paddington again in the 1980s.

In 1982, a bronze statue of Brunel was erected on the station concourse. It was sculpted by John Doubleday and funded by the Bristol and West Building Society. Between 1989 and 1999, the Lawn was re-roofed and separated from the concourse by a glass screen wall. It is surrounded by shops and cafes on several levels.

=== Privatisation ===
As with other major British railway termini, Paddington is owned and managed by Network Rail. Train services were privatised in 1996, initially to Great Western Trains and Thames Trains. The former company was renamed First Great Western in 1998, and merged with First Great Western Link and Wessex Trains to form the Greater Western franchise in 2006. In 2015, the operating company was renamed Great Western Railway.

In the mid 1990s, the Great Western Main Line approaches and platforms were electrified as part of the Heathrow Express project. Opening in 1998, the airport rail link connects the station directly to Heathrow Airport. From 1999 until 2003, Express Baggage check-in facilities for airline passengers were provided in the Lawn, however these were progressively replaced by retail units.

The station&#x27;s fourth span was renovated in 2010, involving repair and restoration of the original glazed roof, so that platforms 9 to 12 can once more enjoy daylight. A false ceiling or crash deck had been in place since 1996. Work was completed and the restored roof unveiled in July 2011. A second phase of improvements began in July 2014 and was completed two years later. Network Rail originally planned to demolish Span 4 and build an office block over it, which was successfully contested by Save Britain&#x27;s Heritage.

In the mid 2010s, construction began on an underground station as part of the Crossrail project, located south west of the main station building. Coinciding with this project, a new taxi rank and pick up point was built north of the main station, as well as comprehensive upgrades to Paddington tube station. The underground platforms opened as the Elizabeth line on 24 May 2022.

The station had historically been criticised for very poor air quality inside the train shed; however, the replacement of diesel InterCity 125 trains by bi-mode Class 800 and 802 trains in the late 2010s improved air quality.

London Paddington has always been one of the busiest stations in the UK, and was ranked as the 8th busiest station in the United Kingdom during the 2016–17 period according to the Office of Rail &amp; Road, with 36.6 million passengers during that period, and was placed between and . However, as a result of the opening of the Elizabeth Line, alongside , it has become far busier, and London Paddington had become the 2nd busiest station in the United Kingdom during the 2022–23 period, with 59.2 million total passengers, behind London Liverpool Street and ahead of , the former busiest station.

==Services==
Paddington is the London terminus for long-distance high-speed trains operated by Great Western Railway. Two services go to Heathrow Airport: the Heathrow Express travels non-stop at a premium fare, while Elizabeth line takes the same route but calls at all intermediate stations.

The station has 13 terminal platforms, numbered 1 to 12 and 14 from south-west to north-east (left to right as seen from the concourse). Platforms 1 to 8 are below the original three spans of Brunel&#x27;s train shed, platforms 9 to 12 beneath the later fourth span. Platform 13 was decommissioned in December 2016 to permit lengthening of platform 12 for 10-coach trains.

Platform 14 is within the Metropolitan Railway&#x27;s old Bishop&#x27;s Road (Suburban) station to the north-west. Immediately alongside are through platforms 15 and 16, used by the London Underground&#x27;s Hammersmith &amp; City and Circle lines. The current operator, Great Western Railway, assigns numbers to the pocket timetables it publishes, and its services to Bath, Bristol, Weston-super-Mare and South Wales are in timetable number 1.

With the building of the Elizabeth line Paddington gained two more low level platforms numbered A and B. These are located underground in the Elizabeth line section of the station directly to the south west of the main concourse. 

The concourse stretches across the heads of platforms 1 to 12, underneath the London end of the four train sheds. Platform 14 can only be reached indirectly via the north-western end of platform 12. A footbridge crosses the north-western end of the station and gives access to platforms 1–12 and 14. There are ticket barriers to platforms 2–7 and 10–14. 

A first-class lounge on Platform 1 provides complimentary refreshments and Wi-Fi internet access. It also has screens showing television news as well as a departure board.

Platform 7 is dedicated to the Heathrow Express. Flight information display screens for airline passengers are provided at the Heathrow Express ticket office near these platforms. An integrated timetable is offered between Paddington and Rosslare Europort in Ireland via the Stena Line ferry from Fishguard Harbour railway station with through ticketing to stations and a daily morning and evening service in both directions, changing at Newport, Cardiff or Swansea. This route has been in existence since 1906.

Paddington is the terminus for suburban trains to West London, Thames Valley, Reading, and Didcot, operated by Great Western Railway.

The general off peak service pattern in trains per hour (tph) is:

Great Western Railway
*1 tph Newbury
*2 tph Bristol Temple Meads with 1tp2h continuing to Weston-super-Mare
*2 tph Cardiff Central with 1 tph carrying on to Swansea
*1 tph Cheltenham Spa
*1 tp2h to Exeter St Davids (some services extended to various destinations in the South West)
*2 tph Oxford with 1 tph carrying on to Great Malvern (some services extended to Hereford)
*1 tph Plymouth via Exeter St Davids (1tp2h extended to Penzance)
*2 tph Didcot Parkway (stopping service using the relief lines)

Elizabeth line (operates from underground Elizabeth line platforms, A and B)
*4 tph Heathrow Terminal 4
*2 tph Heathrow Terminal 5
*2 tph Reading
*2 tph Maidenhead
*8 tph Abbey Wood 
*8 tph Shenfield 

Heathrow Express
*4 tph Heathrow Terminal 5

Until May 2003, Paddington was part of the Virgin CrossCountry network with services to the North of England and Scotland via Oxford and Birmingham New Street. From June 2005 until May 2018, Paddington was the terminus for Heathrow Connect services.

Until December 2018, Chiltern Railways operated a weekday parliamentary service from South Ruislip and to High Wycombe via the Acton–Northolt line. It ceased when the Acton-Northolt line closed. When its London Marylebone terminus was closed, Chiltern Railways diverted its services to London Paddington as did Wrexham &amp; Shropshire between 2008 and 2011.

==Accidents and incidents==
On 9 August 1920, a passenger train collided with the buffers. Two people were injured. The following year, a passenger train was being shunted into a platform and collided with three luggage vans already occupying the line. A carriage was derailed and a luggage van was wrecked.

On 23 November 1983, a sleeper train hauled by Class 50 locomotive 50 041 &quot;Bulwark&quot; was derailed on the approach to Paddington after speeding through a crossover. Three of the seventy passengers were injured.

On 18 February 1991, Paddington was bombed by the Provisional IRA, causing bad damage to the station&#x27;s roof. Three hours later London Victoria station was targeted in a much more serious attack.

The worst accident at Paddington was the Ladbroke Grove rail crash (also called the Paddington rail crash). On 5 October 1999, a Thames Train stopping service from Paddington to passed a red signal and collided with a Great Western express travelling in the opposite direction. The drivers of both trains were killed, along with 29 passengers; 400 others were injured.

On 25 May 2014, the middle coach of an empty stock Class 360 electric multiple unit 360 205 derailed as it entered platform 3, due to maintenance errors.

On 16 June 2016, a Class 165 diesel multiple unit 165 124 passed a signal at danger and derailed in a siding, causing significant disruption to services and damage to infrastructure.

On 20 August 2017, a Class 43, 43188 derailed during departure from Platform 2, when forming the rear power car of the 11:57 service to .

==London Underground stations==

The GWR was aware that Paddington was some distance from the centre of London, and in 1854 donated £175,000 (£ as of ) to the North Metropolitan Railway in order that the station could have a link to the City. Consequently, Paddington was the original western terminus of the line when it opened on 1 January 1863. An extension to the Metropolitan Railway provided Paddington with a connection to south of the River Thames, opening from Praed Street Junction via a new station at Paddington, located on Praed Street, to Gloucester Road on 1 October 1868. An extension of the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway to Paddington opened on 1 December 1913, connecting to the Metropolitan Railway&#x27;s Praed Street station.

Because of the history of the various railways, Paddington is served by four London Underground lines through two separate stations: the Bakerloo, Circle and District lines have a combined sub-surface and deep-level station on Praed Street to the south of the main line station, and the Circle and Hammersmith &amp; City lines have a sub-surface station with access from Paddington Basin to the north. Circle line services run through both of the sub-surface stations as part of a spiral route. Although shown on the London Underground map as a single station, the two stations are not directly linked.

Lancaster Gate Underground station on the Central line and Marylebone mainline station are within walking distance, and out-of-station interchanges to these stations are permitted at no extra cost if made within the permitted time.

==Elizabeth line station==
As part of the Crossrail project, a new underground station was constructed on the site of the former taxi rank in Departures Road. The platforms opened with the launch of the Elizabeth line on 24 May 2022.

Built using cut and cover construction, the station box is deep and long. As part of the construction of the station, the taxi rank was moved to the north side of the station, and Eastbourne Terrace was closed in early 2012 for two years to allow construction of the station box to take place.

The station was designed by Weston Williamson, with a clear opening into the underground station covered by a long by wide glass canopy. Artwork of cloud formations by the artist Spencer Finch has been digitally printed onto the glass canopy. The station was awarded a Civic Trust Award in 2023.

In the 1990s proposals for Crossrail, the station was to be built in the same location on Eastbourne Terrace but would have been designed by the architect Will Alsop with a similar canopy-based design.

Like all Elizabeth line stations, the station has been built to be fully accessible, with lifts and step-free access. An underground connecting passage between the Bakerloo line platforms and the Elizabeth line platforms has been built.

==Cultural references==

The children&#x27;s book character Paddington Bear was named after the station. In the books, by Michael Bond, he is found at the station, having come from &quot;deepest, darkest Peru&quot; and with a note attached to his coat reading &quot;please look after this bear, thank you&quot;. A statue of him by Marcus Cornish, based on the original drawings by Peggy Fortnum, is located under the clock on platform 1.

Paddington station has been referred to in several popular works of fiction. It is mentioned in several Sherlock Holmes novels. In &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot;, Watson and his companions Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville leave for Dartmoor from Paddington, while in &quot;The Boscombe Valley Mystery&quot;, Holmes and Watson leave the station for a train to Boscombe Valley near Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. The mystery novel &quot;4.50 From Paddington&quot; (1957) by Agatha Christie begins with a murder witnessed by a passenger on a train from Paddington.

One of &quot;The Railway Series&quot; books, &quot;The Eight Famous Engines&quot;, contains a story about Gordon, Duck and a foreign engine debating which station London is. Duck says that he used to work at Paddington so he knows that Paddington is most important. However, Gordon later finds out that the station in London is St Pancras. There is a fictional underground Paddington station on the North London System in the novel &quot;The Horn of Mortal Danger&quot; (1980).

Paddington station was the subject of William Powell Frith&#x27;s 1862 painting &quot;The Railway Station&quot;. The portrait was viewed by over 21,000 people (paying a shilling each) in the first seven weeks of its being publicly shown. The painting is now held in the Royal Holloway College.

The band Supertramp used Paddington station to record the train sounds featured in the song &quot;Rudy&quot; on the 1974 album &quot;Crime of the Century&quot;. There is a documentary television series about Paddington station on Channel 5 called &quot;Paddington Station 24/7&quot;.

==Connections==
London Buses routes 7, 16, 23, 27, 36, 46, 205 and night routes N7, N27 and N205 serve the station.

==Railway band==
Paddington is home to the Great Western Railway Paddington Band, the last railway band in England. It plays on Friday evenings on the main concourse. In 1997, Railtrack unsuccessfully tried to evict the band, citing a lack of space while the station was redeveloped to accommodate Heathrow Express services.

==References==
Citations
Sources
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Station information on Paddington station from Network Rail
* Train times and station information for Paddington railway station from National Rail (Station code: PAD)
* Paddington Station (Virtual Archive from Network Rail)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="0" end="10" title="London Paddington station" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="26" end="43" title="London Paddington station" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311711" start="50" end="72" title="London station group" label="London railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="77" end="95" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q14997270" start="124" end="136" title="Praed Street" label="Praed Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="144" end="154" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="227" end="248" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="346" end="369" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="489" end="512" title="Liverpool Street station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415063" start="593" end="616" title="Great Western Main Line" label="Great Western Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="663" end="684" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772582" start="765" end="778" title="Thames Valley" label="Thames Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="834" end="852" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="857" end="868" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540080" start="915" end="931" title="Heathrow Express" label="Heathrow Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="961" end="975" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461338" start="990" end="999" title="Shenfield railway station" label="Shenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="1001" end="1015" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q801355" start="1066" end="1073" title="Reading railway station" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q800907" start="1075" end="1094" title="Heathrow Terminal 5 station" label="Heathrow Terminal 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694347" start="1100" end="1119" title="Heathrow Terminal 4 railway station" label="Heathrow Terminal 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087079" start="1138" end="1148" title="Abbey Wood railway station" label="Abbey Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171881" start="1162" end="1173" title="List of stations in London fare zone 1" label="fare zone 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892" start="1236" end="1244" title="Bakerloo line" label="Bakerloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="1246" end="1252" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="1257" end="1265" title="District line" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="1291" end="1297" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="1302" end="1324" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="1384" end="1396" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="1803" end="1823" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="1951" end="1963" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2080" end="2092" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14997270" start="2209" end="2221" title="Praed Street" label="Praed Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917395" start="2304" end="2324" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914" start="2441" end="2458" title="Grand Union Canal" label="Grand Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989817" start="2640" end="2647" title="Westway (London)" label="Westway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047586" start="2669" end="2681" title="Edgware Road" label="Edgware Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258965" start="2720" end="2742" title="London Inner Ring Road" label="London Inner Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495342" start="2812" end="2835" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital, London" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="2967" end="2980" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="2989" end="3007" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="3035" end="3043" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3051" end="3055" title="City of London" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123338" start="3135" end="3155" title="Paddington Waterside" label="Paddington Waterside"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171881" start="3221" end="3239" title="List of stations in London fare zone 1" label="London fare zone 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431057" start="3296" end="3318" title="Lancaster Gate tube station" label="Lancaster Gate station"/>
<link wikidata="Q205355" start="3326" end="3338" title="Central line (London Underground)" label="Central line"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="3431" end="3440" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q822607" start="3445" end="3463" title="Kensington Gardens" label="Kensington Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030864" start="3532" end="3546" title="Ladbroke Grove" label="Ladbroke Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="3801" end="3823" title="tube map" label="London Underground map"/>
<link wikidata="Q801716" start="3956" end="3966" title="train shed" label="train shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="4005" end="4028" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="4060" end="4081" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="4139" end="4151" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301181" start="4479" end="4508" title="London and Birmingham Railway" label="London and Birmingham Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="4712" end="4721" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790415" start="5492" end="5511" title="Matthew Digby Wyatt" label="Matthew Digby Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q318372" start="5538" end="5551" title="Joseph Paxton" label="Joseph Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="5559" end="5573" title="The Crystal Palace" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q254647" start="5582" end="5602" title="München Hauptbahnhof" label="München Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="5636" end="5648" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="5756" end="5764" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082925" start="5869" end="5879" title="Transfer table" label="traversers"/>
<link wikidata="Q753779" start="5889" end="5896" title="Coach (rail)" label="coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529026" start="6583" end="6602" title="Hilton London Paddington" label="Great Western Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14997270" start="6616" end="6628" title="Praed Street" label="Praed Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183345" start="6684" end="6707" title="Philip Charles Hardwick" label="Philip Charles Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887879" start="6716" end="6731" title="Philip Hardwick" label="Philip Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414359" start="6749" end="6760" title="Euston Arch" label="Euston Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757115" start="8435" end="8444" title="Royal Oak tube station" label="Royal Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857925" start="8449" end="8464" title="Westbourne Park tube station" label="Westbourne Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q856548" start="8552" end="8564" title="gas lighting" label="gas lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084646" start="8983" end="8997" title="Old Oak Common TMD" label="Old Oak Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9292" end="9303" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9691" end="9702" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="9713" end="9721" title="London Victoria station" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="9837" end="9850" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600211" start="9857" end="9884" title="Great Western Railway War Memorial" label="a memorial to the employees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926362" start="9936" end="9954" title="Victor Spencer, 1st Viscount Churchill" label="Viscount Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082353" start="10031" end="10054" title="Charles Sargeant Jagger" label="Charles Sargeant Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q221905" start="10178" end="10186" title="Big Four (British railway companies)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11084" end="11096" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772582" start="11382" end="11395" title="Thames Valley" label="Thames Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q277436" start="11672" end="11691" title="Bank holiday" label="August bank holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="11883" end="11903" title="diesel multiple unit" label="diesel multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968756" start="12848" end="12881" title="Bristol &amp;amp; West" label="Bristol and West Building Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="13144" end="13156" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="13178" end="13188" title="Privatisation of British Rail" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709917" start="13236" end="13249" title="Thames Trains" label="Thames Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419444" start="13327" end="13351" title="First Great Western Link" label="First Great Western Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567397" start="13356" end="13369" title="Wessex Trains" label="Wessex Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600820" start="13382" end="13407" title="Greater Western franchise" label="Greater Western franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="13460" end="13481" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415063" start="13506" end="13529" title="Great Western Main Line" label="Great Western Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540080" start="13587" end="13603" title="Heathrow Express" label="Heathrow Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192191" start="13634" end="13651" title="airport rail link" label="airport rail link"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="13685" end="13701" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933381" start="14374" end="14402" title="Save Britain&amp;#x27;s Heritage" label="Save Britain&amp;#x27;s Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="14483" end="14492" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360320" start="14689" end="14712" title="Paddington tube station (Bakerloo, Circle and District lines)" label="Paddington tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="14754" end="14768" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q948845" start="14915" end="14928" title="InterCity 125" label="InterCity 125"/>
<link wikidata="Q15956101" start="14947" end="14956" title="British Rail Class 800" label="Class 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000475" start="14961" end="14964" title="British Rail Class 802" label="802"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="15341" end="15355" title="Elizabeth Line" label="Elizabeth Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="15707" end="15728" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694342" start="15749" end="15765" title="Heathrow Terminals 2 &amp;amp; 3 railway station" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540080" start="15771" end="15787" title="Heathrow Express" label="Heathrow Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="15830" end="15844" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="16307" end="16327" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="16463" end="16481" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="16489" end="16511" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="16516" end="16522" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146283" start="17269" end="17284" title="turnstile" label="ticket barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540080" start="17519" end="17535" title="Heathrow Express" label="Heathrow Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281650" start="17726" end="17743" title="Rosslare Europort" label="Rosslare Europort"/>
<link wikidata="Q833903" start="17763" end="17773" title="Stena Line" label="Stena Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602643" start="17785" end="17818" title="Fishguard Harbour railway station" label="Fishguard Harbour railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772582" start="18064" end="18077" title="Thames Valley" label="Thames Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q801355" start="18079" end="18086" title="Reading railway station" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929166" start="18092" end="18098" title="Didcot Parkway railway station" label="Didcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206584" start="18232" end="18239" title="Newbury railway station" label="Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q800579" start="18247" end="18267" title="Bristol Temple Meads railway station" label="Bristol Temple Meads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335883" start="18293" end="18310" title="Weston-super-Mare railway station" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292817" start="18318" end="18333" title="Cardiff Central railway station" label="Cardiff Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949311" start="18360" end="18367" title="Swansea railway station" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845519" start="18375" end="18389" title="Cheltenham Spa railway station" label="Cheltenham Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244559" start="18401" end="18417" title="Exeter St Davids railway station" label="Exeter St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880536" start="18492" end="18498" title="Oxford railway station" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959698" start="18525" end="18538" title="Great Malvern railway station" label="Great Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q956813" start="18583" end="18591" title="Plymouth railway station" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929166" start="18649" end="18663" title="Didcot Parkway railway station" label="Didcot Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694347" start="18791" end="18810" title="Heathrow Terminal 4 railway station" label="Heathrow Terminal 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q800907" start="18818" end="18837" title="Heathrow Terminal 5 station" label="Heathrow Terminal 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q801355" start="18845" end="18852" title="Reading railway station" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801859" start="18860" end="18870" title="Maidenhead railway station" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087079" start="18878" end="18888" title="Abbey Wood railway station" label="Abbey Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461338" start="18897" end="18906" title="Shenfield railway station" label="Shenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q800907" start="18933" end="18952" title="Heathrow Terminal 5 railway station" label="Heathrow Terminal 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933902" start="18997" end="19016" title="Virgin CrossCountry" label="Virgin CrossCountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880536" start="19080" end="19086" title="Oxford railway station" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q683063" start="19091" end="19112" title="Birmingham New Street railway station" label="Birmingham New Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592596" start="19177" end="19193" title="Heathrow Connect" label="Heathrow Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q567000" start="19226" end="19243" title="Chiltern Railways" label="Chiltern Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139085" start="19263" end="19284" title="Parliamentary train" label="parliamentary service"/>
<link wikidata="Q801459" start="19290" end="19303" title="South Ruislip station" label="South Ruislip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851135" start="19311" end="19323" title="High Wycombe railway station" label="High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010627" start="19332" end="19351" title="Acton–Northolt line" label="Acton–Northolt line"/>
<link wikidata="Q649419" start="19409" end="19426" title="Marylebone railway station" label="London Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249958" start="19516" end="19540" title="Wrexham &amp;amp; Shropshire" label="Wrexham &amp;amp; Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970826" start="19921" end="19929" title="British Rail Class 50" label="Class 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q28197704" start="20130" end="20136" title="Bombings of Paddington and Victoria stations" label="bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="20144" end="20159" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="20226" end="20249" title="London Victoria station" label="London Victoria station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728539" start="20336" end="20361" title="Ladbroke Grove rail crash" label="Ladbroke Grove rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811650" start="20473" end="20492" title="Signal passed at danger" label="passed a red signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q918229" start="20716" end="20725" title="British Rail Class 360" label="Class 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="20726" end="20748" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303631" start="20839" end="20848" title="British Rail Class 165" label="Class 165"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="20849" end="20869" title="diesel multiple unit" label="diesel multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080162" start="21025" end="21033" title="British Rail Class 43 (HST)" label="Class 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="21302" end="21328" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="North Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360320" start="21645" end="21691" title="Paddington tube station (Bakerloo, Circle and District lines)" label="station at Paddington, located on Praed Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431088" start="21696" end="21711" title="Gloucester Road tube station" label="Gloucester Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849221" start="21751" end="21784" title="Baker Street and Waterloo Railway" label="Baker Street and Waterloo Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="21972" end="21990" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892" start="22032" end="22040" title="Bakerloo line" label="Bakerloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="22042" end="22048" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="22053" end="22061" title="District line" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360320" start="22084" end="22118" title="Paddington tube station (Bakerloo, Circle and District lines)" label="sub-surface and deep-level station"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="22193" end="22215" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378866" start="22229" end="22248" title="Paddington tube station (Circle and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="sub-surface station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123324" start="22266" end="22282" title="Paddington Basin" label="Paddington Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="22412" end="22434" title="Tube map" label="London Underground map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431057" start="22499" end="22513" title="Lancaster Gate tube station" label="Lancaster Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205355" start="22541" end="22553" title="Central line (London Underground)" label="Central line"/>
<link wikidata="Q649419" start="22558" end="22568" title="Marylebone station" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="22774" end="22783" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="22935" end="22949" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125761" start="22979" end="22992" title="Station box" label="cut and cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125761" start="23011" end="23022" title="station box" label="station box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989484" start="23290" end="23307" title="Weston Williamson" label="Weston Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281195" start="23410" end="23426" title="cloud formations" label="cloud formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576048" start="23441" end="23454" title="Spencer Finch" label="Spencer Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124342" start="23531" end="23548" title="Civic Trust Awards" label="Civic Trust Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593611" start="23566" end="23595" title="History of the Crossrail line" label="1990s proposals for Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q304768" start="23714" end="23724" title="Will Alsop" label="Will Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360320" start="23926" end="23939" title="Paddington tube station (Bakerloo, Circle and District lines)" label="Bakerloo line"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="23958" end="23972" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="24060" end="24075" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122127" start="24122" end="24134" title="Michael Bond" label="Michael Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="24204" end="24208" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758106" start="24331" end="24345" title="Marcus Cornish" label="Marcus Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160661" start="24381" end="24394" title="Peggy Fortnum" label="Peggy Fortnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="24543" end="24558" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45192" start="24576" end="24605" title="The Hound of the Baskervilles" label="The Hound of the Baskervilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192541" start="24729" end="24756" title="The Boscombe Valley Mystery" label="The Boscombe Valley Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057705" start="24836" end="24847" title="Ross-on-Wye" label="Ross-on-Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="24849" end="24862" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q197243" start="24888" end="24908" title="4.50 From Paddington" label="4.50 From Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="24925" end="24940" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348667" start="25029" end="25047" title="The Railway Series" label="The Railway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q720102" start="25344" end="25354" title="St Pancras railway station" label="St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740293" start="25454" end="25479" title="The Horn of Mortal Danger" label="The Horn of Mortal Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q955750" start="25533" end="25553" title="William Powell Frith" label="William Powell Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q118098490" start="25581" end="25600" title="The Railway Station" label="The Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="25664" end="25672" title="shilling (British coin)" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202039" start="25765" end="25787" title="Royal Holloway, University of London" label="Royal Holloway College"/>
<link wikidata="Q176457" start="25799" end="25809" title="Supertramp" label="Supertramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q526386" start="25923" end="25943" title="Crime of the Century (album)" label="Crime of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q60608206" start="26043" end="26066" title="Paddington Station 24/7" label="Paddington Station 24/7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="26091" end="26103" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670132" start="26111" end="26112" title="London Buses route 7" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669968" start="26114" end="26116" title="London Buses route 16" label="16"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670010" start="26118" end="26120" title="London Buses route 23" label="23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670043" start="26122" end="26124" title="London Buses route 27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670076" start="26126" end="26128" title="London Buses route 36" label="36"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="26130" end="26132" title="London Buses route 46" label="46"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669991" start="26134" end="26137" title="London Buses route 205" label="205"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="26155" end="26157" title="London Buses route N7" label="N7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="26159" end="26162" title="London Buses route N27" label="N27"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="26167" end="26171" title="London Buses route N205" label="N205"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="26368" end="26377" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="26650" end="26662" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="26737" end="26750" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
</links>
</doc>
