<doc id="54361" wikidata="Q151250" url="?curid=54361" title="Neo-Nazism">
<text>Neo-Nazism comprises the post–World War II militant, social, and political movements that seek to revive and reinstate Nazi ideology. Neo-Nazis employ their ideology to promote hatred and racial supremacy (often white supremacy), to attack racial and ethnic minorities (often antisemitism and Islamophobia), and in some cases to create a fascist state.

Neo-Nazism is a global phenomenon, with organized representation in many countries and international networks. It borrows elements from Nazi doctrine, including antisemitism, ultranationalism, racism, xenophobia, ableism, homophobia, anti-communism, and creating a &quot;Fourth Reich&quot;. Holocaust denial is common in neo-Nazi circles.

Neo-Nazis regularly display Nazi symbols and express admiration for Adolf Hitler and other Nazi leaders. In some European and Latin American countries, laws prohibit the expression of pro-Nazi, racist, antisemitic, or homophobic views. Nazi-related symbols are banned in many European countries (especially Germany) in an effort to curtail neo-Nazism.

== Definition ==
The term neo-Nazism describes any post-World War II militant, social or political movements seeking to revive the ideology of Nazism in whole or in part.

The term &#x27;neo-Nazism&#x27; can also refer to the ideology of these movements, which may borrow elements from Nazi doctrine, including ultranationalism, anti-communism, racism, ableism, xenophobia, homophobia, antisemitism, up to initiating the Fourth Reich. Holocaust denial is a common feature, as is the incorporation of Nazi symbols and admiration of Adolf Hitler.

Neo-Nazism is considered a particular form of far-right politics and right-wing extremism.

=== Hyperborean racial doctrine ===

Neo-Nazi writers have posited a spiritual, esoteric doctrine of race, which moves beyond the primarily Darwinian-inspired materialist scientific racism popular mainly in the Anglosphere during the 20th century. Figures influential in the development of neo-Nazi racism, such as Miguel Serrano and Julius Evola (writers who are described by critics of Nazism such as the Southern Poverty Law Center as influential within what it presents as parts of &quot;the bizarre fringes of National Socialism, past and present&quot;), claim that the Hyperborean ancestors of the Aryans were in the distant past, far higher beings than their current state, having suffered from &quot;involution&quot; due to mixing with the &quot;Telluric&quot; peoples; supposed creations of the Demiurge. Within this theory, if the &quot;Aryans&quot; are to return to the Golden Age of the distant past, they need to awaken the memory of the blood. An extraterrestrial origin of the Hyperboreans is often claimed. These theories draw influence from Gnosticism and Tantrism, building on the work of the Ahnenerbe. Within this racist theory, Jews are held up as the antithesis of nobility, purity and beauty.

=== Ecology and environmentalism ===
Neo-Nazism generally aligns itself with a blood and soil variation of environmentalism, which has themes in common with deep ecology, the organic movement and animal protectionism. This tendency, sometimes called &quot;ecofascism&quot;, was represented in the original German Nazism by Richard Walther Darré who was the Reichsminister of Food from 1933 until 1942.

== History ==
=== Germany and Austria, 1945–1950s ===
Following the defeat of Nazi Germany, the political ideology of the ruling party, Nazism, was in complete disarray. The final leader of the National Socialist German Workers&#x27; Party (NSDAP) was Martin Bormann. He died on 2 May 1945 during the Battle of Berlin, but the Soviet Union did not reveal his death to the rest of the world, and his ultimate fate remained a mystery for many years. Conspiracy theories emerged about Hitler himself, that he had secretly survived the war and fled to South America or elsewhere.

The Allied Control Council officially dissolved the NSDAP on 10 October 1945, marking the end of &quot;Old&quot; Nazism. A process of denazification began, and the Nuremberg trials took place, where many major leaders and ideologues were condemned to death by October 1946, others committed suicide.
In both the East and West, surviving ex-party members and military veterans assimilated to the new reality and had no interest in constructing a &quot;neo-Nazism&quot;. However, during the 1949 West German elections a number of Nazi advocates such as Fritz Rössler had infiltrated the national conservative &quot;Deutsche Rechtspartei&quot;, which had five members elected. Rössler and others left to found the more radical Socialist Reich Party (SRP) under Otto Ernst Remer. At the onset of the Cold War, the SRP favoured the Soviet Union over the United States.

In Austria, national independence had been restored, and the explicitly criminalised the NSDAP and any attempt at restoration. West Germany adopted a similar law to target parties it defined as anti-constitutional; Article 21 Paragraph 2 in the Basic Law, banning the SRP in 1952 for being opposed to liberal democracy.

As a consequence, some members of the nascent movement of German neo-Nazism joined the of which Hans-Ulrich Rudel was the most prominent figure. Younger members founded the modelled after the Hitler Youth. The stood for elections from 1953 until 1961 fetching around 1% of the vote each time. Rudel befriended French-born Savitri Devi, who was a proponent of Esoteric Nazism. In the 1950s she wrote a number of books, such as &quot;Pilgrimage&quot; (1958), which concerns prominent Third Reich sites, and &quot;The Lightning and the Sun&quot; (1958), in which she claims that Adolf Hitler was an avatar of the God Vishnu. She was not alone in this reorientation of Nazism towards its Thulean-roots; the , founded by former SS member Wilhelm Kusserow, attempted to promote a new paganism.
In the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) a former member of SA, Wilhelm Adam, founded the National Democratic Party of Germany. It reached out to those attracted by the Nazi Party before 1945 and provide them with a political outlet, so that they would not be tempted to support the far-right again or turn to the anti-communist Western Allies. Joseph Stalin wanted to use them to create a new pro-Soviet and anti-Western strain in German politics. According to top Soviet diplomat Vladimir Semyonov, Stalin even suggested that they could be allowed to continue publishing their own newspaper, Völkischer Beobachter. While in Austria, former SS member Wilhelm Lang founded an esoteric group known as the Vienna Lodge; he popularised Nazism and occultism such as the Black Sun and ideas of Third Reich survival colonies below the polar ice caps.
With the onset of the Cold War, the allied forces had lost interest in prosecuting anyone as part of the denazification. In the mid-1950s this new political environment allowed Otto Strasser, an NS activist on the left of the NSDAP, who had founded the Black Front to return from exile. In 1956, Strasser founded the German Social Union as a Black Front successor, promoting a Strasserite &quot;nationalist and socialist&quot; policy, which dissolved in 1962 due to lack of support. Other Third Reich associated groups were the HIAG and Stille Hilfe dedicated to advancing the interests of Waffen-SS veterans and rehabilitating them into the new democratic society. However, they did not claim to be attempting to restore Nazism, instead functioning as lobbying organizations for their members before the government and the two main political parties (the conservative CDU/CSU and the Nazis&#x27; one-time archenemies, the Social Democratic Party)

Many bureaucrats who served under the Third Reich continued to serve in German administration after the war. According to the Simon Wiesenthal Center, many of the more than 90,000 Nazi war criminals recorded in German files were serving in positions of prominence under Chancellor Konrad Adenauer. Not until the 1960s were the former concentration camp personnel prosecuted by West Germany in the Belzec trial, Frankfurt Auschwitz trials, Treblinka trials, Chełmno trials, and the Sobibór trial. However, the government had passed laws prohibiting Nazis from publicly expressing their beliefs.

=== &quot;Universal National Socialism&quot;, 1950s–1970s ===

Neo-Nazism found expression outside of Germany, including in countries who fought against the Third Reich during the Second World War, and sometimes adopted pan-European or &quot;universal&quot; characteristics, beyond the parameters of German nationalism. The two main tendencies, with differing styles and even worldviews, were the followers of the American Francis Parker Yockey, who was fundamentally anti-American and advocated for a pan-European nationalism, and those of George Lincoln Rockwell, an American conservative.

Yockey, a neo-Spenglerian author, had written &quot;&quot; (1949) dedicated to &quot;the hero of the twentieth century&quot; (namely, Adolf Hitler) and founded the European Liberation Front. He was interested more in the destiny of Europe; to this end, he advocated a National Bolshevik-esque red-brown alliance against American culture and influenced 1960s figures such as SS-veteran Jean-François Thiriart. Yockey was also fond of Arab nationalism, in particular Gamal Abdel Nasser, and saw Fidel Castro&#x27;s Cuban Revolution as a positive, visiting officials there. Yockey&#x27;s views impressed Otto Ernst Remer and the radical traditionalist philosopher Julius Evola. He was constantly hounded by the FBI and was eventually arrested in 1960, before committing suicide. Domestically, Yockey&#x27;s biggest sympathisers were the National Renaissance Party, including James H. Madole, H. Keith Thompson and Eustace Mullins ( of Ezra Pound) and the Liberty Lobby of Willis Carto.

Rockwell, an American conservative, was first politicised in the anti-communism and anti-racial integration movements before becoming anti-Jewish. In response to his opponents calling him a &quot;Nazi&quot;, he theatrically appropriated the aesthetic elements of the NSDAP, to &quot;own&quot; the intended insult. In 1959, Rockwell founded the American Nazi Party and instructed his members to dress in imitation SA-style brown shirts, while flying the flag of the Third Reich. In contrast to Yockey, he was pro-American and cooperated with FBI requests, despite the party being targeted by COINTELPRO due to the mistaken belief that they were agents of Nasser&#x27;s Egypt during a brief intelligence &quot;brown scare&quot;. Later leaders of American white nationalism came to politics through the ANP, including a teenage David Duke and William Luther Pierce of the National Alliance, although they soon distanced themselves from explicit self-identification with neo-Nazism.

In 1961, the World Union of National Socialists was founded by Rockwell and Colin Jordan of the British National Socialist Movement, adopting the &quot;Cotswold Declaration.&quot; French socialite Françoise Dior was involved romantically with Jordan and his deputy John Tyndall and a friend of Savitri Devi, who also attended the meeting. The National Socialist Movement wore quasi-SA uniforms, was involved in streets conflicts with the Jewish 62 Group. In the 1970s, Tyndall&#x27;s earlier involvement with neo-Nazism would come back to haunt the National Front, which he led, as they attempted to ride a wave of anti-immigration populism and concerns over British national decline. Televised exposes on &quot;This Week&quot; in 1974 and &quot;World in Action&quot; in 1978, showed their neo-Nazi pedigree and damaged their electoral chances. In 1967, Rockwell was killed by a disgruntled former member. Matthias Koehl took control of the ANP, and strongly influenced by Savitri Devi, gradually transformed it into an esoteric group known as the New Order.

In Franco&#x27;s Spain, certain SS refugees most notably Otto Skorzeny, Léon Degrelle and the son of Klaus Barbie became associated with CEDADE (&quot;Círculo Español de Amigos de Europa&quot;), an organisation which disseminated Third Reich apologetics out of Barcelona. They intersected with neo-Nazi advocates from Mark Fredriksen in France to Salvador Borrego in Mexico.
In the post-fascist Italian Social Movement splinter groups such as Ordine Nuovo and Avanguardia Nazionale, involved in the &quot;Years of Lead&quot; considered Nazism a reference. Franco Freda created a &quot;Nazi-Maoism&quot; synthesis.

In Germany itself, the various Third Reich nostalgic movements coalesced around the National Democratic Party of Germany in 1964 and in Austria the National Democratic Party in 1967 as the primary sympathisers of the NSDAP past, although more publicly cautious than earlier groups.

=== Holocaust denial and subcultures, 1970s–1990s ===
Holocaust denial, the claim that six million Jews were not deliberately and systematically exterminated as an official policy of the Third Reich and Adolf Hitler, became a more prominent feature of neo-Nazism in the 1970s. Before this time, Holocaust denial had long existed as a sentiment among neo-Nazis, but it had not yet been systematically articulated as a theory with a bibliographical canon. Few of the major theorists of Holocaust denial (who call themselves &quot;revisionists&quot;) can be uncontroversially classified as outright neo-Nazis (though some works such as those of David Irving forward a clearly sympathetic view of Hitler and the publisher Ernst Zündel was deeply tied to international neo-Nazism), however, the main interest of Holocaust denial to neo-Nazis was their hope that it would help them rehabilitate their political ideology in the eyes of the general public. &quot;Did Six Million Really Die?&quot; (1974) by Richard Verrall and &quot;The Hoax of the Twentieth Century&quot; (1976) by Arthur Butz are popular examples of Holocaust denial material.
Key developments in international neo-Nazism during this time include the radicalisation of the under former Hitler Youth member Bert Eriksson. They began hosting an annual conference; the &quot;Iron Pilgrimage&quot;; at Diksmuide, which drew kindred ideologues from across Europe and beyond. As well as this, the NSDAP/AO under Gary Lauck arose in the United States in 1972 and challenged the international influence of the Rockwellite WUNS. Lauck&#x27;s organisation drew support from the National Socialist Movement of Denmark of Povl Riis-Knudsen and various German and Austrian figures who felt that the &quot;National Democratic&quot; parties were too bourgeois and insufficiently Nazi in orientation. This included Michael Kühnen, Christian Worch, Bela Ewald Althans and Gottfried Küssel of the 1977-founded ANS/NS which called for the establishment of a Germanic Fourth Reich. Some ANS/NS members were imprisoned for planning paramilitary attacks on NATO bases in Germany and planning to liberate Rudolf Hess from Spandau Prison. The organisation was officially banned in 1983 by the Minister of the Interior.

During the late 1970s, a British subculture came to be associated with neo-Nazism; the skinheads. Portraying an ultra-masculine, crude and aggressive image, with working-class references, some of the skinheads joined the British Movement under Michael McLaughlin (successor of Colin Jordan), while others became associated with the National Front&#x27;s Rock Against Communism project which was meant to counter the SWP&#x27;s Rock Against Racism. The most significant music group involved in this project was Skrewdriver, led by Ian Stuart Donaldson. Together with ex-BM member Nicky Crane, Donaldson founded the international Blood &amp; Honour network in 1987. By 1992 this network, with input from Harold Covington, had developed a paramilitary wing; Combat 18, which intersected with football hooligan firms such as the Chelsea Headhunters. The neo-Nazi skinhead movement spread to the United States, with groups such as the Hammerskins. It was popularised from 1986 onwards by Tom Metzger of the White Aryan Resistance. Since then it has spread across the world. Films such as &quot;Romper Stomper&quot; (1992) and &quot;American History X&quot; (1998) would fix a public perception that neo-Nazism and skinheads were synonymous.
New developments also emerged on the esoteric level, as former Chilean diplomat Miguel Serrano built on the works of Carl Jung, Otto Rahn, Wilhelm Landig, Julius Evola and Savitri Devi to bind together and develop already existing theories. Serrano had been a member of the National Socialist Movement of Chile in the 1930s and from the early days of neo-Nazism, he had been in contact with key figures across Europe and beyond. Despite this, he was able to work as an ambassador to numerous countries until the rise of Salvador Allende. In 1984 he published his book &quot;Adolf Hitler: The Ultimate Avatar&quot;. Serrano claimed that the Aryans were extragalactic beings who founded Hyperborea and lived the heroic life of Bodhisattvas, while the Jews were created by the Demiurge and were concerned only with coarse materialism. Serrano claimed that a new Golden Age can be attained if the Hyperboreans repurify their blood (supposedly the light of the Black Sun) and restore their &quot;blood-memory.&quot; As with Savitri Devi before him, Serrano&#x27;s works became a key point of reference in neo-Nazism.

=== Lifting of the Iron Curtain, 1990s–present ===
With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet Union during the early 1990s, neo-Nazism began to spread its ideas in the East, as hostility to the triumphant liberal order was high and revanchism a widespread feeling. In Russia, during the chaos of the early 1990s, an amorphous mixture of KGB hardliners, Orthodox neo-Tsarist nostalgics (i.e., Pamyat) and explicit neo-Nazis found themselves strewn together in the same camp. They were united by opposition to the influence of the United States, against the liberalising legacy of Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s and on the Jewish question, Soviet Zionology merged with a more explicit anti-Jewish sentiment. The most significant organisation representing this was Russian National Unity under the leadership of Alexander Barkashov, where black-uniform clad Russians marched with a red flag incorporating the Swastika under the banner of &quot;Russia for Russians.&quot; These forces came together in a last gasp effort to save the Supreme Soviet of Russia against Boris Yeltsin during the 1993 Russian constitutional crisis. As well as events in Russia, in newly independent ex-Soviet states, annual commemorations for SS volunteers now took place; particularly in Latvia, Estonia and Ukraine.
The Russian developments excited German neo-Nazism who dreamed of a Berlin–Moscow alliance against the supposedly &quot;decadent&quot; Atlanticist forces; a dream which had been thematic since the days of Remer. Zündel visited Russia and met with ex-KGB general Aleksandr Stergilov and other Russian National Unity members. Despite these initial aspirations, international neo-Nazism and its close affiliates in ultra-nationalism would be split over the Bosnian War between 1992 and 1995, as part of the breakup of Yugoslavia. The split would largely be along ethnic and sectarian lines. The Germans and the French would largely back the Western Catholic Croats (Lauck&#x27;s NSDAP/AO explicitly called for volunteers, which Kühnen&#x27;s Free German Workers&#x27; Party answered and the French formed the &quot;Groupe Jacques Doriot&quot;), while the Russians and the Greeks would back the Orthodox Serbs (including Russians from Barkashov&#x27;s Russian National Unity, Eduard Limonov&#x27;s National Bolshevik Front and Golden Dawn members joined the Greek Volunteer Guard). Indeed, the revival of National Bolshevism was able to steal some of the thunder from overt Russian neo-Nazism, as ultra-nationalism was wedded with veneration of Joseph Stalin in place of Adolf Hitler, while still also flirting with Nazi aesthetics.

== Analogous European movements ==
Outside Germany, in other countries which were involved with the Axis powers and had their own native ultra-nationalist movements, which sometimes collaborated with the Third Reich but were not technically German-style National Socialists, revivalist and nostalgic movements have emerged in the post-war period which, as neo-Nazism has done in Germany, seek to rehabilitate their various loosely associated ideologies. These movements include neo-fascists and post-fascists in Italy; Vichyites, Pétainists and &quot;national Europeans&quot; in France; Ustaše sympathisers in Croatia; neo-Chetniks in Serbia; Iron Guard revivalists in Romania; Hungarists and Horthyists in Hungary and others.

== Issues ==
=== Ex-Nazis in mainstream politics ===

The most significant case on an international level was the election of Kurt Waldheim to the Presidency of Austria in 1986. It came to light that Waldheim had been a member of the National Socialist German Students&#x27; League, the SA and served as an intelligence officer during the Second World War. Following this he served as an Austrian diplomat and was the Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1972 until 1981. After revelations of Waldheim&#x27;s past were made by an Austrian journalist, Waldheim clashed with the World Jewish Congress on the international stage. Waldheim&#x27;s record was defended by Bruno Kreisky, an Austrian Jew who served as Chancellor of Austria. The legacy of the affair lingers on, as Victor Ostrovsky has claimed the Mossad doctored the file of Waldheim to implicate him in war crimes.

=== Contemporary right-wing populism ===
Some critics have sought to draw a connection between Nazism and modern right-wing populism in Europe, but the two are not widely regarded as interchangeable by most academics. In Austria, the Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ) served as a shelter for ex-Nazis almost from its inception. In 1980, scandals undermined Austria&#x27;s two main parties and the economy stagnated. Jörg Haider became leader of the FPÖ and offered partial justification for Nazism, calling its employment policy effective. In the 1994 Austrian election, the FPÖ won 22 percent of the vote, as well as 33 percent of the vote in Carinthia and 22 percent in Vienna; showing that it had become a force capable of reversing the old pattern of Austrian politics.

Historian Walter Laqueur writes that even though Haider welcomed former Nazis at his meetings and went out of his way to address Schutzstaffel (SS) veterans, the FPÖ is not a fascist party in the traditional sense, since it has not made anti-communism an important issue, and it does not advocate the overthrow of the democratic order or the use of violence. In his view, the FPÖ is &quot;not quite fascist&quot;, although it is part of a tradition, similar to that of 19th-century Viennese mayor Karl Lueger, which involves nationalism, xenophobic populism, and authoritarianism. Haider, who in 2005 left the Freedom Party and formed the Alliance for Austria&#x27;s Future, was killed in a traffic accident in October 2008.

Barbara Rosenkranz, the Freedom Party&#x27;s candidate in Austria&#x27;s 2010 presidential election, was controversial for having made allegedly pro-Nazi statements. Rosenkranz is married to Horst Rosenkranz, a key member of a banned neo-Nazi party, who is known for publishing far-right books. Rosenkranz says she cannot detect anything &quot;dishonourable&quot; in her husband&#x27;s activities.

==Around the world==
===Europe===
====Armenia====
The Armenian-Aryan Racialist Political Movement is a National Socialist movement in Armenia. It was founded in 2021 and supports Aryanism, Antisemitism, and White supremacy.

====Belgium====
A Belgian neo-Nazi organization, Bloed, Bodem, Eer en Trouw (Blood, Soil, Honour and Loyalty), was created in 2004 after splitting from the international network (Blood and Honour). The group rose to public prominence in September 2006, after 17 members (including 11 soldiers) were arrested under the December 2003 anti-terrorist laws and laws against racism, antisemitism and supporters of censorship. According to Justice Minister Laurette Onkelinx and Interior Minister Patrick Dewael, the suspects (11 of whom were members of the military) were preparing to launch terrorist attacks in order to &quot;destabilize&quot; Belgium. According to the journalist Manuel Abramowicz, of the Resistances, the extremists of the radical right have always had as its aim to &quot;infiltrate the state mechanisms,&quot; including the army in the 1970s and the 1980s, through Westland New Post and the Front de la Jeunesse.

A police operation, which mobilized 150 agents, searched five military barracks (in Leopoldsburg near the Dutch border, Kleine-Brogel, Peer, Brussels (Royal military school) and Zedelgem) as well as 18 private addresses in Flanders. They found weapons, munitions, explosives and a homemade bomb large enough to make &quot;a car explode&quot;. The leading suspect, B.T., was organizing the trafficking of weapons and was developing international links, in particular with the Dutch far-right movement De Nationale Alliantie.

==== Bosnia and Herzegovina ====
The neo-Nazi white nationalist organization Bosanski Pokret Nacionalnog Ponosa (Bosnian Movement of National Pride) was founded in Bosnia and Herzegovina in July 2009. Its model is the Waffen-SS Handschar Division, which was composed of Bosniak volunteers. It proclaimed its main enemies to be &quot;Jews, Roma, Serbian Chetniks, the Croatian separatists, Josip Broz Tito, Communists, homosexuals and blacks&quot;. Its ideology is a mixture of Bosnian nationalism, National Socialism and white nationalism. It says &quot;Ideologies that are not welcome in Bosnia are: Zionism, Islamism, communism, capitalism. The only ideology good for us is Bosnian nationalism because it secures national prosperity and social justice...&quot; The group is led by a person nicknamed Sauberzwig, after the commander of the 13th SS Handschar. The group&#x27;s strongest area of operations is in the Tuzla area of Bosnia.

==== Bulgaria ====
The primary neo-Nazi political party to receive attention in post-WWII Bulgaria is the Bulgarian National Union – New Democracy.

On 13 February of every year since 2003, Bulgarian neo-Nazis and like-minded far-right nationalists gather at Sofia to honor Hristo Lukov, a late World War II general known for his antisemitic and pro-Nazi stance. From 2003 to 2019, the annual event was hosted by Bulgarian National Union.

==== Croatia ====

Neo-Nazis in Croatia base their ideology on the writings of Ante Pavelić and the Ustaše, a fascist anti-Yugoslav separatist movement. The Ustaše regime committed a genocide against Serbs, Jews and Roma. At the end of World War II, many Ustaše members fled to the West, where they found sanctuary and continued their political and terrorist activities (which were tolerated due to Cold War hostilities).

In 1999, Zagreb&#x27;s Square of the Victims of Fascism was renamed &quot;Croatian Nobles Square&quot;, provoking widespread criticism of Croatia&#x27;s attitude towards the Holocaust. In 2000, the Zagreb City Council again renamed the square into &quot;Square of the Victims of Fascism&quot;. Many streets in Croatia were renamed after the prominent Ustaše figure Mile Budak, which provoked outrage amongst the Serbian minority. Since 2002, there has been a reversal of this development, and streets with the name of Mile Budak or other persons connected with the Ustaše movement are few or non-existent. A plaque in Slunj with the inscription &quot;Croatian Knight Jure Francetić&quot; was erected to commemorate Francetić, the notorious Ustaše leader of the Black Legion. The plaque remained there for four years, until it was removed by the authorities.

In 2003, Croatian penal code was amended with provisions prohibiting the public display of Nazi symbols, the propagation of Nazi ideology, historical revisionism and holocaust denial but the amendments were annulled in 2004 since they were not enacted in accordance with a constitutionally prescribed procedure. Nevertheless, since 2006 Croatian penal code explicitly prohibits any type of hate crime based on race, color, gender, sexual orientation, religion or national origin.

There have been instances of hate speech in Croatia, such as the use of the phrase (&quot;[Hang] Serbs on the willow trees!&quot;). In 2004, an Orthodox church was spray-painted with pro-Ustaše graffiti. During some protests in Croatia, supporters of Ante Gotovina and other at the time suspected war criminals (all acquitted in 2012) have carried nationalist symbols and pictures of Pavelić. On 17 May 2007, a concert in Zagreb by Thompson, a popular Croatian singer, was attended by 60,000 people, some of them wearing Ustaše uniforms. Some gave Ustaše salutes and shouted the Ustaše slogan &quot;Za dom spremni&quot; (&quot;For the homeland – ready!&quot;). This event prompted the Simon Wiesenthal Center to publicly issue a protest to the Croatian president. Cases of displaying Ustashe memorabilia have been recorded at the Bleiburg commemoration held annually in Austria.

==== Czech Republic ====

The government of the Czech Republic strictly punishes neo-Nazism (Czech: &quot;Neonacismus&quot;). According to a report by the Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic, neo-Nazis committed more than 211 crimes in 2013. The Czech Republic has various neo-Nazi groups. One of them is the group Wotan Jugend, based in Germany.

==== Denmark ====
The National Socialist Movement of Denmark was formed in 1991, and was formally a neo-Nazi party, that would actively promote the Nazi ideology in Denmark. The party did not gain any political influence, and were regarded as a failed political project by neo-Nazi expert Frede Farmand. Long time party leader Johnni Hansen was replaced by Esben Rohde Kristensen in 2010, which resulted in a large amount of party members leaving the party. While the party never has been formally dissolved, there has been very little activity from its core member since 2010. Former neo-Nazi Daniel Carlsen formed the small national party Party of the Danes in 2011, which officially rejected Nazism, but were none the less categorized as such by professor in politics Peter Nedergaard. It was dissolved in 2017 after its founder Daniel Stockholm announced retirement from politics.

==== Estonia ====
In 2006, Roman Ilin, a Jewish theatre director from St. Petersburg, Russia, was attacked by neo-Nazis when returning from a tunnel after a rehearsal. Ilin subsequently accused Estonian police of indifference after filing the incident. When a dark-skinned French student was attacked in Tartu, the head of an association of foreign students claimed that the attack was characteristic of a wave of neo-Nazi violence. An Estonian police official, however, stated that there were only a few cases involving foreign students over the previous two years. In November 2006, the Estonian government passed a law banning the display of Nazi symbols.

The 2008 United Nations Human Rights Council Special Rapporteur&#x27;s Report noted that community representatives and non-governmental organizations devoted to human rights had pointed out that neo-Nazi groups were active in Estonia—particularly in Tartu—and had perpetrated acts of violence against non-European minorities.

The neo-Nazi terrorist organization Feuerkrieg Division was found and operates in the country, with some members of the Conservative People&#x27;s Party of Estonia having been linked to the Feuerkrieg Division.

====Finland====

In Finland, neo-Nazism is often connected to the 1930s and 1940s fascist and pro-Nazi Patriotic People&#x27;s Movement (IKL), its youth movement Blues-and-Blacks and its predecessor Lapua Movement. Post-war fascist groups such as Patriotic People&#x27;s Movement (1993), Patriotic Popular Front, Patriotic National Movement, Blue-and-Black Movement and many others consciously copy the style of the movement and look up to its leaders as inspiration. A Finns Party councillor and police officer in Seinäjoki caused small scandal wearing the fascist blue-and-black uniform.

During the Cold War, all partied deemed fascist were banned according to the Paris Peace Treaties and all former fascist activists had to find new political homes. Despite Finlandization, many continued in public life. Three former members of the Waffen SS served as ministers; the Finnish SS Battalion officers Sulo Suorttanen (Centre Party) and Pekka Malinen (People&#x27;s Party) as well as Mikko Laaksonen (Social Democrat), a soldier in the Finnish SS-Company, formed of pro-Nazi defectors. Neo-Nazi activism was limited to small illegal groups like the clandestine Nazi occultist group led by Pekka Siitoin who made headlines after arson and bombing of the printing houses of the Communist Party of Finland. His associates also sent letter bombs to leftists, including to the headquarters of the Finnish Democratic Youth League. Another group called the &quot;New Patriotic People&#x27;s Movement&quot; bombed the left-wing &quot;Kansan Uutiset&quot; newspaper and the embassy of communist Bulgaria. Member of the Nordic Realm Party Seppo Seluska was convicted of the torture and murder of a gay Jewish person.

The skinhead culture gained momentum during the late 1980s and peaked during the late 1990s. In 1991, Finland received a number of Somali immigrants who became the main target of Finnish skinhead violence in the following years, including four attacks using explosives and a racist murder. Asylum seeker centres were attacked, in Joensuu skinheads would force their way into an asylum seeker centre and start shooting with shotguns. At worst Somalis were assaulted by 50 skinheads at the same time.

The most prominent neo-Nazi group is the Nordic Resistance Movement, which is tied to multiple murders, attempted murders and assaults of political enemies was found in 2006 and proscribed in 2019. The second biggest Finnish party, the Finns Party politicians have frequently supported far-right and neo-Nazi movements such as the Finnish Defense League, Soldiers of Odin, Nordic Resistance Movement, Rajat Kiinni (Close the Borders), and Suomi Ensin (Finland First). In the 1990s and 2000s, before the breakthrough of the Finns Party, a few neo-Nazi candidates enjoyed success, like Janne Kujala of Finland - Fatherland (founded as Aryan Germanic Brotherhood) and Jouni Lanamäki who was previously associated with the Nordic Reich Party. Pekka Siitoin of the National Democracy Party was the fifth most popular candidate in Naantali city council elections.

The NRM, Finns party and other far-right nationalist parties organize an annual torch march demonstration in Helsinki in memory of the Finnish SS-battalion on the Finnish independence day which ends at the Hietaniemi cemetery where members visit the tomb of Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim and the monument to the Finnish SS Battalion. The event is protested by antifascists, leading to counterdemonstrators being violently assaulted by NRM members who act as security. The demonstration attracts close to 3,000 participants according to the estimates of the police and hundreds of officers patrol Helsinki to prevent violent clashes.

==== France ====
In France, the most enthusiastic collaborationists during the German occupation of France had been the National Popular Rally of Marcel Déat (former SFIO members) and the French Popular Party of Jacques Doriot (former French Communist Party members). These two groups, like the Germans, saw themselves as combining ultra-nationalism and socialism. In the south there existed the vassal state of Vichy France under the military &quot;Hero of the Verdun&quot;, Marshal Philippe Pétain whose emphasised an authoritarian Catholic conservative politics. Following the liberation of France and the creation of the Fourth French Republic, collaborators were prosecuted during the and nearly 800 put to death for treason under Charles de Gaulle.

In the aftermath of the Second World War, the main concern of the French radical right was the collapse of the French Empire, in particular the Algerian War, which led to the creation of the OAS. Outside of this, individual fascistic activists such as Maurice Bardèche (brother-in-law of Robert Brasillach), as well as SS-veterans Saint-Loup and René Binet, were active in France and involved in the European Social Movement and later the New European Order, alongside similar groups from across Europe. Early neo-fascist groups included Jeune Nation, which introduced the Celtic cross into use by radical right groups (an association which would spread internationally). A &quot;neither East, nor West&quot; pan-Europeanism was most popular among French fascistic activists until the late 1960s, partly motivated by feelings of national vulnerability following the collapse of their empire; thus the Belgian SS-veteran Jean-François Thiriart&#x27;s group Jeune Europe also had a considerable French contingent.

It was the 1960s, during the Fifth French Republic, that a considerable upturn in French neo-fascism occurred; some of it in response to the Protests of 1968. The most explicitly pro-Nazi of these was the FANE of Mark Fredriksen. Neo-fascist groups included Pierre Sidos&#x27; Occident, the Ordre Nouveau (which was banned after violent clashes with the Trotskyist LCR) and the student-based Groupe Union Défense. A number of these activists such as François Duprat were instrumental in founding the Front National under Jean-Marie Le Pen; but the FN also included a broader selection from the French hard-right, including not only these neo-fascist elements, but also Catholic integrists, monarchists, Algerian War veterans, Poujadists and national-conservatives. Others from these neo-fascist micro-groups formed the Parti des forces nouvelles working against Le Pen.

Within the FN itself, Duprat founded the FANE-backed Groupes nationalistes révolutionnaires faction, until his 1978 assassination. The subsequent history of the French hard right has been the conflict between the national-conservative controlled FN and &quot;national revolutionary&quot; (fascistic and National Bolshevik) splinter or opposition groups. The latter include groups in the tradition of Thiriart and Duprat, such as the Parti communautaire national-européen, Troisième voie, the Nouvelle Résistance of Christian Bouchet, Unité Radicale and most recently Bloc identitaire. Direct splits from the FN include the 1987 founded FANE-revival Parti nationaliste français et européen, which was disbanded in 2000. Neo-Nazi organizations are outlawed in the Fifth French Republic, yet a significant number of them still exist.

==== Germany ====
Following the failure of the National Democratic Party of Germany in the election of 1969, small groups committed to the revival of Nazi ideology began to emerge in Germany. The NPD splintered, giving rise to paramilitary &quot;Wehrsportgruppe&quot;. These groups attempted to organize under a national umbrella organization, the Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists. Neo-Nazi movements in East Germany began as a rebellion against the Communist regime; the banning of Nazi symbols helped neo-Nazism to develop as an anti-authoritarian youth movement. Mail order networks developed to send illegal Nazi-themed music cassettes and merchandise to Germany.

Turks in Germany have been victims of neo-Nazi violence on several occasions. In 1992, two young girls were killed in the Mölln arson attack along with their grandmother; nine others were injured. In 1993, five Turks were killed in the Solingen arson attack. In response to the fire Turkish youth in Solingen rioted chanting &quot;Nazis out!&quot; and &quot;We want Nazi blood&quot;. In other parts of Germany police had to intervene to protect skinheads from assault. The Hoyerswerda riots and Rostock-Lichtenhagen riots targeting migrants and ethnic minorities living in Germany also took place during the 1990s.

Between 2000 and 2007, eight Turkish immigrants, one Greek German and a German policewoman were murdered by the neo-Nazi National Socialist Underground. The NSU has its roots in the former East German area of Thuringia, which &quot;The Guardian&quot; identified as &quot;one of the heartlands of Germany&#x27;s radical right&quot;. The German intelligence services have been criticized for extravagant distributions of cash to informants within the far-right movement. Tino Brandt publicly boasted on television that he had received around €100,000 in funding from the German state. Though Brandt did not give the state &quot;useful information&quot;, the funding supported recruitment efforts in Thuringia during the early 1990s. (Brandt was eventually sentenced to five and a half years in prison on for 66 counts of child prostitution and child sexual abuse).

Police were only able to locate the killers when they were tipped off following a botched bank robbery in Eisenach. As the police closed in on them, the two men committed suicide. They had evaded capture for 13 years. Beate Zschäpe, who had been living with the two men in Zwickau, turned herself in to the German authorities a few days later. Zschäpe&#x27;s trial began in May 2013; she was charged with nine counts of murder. She pleaded &quot;not guilty&quot;. According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, the NSU may have enjoyed protection and support from certain &quot;elements of the state&quot;. Anders Behring Breivik, a fan of Zschäpe&#x27;s, reportedly sent her a letter from prison in 2012.

According to the annual report of Germany&#x27;s interior intelligence service (Verfassungsschutz) for 2012, at the time there were 26,000 right-wing extremists living in Germany, including 6,000 neo-Nazis. In January 2020, Combat 18 was banned in Germany, and raids directed against the organization were made across the country. In March 2020, United German Peoples and Tribes, which is part of Reichsbürger, a neo-Nazi movement that rejects the German state as a legal entity, was raided by the German police. Holocaust denial is a crime, according to the German Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch § 86a) and § 130 (public incitement).

==== Greece ====
The far-right political party Golden Dawn (Χρυσή Αυγή – Chrysi Avyi) is generally labelled neo-Nazi, although the group rejects this label. A few Golden Dawn members participated in the Bosnian War in the Greek Volunteer Guard (GVG) and were present in Srebrenica during the Srebrenica massacre. The party has its roots in Papadopoulos&#x27; regime.

There is often collaboration between the state and neo-Nazi elements in Greece. In 2018, during the trial of sixty-nine members of the Golden Dawn party, evidence was presented of the close ties between the party and the Hellenic Police.

Golden Dawn has spoken out in favour of the Assad regime in Syria, and the Strasserist group Black Lily have claimed to have sent mercenaries to Syria to fight alongside the Syrian regime, specifically mentioning their participation in the Battle of al-Qusayr. In the 6 May 2012 legislative election, Golden Dawn received 6.97% of the votes, entering the Greek parliament for the first time with 21 representatives, but when the elected parties were unable to form a coalition government a second election was held in June 2012. Golden Dawn received 6.92% of the votes in the June election and entered the Greek parliament with 18 representatives.

Since 2008, neo-Nazi violence in Greece has targeted immigrants, leftists and anarchist activists. In 2009, certain far-right groups announced that Agios Panteleimonas in Athens was off limits to immigrants. Neo-Nazi patrols affiliated with the Golden Dawn party began attacking migrants in this neighborhood. The violence continued escalating through 2010. In 2013, after the murder of anti-fascist rapper Pavlos Fyssas, the number of hate crimes in Greece declined for several years until 2017. Many of the crimes in 2017 have been attributed to other groups like the Crypteia Organisation and Combat 18 Hellas.

==== Hungary ====

In Hungary, the historical political party which allied itself ideologically with German National Socialism and drew inspiration from it, was the Arrow Cross Party of Ferenc Szálasi. They referred to themselves explicitly as National Socialists and within Hungarian politics this tendency is known as Hungarism. After the Second World War, exiles such as Árpád Henney kept the Hungarist tradition alive. Following the fall of the Hungarian People&#x27;s Republic in 1989, which was a Marxist–Leninist state and a member of the Warsaw Pact, many new parties emerged. Amongst these was the Hungarian National Front of István Győrkös, which was a Hungarist party and considered itself the heirs of Arrow Cross-style National Socialism (a self-description they explicitly embraced). In the 2000s, Győrkös&#x27; movement moved closer to a national bolshevist and neo-Eurasian position, aligned with Aleksandr Dugin, cooperating with the Hungarian Workers&#x27; Party. Some Hungarists opposed this and founded the Pax Hungarica Movement.

In modern Hungary, the ultranationalist Jobbik is regarded by some scholars as a neo-Nazi party; for example, it has been termed as such by Randolph L. Braham. The party denies being neo-Nazi, although &quot;there is extensive proof that the leading members of the party made no effort to hide their racism and anti-Semitism.&quot; Rudolf Paksa, a scholar of the Hungarian far-right, describes Jobbik as &quot;anti-Semitic, racist, homophobic and chauvinistic&quot; but not as neo-Nazi because it does not pursue the establishment of a totalitarian regime. Historian Krisztián Ungváry writes that &quot;It is safe to say that certain messages of Jobbik can be called open neo-Nazi propaganda. However, it is quite certain that the popularity of the party is not due to these statements.&quot;

==== Italy ====

During the 1950s, the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement moved closer to bourgeois conservative politics on the domestic front, which led to radical youths founding hardline splinter groups, such as Pino Rauti&#x27;s Ordine Nuovo (later succeeded by Ordine Nero) and Stefano Delle Chiaie&#x27;s Avanguardia Nazionale. These organisations were influenced by the esotericism of Julius Evola and considered the Waffen-SS and Romanian leader Corneliu Zelea Codreanu a reference, moving beyond Italian fascism. They were implicated in paramiliary attacks during the late 1960s to the early 1980s, such as the Piazza Fontana bombing. Delle Chiaie had even assisted Junio Valerio Borghese in a failed 1970 coup attempt known as the Golpe Borghese, which attempted to reinstate a fascist state in Italy.

====Ireland====
The National Socialist Irish Workers Party, a small party, was active between 1968 and the late 1980s, producing neo-Nazi propaganda pamphlets and sending threatening messages to Jews and Black people living in Ireland.

==== Netherlands ====
Noteworthy neo-Nazi movements and parties in the Netherlands include the National European Social Movement (NESB), the Dutch People&#x27;s Union (NVU), the National Alliance (NA), and the Nationalist People&#x27;s Movement (NVB). Individuals of note have included &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; volunteer and NESB founder Paul van Tienen, war-time collaborator and NESB co-founder Jan Wolthuis, former NVU member , the &quot;Black Widow&quot; Florentine Rost van Tonningen, former NVU leader Joop Glimmerveen, CP/CP&#x27;86 member and NVB leader , former CP/CP&#x27;86 member and NA leader , former NVU member and &quot;Hitler-lookalike&quot; , former CP&#x27;86 member and current NVU leader Constant Kusters, and former NVU member and NA leader .

Both the General Intelligence and Security Service and non-governmental initiatives such as the far-left anti-fascist research group Kafka research neo-Nazism and other forms of political extremism and have attested to the local presence of international movements such as Blood &amp; Honour, Combat 18, the Racial Volunteer Force, and The Base, and expressed concern at the online dissemination of alt-right and far-right accelerationist thought in the Netherlands.

==== Poland ====
Under the Polish Constitution promoting any totalitarian system such as Nazism, fascism, or communism, as well as inciting violence and/or racial hatred is illegal. This was further re-enforced in the Polish Penal Code where discrediting any group or persons on national, religious, or racial grounds carries a sentence of 3 years.

Although several small far-right and anti-semitic organisations exist, most notably NOP and ONR (both of which exist legally), they frequently adhere to Polish nationalism and National Democracy, in which Nazism is generally considered to be against ultra-nationalist principles, and although they are classed as nationalist and fascist movements, they are at the same time considered anti-Nazi. Some of their elements may resemble neo-Nazi features, but these groups frequently dissociate themselves from Nazi elements, claiming that such acts are unpatriotic and they argue that Nazism misappropriated or slightly altered several pre-existing symbols and features, such as distinguishing the Roman salute from the Nazi salute.

Self-declared neo-Nazi movements in Poland frequently treat Polish culture and traditions with contempt, are anti-Christian and translate various texts from German, meaning they are considered movements favouring Germanisation.

According to several reporter investigations, the Polish government turns a blind eye to these groups, and they are free to spread their ideology, frequently dismissing their existence as conspiracy theories, dismissing acts political provocations, deeming them too insignificant to pose a threat, or attempting to justify or diminish the seriousness of their actions.

==== Russia ====

Some observers have noted a subjective irony of Russians embracing Nazism, because one of Hitler&#x27;s ambitions at the start of World War II was the Generalplan Ost (Master Plan East) which envisaged to exterminate, expel, or enslave most or all Slavs from central and eastern Europe (e.g., Russians, Ukrainians, Poles etc.). At the end of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, over 25 million Soviet citizens had died.

The first reports of neo-Nazi organizations in the USSR appeared in the second half of the 1950s. In some cases, the participants were attracted primarily by the aesthetics of Nazism (rituals, parades, uniforms, the cult of physical fitness, architecture). Other organizations were more interested in the ideology of the Nazis, their program, and the image of Adolf Hitler. The formation of neo-Nazism in the USSR dates back to the turn of the 1960s and 1970s; during this period, these organizations still preferred to operate underground.

Modern Russian neo-paganism took shape in the second half of the 1970s and is associated with the activities of supporters of antisemitism, especially the Moscow Arabist Valery Yemelyanov (also known as &quot;Velemir&quot;) and the former dissident and neo-Nazi activist Alexey Dobrovolsky (also known as &quot;Dobroslav&quot;).

In Soviet times, the founder of the movement of Peterburgian Vedism (a branch of Slavic neopaganism) Viktor Bezverkhy (Ostromysl) revered Hitler and Heinrich Himmler and propagated racial and antisemitic theories in a narrow circle of his students, calling for the deliverance of mankind from &quot;inferior offspring&quot;, allegedly arising from interracial marriages. He called such &quot;inferior people&quot; &quot;bastards&quot;, referred to them as &quot;Zhyds, Indians or gypsies and mulattoes&quot; and believed that they prevent society from achieving social justice.

The first public manifestations of neo-Nazis in Russia took place in 1981 in Kurgan, and then in Yuzhnouralsk, Nizhny Tagil, Sverdlovsk, and Leningrad.

In 1982, on Hitler&#x27;s birthday, a group of Moscow high school students held a Nazi demonstration on Pushkinskaya Square.

Russian National Unity (RNE) was a Neo-Nazi group founded in 1990 and was led by Alexander Barkashov, who claimed to have members in 250 cities. RNE adopted the swastika as its symbol, and sees itself as the avant-garde of a coming national revolution. It is critical of other major far-right organizations, such as the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR). As of 1997, the members RNE were called Soratnik (comrades in arms), receive combat training at locations near Moscow, and many of them work as security officers or armed guards. RNE was banned in 1999 by Moscow&#x27;s court in 1999, after which the group faded away.

In 2007, it was claimed that Russian neo-Nazis accounted for &quot;half of the world&#x27;s total&quot;.

On 15 August 2007, Russian authorities arrested a student for allegedly posting a video on the Internet which appears to show two migrant workers being beheaded in front of a red and black swastika flag. Alexander Verkhovsky, the head of a Moscow-based center that monitors hate crime in Russia, said, &quot;It looks like this is the real thing. The killing is genuine ... There are similar videos from the Chechen war. But this is the first time the killing appears to have been done intentionally.&quot;

Atomwaffen Division Russland is a neo-Nazi terrorist group in Russia found by Russian officials to have been tied to multiple mass murder plots. AWDR was founded by former members of defunct National Socialist Society responsible for 27 murders and AWDR is connected to local chapter of the Order of Nine Angles responsible for rapes, ritual murders and drug trafficking. The Russian authorities raided an Atomwaffen compound in Ulan-Ude and uncovered illegal weapons and explosives.

==== Serbia ====
An example of neo-Nazism in Serbia is the group Nacionalni stroj. In 2006 charges were brought against 18 leading members. Besides political parties, there are a few militant neo-Nazi organizations in Serbia, such as Blood &amp; Honour Serbia and Combat 18.

==== Slovakia ====

The Slovak political party Kotlebists – People&#x27;s Party Our Slovakia, which is represented in the National Council and European Parliament, is widely characterized as neo-Nazi. Kotleba has softened its image over time and now disputes that is fascist or neo-Nazi, even suing a media outlet that described it as neo-Nazi. As of 2020, the party spokesperson was Ondrej Durica, a former member of the neo-Nazi band (White Resistance). 2020 candidate Andrej Medvecky was convicted of attacking a black man while shouting racial slurs; another candidate, Anton Grňo, was fined for making a fascist salute. The party still celebrates 14 March, the anniversary of the founding of the fascist first Slovak Republic. In 2020, party leader Marian Kotleba was facing trial for writing checks for 1,488 euros, alleged to be a reference to Fourteen Words and Heil Hitler.

==== Spain ====

Spanish neo-Nazism is often connected to the country&#x27;s Francoist and Falangist past, and nurtured by the ideology of the National Catholicism.

According to a study by the newspaper &quot;ABC&quot;, black people are the ones who have suffered the most attacks by neo-Nazi groups, followed by Maghrebis and Latin Americans. They have also caused deaths in the anti-fascist group, such as the murder of the Madrid-born sixteen-year-old Carlos Palomino on 11 November 2007, stabbed with a knife by a soldier in the Legazpi metro station (Madrid).

There have been other neo-Nazi cultural organizations such as the Spanish Circle of Friends of Europe (CEDADE) and the Circle of Indo-European Studies (CEI).

The extreme right has little electoral support, with the presence of these groups of 0.36% (if the Plataforma per Catalunya (PxC) party is excluded with 66007 votes (0.39%), according to the voting data of the European elections of 2014. The first extreme right party FE de las JONS obtains 0.13% of the votes (21 577 votes), after doubling its results after the crisis; this is followed by the far-right party La España en Marcha (LEM) with 0.1% of the votes, National Democracy (DN) of the far-right with 0.08%, Republican Social Movement (MSR) (far-right) with 0.05% of the votes.

==== Sweden ====
Neo-Nazi activities in Sweden have previously been limited to white supremacist groups, few of which have a membership over a few hundred members. The main neo-Nazi organization is the Nordic Resistance Movement, a political movement which engages in martial arts training and paramilitary exercises and which has been called a terrorist group. They are also active in Norway and Denmark; the branch in Finland was banned in 2019.

==== Switzerland ====

The neo-Nazi and white power skinhead scene in Switzerland has seen significant growth in the 1990s and 2000s. It is reflected in the foundation of the Partei National Orientierter Schweizer in 2000, which resulted in an improved organizational structure of the neo-Nazi and white supremacist scene.

==== Ukraine ====
Neo-Nazism in Ukraine, like other far-right political organizations and people adhering to neo-Nazi ideology, has no political power. Since the mid-2000s, the number and severity of hate crimes in Ukraine have been decreasing. The far-right in Ukraine has failed to create stable structures, they have been on the periphery since 1991, when Ukraine became independent, are not represented in parliament and do not have significant influence on the authorities. Right-wing radical parties rarely received more than 3% of the vote and received only a few seats in single-member districts. Never has an ultra-right presidential candidate received more than 5%.

Far-right radicals, including neo-Nazis by their own admission, participated in the conflict with Russia, which escalated into a war. They played a role in the first months of the conflict in the spring and summer of 2014, but their role is often overestimated. Members of far-right (including neo-Nazi) groups played an important role on the pro-Russian side, arguably more so than on the Ukrainian side. Members and former members of the National Bolshevik Party, Russian National Unity (RNU), Eurasian Youth Union, and Cossack groups participated in recruitment of the separatists. A former RNU member, Pavel Gubarev, was founder of the Donbas People&#x27;s Militia and first &quot;governor&quot; of the Donetsk People&#x27;s Republic. RNU is particularly linked to the Russian Orthodox Army, one of a number of separatist units described as &quot;pro-Tsarist&quot; and &quot;extremist&quot; Orthodox nationalists. &#x27;Rusich&#x27; is part of the Wagner Group, a Russian mercenary group in Ukraine which has been linked to far-right extremism.

By the end of 2014, the pro-Russian far-right groups became less important in Donbas and the need for Russian radical nationalists started to disappear. However, in the Russian-controlled DPR and LPR, the authorities have taken a right-conservative direction and use xenophobia in their ideology and messages.

&quot;Ukrainian Nazis&quot; became the central theme of Russian propaganda during the war with Ukraine. On February 24, 2022, the Russian online press and blogs launched an unprecedented campaign to justify the Russian invasion by creating a false picture of Ukraine as overrun by far-right extremists. Justifying Russian crimes in Bucha by accusing Ukrainians of Nazism helps Russians overcome emerging internal contradictions.

==== United Kingdom ====
In 1962, the British neo-Nazi activist Colin Jordan formed the National Socialist Movement (NSM) which later became the British Movement (BM) in 1968.

John Tyndall, a long-term neo-Nazi activist in the UK, led a break-away from the National Front to form an openly neo-Nazi party named the British National Party. In the 1990s, the party formed a group for protecting its meetings named Combat 18, which later grew too violent for the party to control and began to attack members of the BNP who were not perceived as supportive of neo-Nazism. Under the subsequent leadership of Nick Griffin, the BNP distanced itself from neo-Nazism, although many members (including Griffin himself) have been accused of links to other neo-Nazi groups.

Sonnenkrieg Division is a neo-Nazi terrorist organization in the United Kingdom, linked to international Atomwaffen Division network. Multiple members have been jailed for plotting terror attacks against minorities. Sonnenkrieg Division has been proscribed as a terrorist organization in United Kingdom and Australia. Sonnenkrieg Division is also closely tied with the Order of Nine Angles linked to the Murders of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman.

The UK has also been a source of neo-Nazi music, such as the band Skrewdriver.

=== Asia ===
==== Iran ====
Several neo-Nazi groups were active in Iran, although they are now defunct. Advocates of Nazism continue to exist in Iran and are mainly based on the Internet.

==== Israel ====

Neo-Nazi activity is not common or widespread in Israel, and the few reported activities have all been the work of extremists, who were punished severely. One notable case is that of Patrol 36, a cell in Petah Tikva made up of eight teenage immigrants from the former Soviet Union who had been attacking foreign workers and gay people, and vandalizing synagogues with Nazi images. These neo-Nazis were reported to have operated in cities across Israel, and have been described as being influenced by the rise of neo-Nazism in Europe; mostly influenced by similar movements in Russia and Ukraine, as the rise of the phenomenon is widely credited to immigrants from those two states, the largest sources of emigration to Israel. Widely publicized arrests have led to a call to reform the Law of Return to permit the revocation of Israeli citizenship for—and the subsequent deportation of—neo-Nazis.

==== Japan ====
Since 1982, the neo-Nazi National Socialist Japanese Workers&#x27; Party has operated in Japan, currently under the leadership of Kazunari Yamada, who has praised Hitler and denied the Holocaust.

==== Mongolia ====

From 2008, Mongolian neo-Nazi groups have defaced buildings in Ulaanbaatar, smashed Chinese shopkeepers&#x27; windows, and killed Chinese immigrants. The neo-Nazi Mongols&#x27; targets for violence are Chinese, Koreans, Mongol women who have sex with Chinese men, and LGBT people. They wear Nazi uniforms and revere the Mongol Empire and Genghis Khan. Though Tsagaan Khass leaders say they do not support violence, they are self-proclaimed Nazis. &quot;Adolf Hitler was someone we respect. He taught us how to preserve national identity,&quot; said the 41-year-old co-founder, who calls himself Big Brother. &quot;We don&#x27;t agree with his extremism and starting the Second World War. We are against all those killings, but we support his ideology. We support nationalism rather than fascism.&quot; Some have ascribed it to poor historical education.

==== Taiwan ====

The National Socialism Association (NSA) is a neo-Nazi political organisation founded in Taiwan in September 2006 by Hsu Na-chi (), at that time a 22-year-old female political science graduate of Soochow University. The NSA has an explicit stated goal of obtaining the power to govern the state. The Simon Wiesenthal Centre condemned the National Socialism Association on 13 March 2007 for championing the former Nazi dictator and blaming democracy for social unrest in Taiwan.

==== Turkey ====

A neo-Nazi group existed in 1969 in İzmir, when a group of former Republican Villagers Nation Party members (precursor party of the Nationalist Movement Party) founded the association &quot;Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf&quot; (&quot;National Activity and Vigorous Development&quot;). The club maintained two combat units. The members wore SA uniforms and used the Hitler salute. One of the leaders (Gündüz Kapancıoğlu) was re-admitted to the Nationalist Movement Party in 1975.

Apart from neo-fascist Grey Wolves and the Turkish ultranationalist Nationalist Movement Party, there are some neo-Nazi organizations in Turkey such as the Turkish Nazi Party or the National Socialist Party of Turkey, which are mainly based on the Internet.

National Front Party (Ulusal Cephe Partisi) adheres to neo-Nazism, spreads Nazi material translated into Turkish and targets Jews, Arabs and Africans. National Front Party has about 1000 members and is affiliated with the racist Victory Party (Turkey).

The neo-Nazi Ataman Brotherhood (Ataman Kardeşliği) patrols streets in Turkey and attacks Syrian and Afghan refugees.

=== Americas ===
==== Brazil ====

Several Brazilian neo-Nazi gangs appeared in the 1990s in Southern and Southeastern Brazil, regions with mostly white people, with their acts gaining more media coverage and public notoriety in the 2010s. Some members of Brazilian neo-Nazi groups have been associated with football hooliganism. Their targets have included African, South American and Asian immigrants; Jews, Muslims, Catholics and atheists; Afro-Brazilians and internal migrants with origins in the northern regions of Brazil (who are mostly brown-skinned or Afro-Brazilian); homeless people, prostitutes; recreational drug users; feminists and—more frequently reported in the media—gay people, bisexuals, and transgender and third-gender people. News of their attacks has played a role in debates about anti-discrimination laws in Brazil (including to some extent hate speech laws) and the issues of sexual orientation and gender identity.

==== Canada ====
Neo-Nazism in Canada began with the formation of the Canadian Nazi Party in 1965. In the 1970s and 1980s, neo-Nazism continued to spread in the country as organizations including the Western Guard Party and Church of the Creator (later renamed &quot;Creativity&quot;) promoted white supremacist ideals. Founded in the United States in 1973, Creativity calls for white people to wage racial holy war (Rahowa) against Jews and other perceived enemies.

Don Andrews founded the Nationalist Party of Canada in 1977. The purported goals of the unregistered party are &quot;the promotion and maintenance of European Heritage and Culture in Canada,&quot; but the party is known for anti-Semitism and racism. Many influential neo-Nazi Leaders, such as Wolfgang Droege, were affiliated with the party, but many of its members left to join the Heritage Front, which was founded in 1989.

Droege founded the Heritage Front in Toronto at a time when leaders of the white supremacist movement were &quot;disgruntled about the state of the radical right&quot; and wanted to unite unorganized groups of white supremacists into an influential and efficient group with common objectives. Plans for the organization began in September 1989, and the formation of the Heritage Front was formally announced a couple of months later in November. In the 1990s, George Burdi of Resistance Records and the band Rahowa popularized the Creativity movement and the white power music scene.

On September 18, 2020, Toronto Police arrested 34-year-old Guilherme &quot;William&quot; Von Neutegem and charged him with the murder of Mohamed-Aslim Zafis. Zafis was the caretaker of a local mosque who was found dead with his throat cut. The Toronto Police Service said the killing is possibly connected to the stabbing murder of Rampreet Singh a few days prior a short distance from the spot where Zafis&#x27; murder took place. Von Neutegem is a member of the Order of Nine Angles and social media accounts established as belonging to him promote the group and included recordings of Von Neutegem performing satanic chants. In his home there was also an altar with the symbol of the O9A adorning a monolith. According to Evan Balgord of the Canadian Anti-Hate Network, they are aware of more O9A members in Canada and their affiliated organization Northern Order. Northern Order is a proscribed neo-Nazi terrorist organization in Canada. NO members have been arrested for trafficking explosives and firearms, and NO has active members of the Canadian Armed Forces as its members and even a member of the CJIRU was identified as a member.

Controversy and dissention has left many Canadian neo-Nazi organizations dissolved or weakened.

==== Chile ====
After the dissolution of the National Socialist Movement of Chile (MNSCH) in 1938, notable former members of MNSCH migrated into Partido Agrario Laborista (PAL), obtaining high positions. Not all former MNSCH members joined the PAL; some continued to form parties that followed the MNSCH model until 1952. A new old-school Nazi party was formed in 1964 by school teacher Franz Pfeiffer. Among the activities of this group were the organization of a &quot;Miss Nazi&quot; beauty contest and the formation of a Chilean branch of the Ku Klux Klan. The party disbanded in 1970. Pfeiffer attempted to restart it in 1983 in the wake of a wave of protests against the Augusto Pinochet regime.

Nicolás Palacios considered the &quot;Chilean race&quot; to be a mix of two bellicose master races: the Visigoths of Spain and the Mapuche (Araucanians) of Chile. Palacios traces the origins of the Spanish component of the &quot;Chilean race&quot; to the coast of the Baltic Sea, specifically to Götaland in Sweden, one of the supposed homelands of the Goths. Palacios claimed that both the blonde-haired and the bronze-coloured Chilean Mestizo share a &quot;moral physonomy&quot; and a masculine psychology. He opposed immigration from Southern Europe, and argued that Mestizos who are derived from south Europeans lack &quot;cerebral control&quot; and are a social burden.

==== Costa Rica ====
Several fringe neo-Nazi groups have existed in Costa Rica, some with online presence since around 2003. The groups normally target Jewish Costa Ricans, Afro-Costa Ricans, Communists, gay people and especially Nicaraguan and Colombian immigrants. In 2012 the media discovered the existence of a neo-Nazi police officer inside the Public Force of Costa Rica, for which he was fired and would later commit suicide in April 2016 due to lack of job opportunities and threats from anti-fascists.

In 2015, the Simon Wiesenthal Center asked the Costa Rican government to shut down a store in San José that sells Nazi paraphernalia, Holocaust denial books and other products associated with Nazism.

In 2018, a series of pages on the social network Facebook of neo-Nazi inclination openly or discreetly carried out a vast campaign instigating xenophobic hatred by recycling old news or posting fake news to take advantage of an anti-immigrant sentiment after three homicides of tourists allegedly committed by migrants (although from one of the homicides the suspect is Costa Rican). A rally against the country&#x27;s migration policy was held on 19 August 2018, in which neo-Nazi and hooligans took part. Although not all participants were linked these groups and the majority of participants were peaceful, the protest turned violent and the Public Force intervened with 44 arrested (36 Costa Ricans and the rest Nicaraguans). Authorities confiscated sharp weapons, Molotov cocktails and other items from the neo-Nazis, who also carried swastika flags. A subsequent anti-xenophobic march and solidarity with the Nicaraguan refugees was organized a week later with more assistance. A second anti-migration demonstration, with the explicit exclusion of neo-Nazis and hooligans, was carried out in September with similar assistance. In 2019 Facebook pages of extreme right-wing tendencies and anti-immigration position as &quot;Deputy 58&quot;, &quot;Costa Rican Resistance&quot; and &quot;Salvation Costa Rica&quot; called an anti-government demonstration on 1 May with small attendance.

====Peru====
Peru has been home to a handful of neo-Nazi groups, most notably the National Socialist Movement &quot;Peru Awake&quot;, the National Socialist Tercios of New Castile, and the Peruvian National Socialist Union.

====United States====

Statistics

In 2017, following the Charlottesville car attack, an ABC News/Washington Post poll found out that 9% of all Americans supported the neo-Nazi ideology, which back then amounted to some 22 million Americans.

Ideology

The ideology of James H. Madole, leader of the National Renaissance Party, was influenced by Blavatskian Theosophy. Helena Blavatsky developed a racial theory of evolution, holding that the white race was the &quot;fifth rootrace&quot; called the Aryan Race. According to Blavatsky, Aryans had been preceded by Atlanteans who had perished in the flood that sunk the continent Atlantis. The three races that preceded the Atlanteans, in Blavatsky&#x27;s view, were proto-humans; these were the Lemurians, Hyperboreans and the first Astral rootrace. It was on this foundation that Madole based his claims that the Aryan Race has been worshiped as &quot;White Gods&quot; since time immemorial and proposed a governance structure based on the Hindu Laws of Manu and its hierarchical caste system.

Organizations and individuals

There are several neo-Nazi groups in the United States. The National Socialist Movement (NSM), with about 400 members in 32 states, is currently the largest neo-Nazi organization in the US. After World War II, new organizations formed with varying degrees of support for Nazi principles. The National States&#x27; Rights Party, founded in 1958 by Edward Reed Fields and J. B. Stoner, countered racial integration in the Southern United States with Nazi-inspired publications and iconography. The American Nazi Party, founded by George Lincoln Rockwell in 1959, achieved high-profile coverage in the press through its public demonstrations.

The Institute for Historical Review, formed in 1978, is a Holocaust denial body associated with neo-Nazism.

In 2022, famous rapper Kanye West stated that he identifies as a Nazi, denying the Holocaust and praising the policies of Adolf Hitler.

In 2025, businessman Elon Musk&#x27;s comments and remarks linked his relations with antisemitism conspiracy theories were criticized by international governments and several media outlets over the years.

Between freedom of speech and national security threats

The First Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, which the courts have interpreted very broadly to include hate speech, severely limiting the government&#x27;s authority to suppress it. This allows political organizations great latitude in expressing Nazi, racist, and antisemitic views. A landmark First Amendment case was &quot;National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie&quot;, in which neo-Nazis threatened to march in a predominantly Jewish suburb of Chicago. The march never took place in Skokie, but the court ruling allowed the neo-Nazis to stage a series of demonstrations in Chicago.

Organizations which report upon neo-Nazi activities in the U.S., which may involve attacking and harassing minorities, include the American organizations Anti-Defamation League and the Southern Poverty Law Center.

In 2020, the FBI reclassified neo-Nazis to the same threat level as ISIS. Chris Wray, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, stated &quot;Not only is the terror threat diverse, it&#x27;s unrelenting.&quot;

==== Uruguay ====
In 1998, a group of people belonging to the &quot;Joseph Goebbels Movement&quot; tried to burn down a synagogue, which also served as a Hebrew school, in the Pocitos neighborhood of Montevideo in Uruguay; an antisemitic pamphlet signed by the group was found in the building after the quick action of firefighters saved it. Another group, the racist and antisemitic neo-Nazi group, founded in 1996, said when they were interviewed by the newspaper &quot;La República de Montevideo&quot; that they had no involvement with the attack on the synagogue, but revealed that they maintain contacts with a group called (&quot;White Power&quot;), also Uruguayan, as well as with neo-Nazi groups from Argentina and several European countries. Through the Internet they have received the solidarity of the &quot;Patria&quot; pro-fascist group, based in Spain. They also said that in the city of Canelones, Uruguay, fifty kilometers from Montevideo, there is a clandestine &quot;Aryan church&quot; which uses rituals taken from the Ku Klux Klan. The declared that they did not tolerate interracial or gay couples. One of the militants said in the interview that &quot;... if we see a black man with a white woman, we break them up ...&quot;. Other neo-Nazi incidents in Uruguay in 1998 included the bombing of a Jewish-owned small business in February, which injured two people, and the appearance of posters celebrating the anniversary of Hitler&#x27;s birthday in April.

=== Africa ===
==== South Africa ====
Several groups in South Africa, such as and Blanke Bevrydingsbeweging, have often been described as neo-Nazi.
Eugène Terre&#x27;Blanche was a prominent South African neo-Nazi leader who was murdered in 2010.

=== Oceania ===

There were a number of now-defunct Australian neo-Nazi groups, such as the Australian National Socialist Party (ANSP), which was formed in 1962 and merged into the National Socialist Party of Australia (1968–1970s), originally a splinter group, in 1968, and Jack van Tongeren&#x27;s Australian Nationalist Movement.

The National Socialist Network (NSN) is an Australian neo-Nazi political organisation formed from two far-right organisations, the Lads Society and the Antipodean Resistance, in 2020.

White supremacist organisations active in Australia as of 2016 included local chapters of the Aryan Nations. Blair Cottrell, former leader of the United Patriots Front, has tried to distance himself from neo-Nazism, but he has nevertheless been accused of expressing &quot;pro-Nazi views&quot;. Australian Security Intelligence Organisation director Mike Burgess said in February 2020 that neo-Nazis pose a &quot;real threat&quot; to Australia&#x27;s security. Burgess maintained that there is a growing threat from the extreme right, and that its supporters &quot;regularly meet to salute Nazi flags, inspect weapons, train in combat and share their hateful ideology&quot;. In June 2022, the Australian state Victoria banned display of the swastika symbol. Under the new law, individuals who intentionally exhibit the symbol may face up to a year in jail or a A$22,000 (£12,300; $15,000) fine. The state of Victoria already has laws against hate speech, but they have been criticized for having weaknesses. The call for reform of these laws grew stronger in 2020 when a couple flew a swastika flag over their home, causing outrage in the community.&quot;

In New Zealand, historical neo-Nazi organisations include Unit 88 and the National Socialist Party of New Zealand. White nationalist organisations such as the New Zealand National Front and Action Zealandia have faced accusations of neo-Nazism.

== See also ==
* &quot;The Believer&quot;2001 film by Henry Bean
* &quot;The Daily Stormer&quot;US neo-Nazi commentary &amp; message board
* 
* 
* White separatismApartheid-type ideology
* List of neo-Nazi bands
* List of neo-Nazi organizations
* List of white nationalist organizations
== References ==
Informational notes
Citations
Bibliography

::Primary sources
* &quot;&quot; by Francis Parker Yockey (using the pen name Ulick Varange, 1947, )
* &quot;The Lightning and the Sun&quot; by Savitri Devi, (1958 (written 1948–56); )
* &quot;White Power&quot; by George Lincoln Rockwell (1967; John McLaughlin, 1996, )
* &quot;This Time The World&quot; by George Lincoln Rockwell (1961; Liberty Bell Publications, 2004, )
* &quot;National Socialism: Vanguard of the Future, Selected Writings of Colin Jordan&quot; ()
* &quot;Merrie England – 2000&quot; by Colin Jordan
* &quot;The Turner Diaries&quot; by William Pierce (under the pseudonym Andrew Macdonald), novel (1978, ) .
* &quot;Siege: The Collected Writings of James Mason&quot; edited and introduced by Michael M. Jenkins (Storm Books, 1992) or introduced by Ryan Schuster (Black Sun Publications, )
* &quot;Hunter&quot; by William Pierce (under the pseudonym Andrew Macdonald), novel (National Vanguard Books, 1984, )
* &quot;Faith of the Future&quot; by Matt Koehl (New Order; Rev edition, 1995, )
* &quot;Serpent&#x27;s Walk&quot; by Randolph D. Calverhall (pseudonym), novel (National Vanguard Books, 1991, )
* &quot;The Nexus&quot; periodical edited by Kerry Bolton
* &quot;Deceived, Damned &amp; Defiant – The Revolutionary Writings of David Lane&quot; by David Lane, foreword by Ron McVan, preface by Katja Lane (Fourteen Word Press, 1999, )
* &quot;Resistance Magazine&quot; published by National Vanguard Books

::Academic surveys
* &quot;The Beast Reawakens&quot; by Martin A. Lee, (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 1997, )
* &quot;Fascism&quot; (Oxford Readers) by Roger Griffin (1995, )
* &quot;Beyond Eagle and Swastika: German nationalism since 1945&quot; by Kurt P. Tauber (Wesleyan University Press; [1st ed.] edition, 1967)
* &quot;Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890&quot; edited by Philip Rees, (1991, )
* &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Priestess: Savitri Devi, the Hindu-Aryan Myth, and Neo-Nazism&quot; by Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke (1998, and )
* &quot;Dreamer of the Day: Francis Parker Yockey and the Postwar Fascist International&quot; by Kevin Coogan, (Autonomedia, Brooklyn, NY 1998, )
* &quot;Hate: George Lincoln Rockwell and the American Nazi Party&quot; by William H. Schmaltz (Potomac Books, 2000, )
* &quot;American Fuehrer: George Lincoln Rockwell and the American Nazi Party&quot; by Frederick J. Simonelli (University of Illinois Press, 1999, )
* &quot;Fascism in Britain: A History, 1918–1985&quot; by Richard C. Thurlow (Olympic Marketing Corp, 1987, )
* &quot;Fascism Today: A World Survey&quot; by Angelo Del Boca and Mario Giovana (Pantheon Books, 1st American edition, 1969)
* &quot;Germany&#x27;s New Nazis&quot; by the Anglo-Jewish Association (Jewish Chronicle Publications, 1951)
* &quot;The New Germany and the Old Nazis&quot; by Tete Harens Tetens (Random House, 1961)
* &quot;Swastika and the Eagle: Neo-Nazism in America Today&quot; by Clifford L Linedecker (A &amp; W Pub, 1982, )
* &quot;The Silent Brotherhood: Inside America&#x27;s Racist Underground&quot; by Kevin Flynn and Gary Gerhardt (Signet Book; Reprint edition, 1995, )
* &quot;&quot;White Power, White Pride!&quot;: The White Separatist Movement in the United States&quot; by Betty A. Dobratz with Stephanie L. Shanks-Meile (hardcover, Twayne Publishers, 1997, ); a.k.a. &quot;The White Separatist Movement in the United States: White Power White Pride&quot; (paperback, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 2000, )
* &quot;Encyclopedia of White Power: A Sourcebook on the Radical Racist Right&quot; by Jeffrey Kaplan (Rowman &amp; Littlefield Pub Inc, 2000, )
* &quot;Blood in the Face: The Ku Klux Klan, Aryan Nations, Nazi Skinheads, and the Rise of a New White Culture&quot; by James Ridgeway (Thunder&#x27;s Mouth Press; 2nd edition, 1995, )
* &quot;A Hundred Little Hitlers: The Death of a Black Man, the Trial of a White Racist, and the Rise of the Neo-Nazi Movement in America&quot; by Elinor Langer (Metropolitan Books, 2003, )
* &quot;The Racist Mind: Portraits of American Neo-Nazis and Klansmen&quot; by Raphael S. Ezekiel (Penguin (Non-Classics); Reprint edition, 1996, )
* &quot;Black Sun: Aryan Cults, Esoteric Nazism and the Politics of Identity&quot; by Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke (2001, )
* &quot;Free to Hate: The Rise of the Right in Post-Communist Eastern Europe&quot; by Paul Hockenos (Routledge; Reprint edition, 1994, )
* &quot;The Dark Side of Europe: The Extreme Right Today&quot; by Geoff Harris, (Edinburgh University Press; New edition, 1994, )
* &quot;The Far Right in Western and Eastern Europe&quot; by Luciano Cheles, Ronnie Ferguson, and Michalina Vaughan (Longman Publishing Group; 2nd edition, 1995, )
* &quot;The Radical Right in Western Europe: A Comparative Analysis&quot; by Herbert Kitschelt (University of Michigan Press; Reprint edition, 1997, )
* &quot;Shadows Over Europe: The Development and Impact of the Extreme Right in Western Europe&quot; edited by Martin Schain, Aristide Zolberg, and Patrick Hossay (Palgrave Macmillan; 1st edition, 2002, )
* &quot;The Fame of a Dead Man&#x27;s Deeds: An Up-Close Portrait of White Nationalist William Pierce&quot; by Robert S. Griffin (Authorhouse, 2001, )
* &quot;Nation and Race: The Developing Euro-American Racist Subculture&quot; by Jeffrey Kaplan, Tore Bjorgo (Northeastern University Press, 1998, )
* &quot;Gods of the Blood: The Pagan Revival and White Separatism&quot; by Mattias Gardell (Duke University Press, 2003, )
* &quot;The Nazi conception of law (Oxford pamphlets on world affairs)&quot; by J. Walter Jones, Clarendon (1939)
* 


== External links ==
* Neo-Nazism at Jewish Virtual Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="0" end="10" title="Neo-Nazism" label="Neo-Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="30" end="42" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="119" end="132" title="Nazism" label="Nazi ideology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="188" end="204" title="Supremacism#Racial" label="racial supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="212" end="227" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="276" end="288" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="293" end="305" title="Islamophobia" label="Islamophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="338" end="351" title="fascist state" label="fascist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="529" end="545" title="ultranationalism" label="ultranationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="547" end="553" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="555" end="565" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192251" start="567" end="574" title="ableism" label="ableism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="576" end="586" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="588" end="602" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702157" start="625" end="637" title="Fourth Reich" label="Fourth Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="645" end="661" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079999" start="722" end="734" title="Nazi symbolism" label="Nazi symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="762" end="774" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234541" start="930" end="988" title="Bans on Nazi symbols" label="Nazi-related symbols are banned in many European countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q325632" start="1001" end="1008" title="Strafgesetzbuch section 86a" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1103" end="1115" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1190" end="1196" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="1358" end="1374" title="ultranationalism" label="ultranationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1376" end="1390" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192251" start="1400" end="1407" title="ableism" label="ableism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="1409" end="1419" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="1421" end="1431" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="1433" end="1445" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702157" start="1468" end="1480" title="Fourth Reich" label="Fourth Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="1482" end="1498" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079999" start="1547" end="1559" title="Nazi symbolism" label="Nazi symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1578" end="1590" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="1639" end="1657" title="far-right politics" label="far-right politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="1786" end="1790" title="Race (human categorization)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="1825" end="1834" title="Darwinian" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="1856" end="1873" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="1896" end="1907" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q676455" start="2000" end="2014" title="Miguel Serrano" label="Miguel Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="2019" end="2031" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="2092" end="2119" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="2260" end="2271" title="Hyperborean" label="Hyperborean"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="2289" end="2295" title="Aryan race" label="Aryans"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="2489" end="2497" title="Demiurge" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="2566" end="2576" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="2646" end="2662" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="2743" end="2753" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="2758" end="2766" title="Tantrism" label="Tantrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160394" start="2796" end="2805" title="Ahnenerbe" label="Ahnenerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q570012" start="2981" end="2995" title="blood and soil" label="blood and soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216279" start="3059" end="3071" title="deep ecology" label="deep ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073374" start="3077" end="3093" title="organic movement" label="organic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764967" start="3098" end="3118" title="animal protectionism" label="animal protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510591" start="3158" end="3168" title="ecofascism" label="ecofascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60145" start="3225" end="3246" title="Richard Walther Darré" label="Richard Walther Darré"/>
<link wikidata="Q748256" start="3259" end="3281" title="Reichsminister of Food" label="Reichsminister of Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3383" end="3395" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="3499" end="3544" title="Nazi Party" label="National Socialist German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="3557" end="3571" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="3606" end="3622" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3632" end="3644" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931561" start="3753" end="3801" title="Conspiracy theories about Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s death" label="Conspiracy theories emerged about Hitler himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="3886" end="3908" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="4016" end="4030" title="denazification" label="denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="4046" end="4062" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q695222" start="4371" end="4397" title="West German federal election, 1949" label="1949 West German elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q102456" start="4433" end="4446" title="Fritz Rössler" label="Fritz Rössler"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="4467" end="4488" title="national conservative" label="national conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q584965" start="4495" end="4516" title="Deutsche Rechtspartei" label="Deutsche Rechtspartei"/>
<link wikidata="Q708012" start="4606" end="4627" title="Socialist Reich Party" label="Socialist Reich Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57504" start="4640" end="4656" title="Otto Ernst Remer" label="Otto Ernst Remer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4678" end="4686" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="4750" end="4757" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4874" end="4886" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="4992" end="5001" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="5048" end="5065" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57131" start="5164" end="5181" title="Hans-Ulrich Rudel" label="Hans-Ulrich Rudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="5260" end="5272" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q270337" start="5390" end="5402" title="Savitri Devi" label="Savitri Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002560" start="5427" end="5442" title="Esoteric Nazism" label="Esoteric Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5500" end="5510" title="Pilgrimage (book)" label="Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5550" end="5561" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747327" start="5579" end="5604" title="The Lightning and the Sun" label="The Lightning and the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="5682" end="5688" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q156652" start="5752" end="5759" title="Thule Society" label="Thulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="5846" end="5854" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="5863" end="5889" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="5924" end="5926" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65032" start="5928" end="5940" title="Wilhelm Adam" label="Wilhelm Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49758" start="5954" end="5990" title="National Democratic Party of Germany (East Germany)" label="National Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="6209" end="6222" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152564" start="6458" end="6479" title="Völkischer Beobachter" label="Völkischer Beobachter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568240" start="6568" end="6580" title="Landig Group" label="Vienna Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565683" start="6597" end="6617" title="Nazism and occultism" label="Nazism and occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q69264" start="6630" end="6639" title="Black Sun (occult symbol)" label="Black Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6731" end="6739" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q76640" start="6886" end="6899" title="Otto Strasser" label="Otto Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078734" start="6962" end="6973" title="Black Front" label="Black Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201866" start="7026" end="7045" title="German Social Union (West Germany)" label="German Social Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q701333" start="7086" end="7097" title="Strasserite" label="Strasserite"/>
<link wikidata="Q703256" start="7237" end="7241" title="HIAG" label="HIAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q662518" start="7246" end="7258" title="Stille Hilfe" label="Stille Hilfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="7299" end="7308" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q708725" start="7578" end="7585" title="CDU/CSU" label="CDU/CSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="7632" end="7655" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="7784" end="7807" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="7939" end="7954" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="8035" end="8047" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q816308" start="8055" end="8067" title="Belzec trial" label="Belzec trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q510395" start="8069" end="8095" title="Frankfurt Auschwitz trials" label="Frankfurt Auschwitz trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q830819" start="8097" end="8113" title="Treblinka trials" label="Treblinka trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q15898594" start="8115" end="8129" title="Chełmno trials" label="Chełmno trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q151220" start="8139" end="8152" title="Sobibór trial" label="Sobibór trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="8473" end="8485" title="Pan-European identity" label="pan-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="8553" end="8571" title="German nationalism" label="German nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="8676" end="8697" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="8721" end="8734" title="anti-American" label="anti-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q784671" start="8755" end="8779" title="pan-European nationalism" label="pan-European nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="8794" end="8817" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="8822" end="8843" title="American conservative" label="American conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088491" start="9010" end="9035" title="European Liberation Front" label="European Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q571627" start="9114" end="9132" title="National Bolshevik" label="National Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303490" start="9139" end="9157" title="Red–green–brown alliance" label="red-brown alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="9166" end="9182" title="American culture" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186229" start="9231" end="9253" title="Jean-François Thiriart" label="Jean-François Thiriart"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="9279" end="9295" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="9311" end="9329" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="9339" end="9351" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="9359" end="9375" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="9507" end="9519" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9554" end="9557" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978019" start="9680" end="9706" title="National Renaissance Party (United States)" label="National Renaissance Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008744" start="9718" end="9733" title="James H. Madole" label="James H. Madole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628342" start="9735" end="9752" title="H. Keith Thompson" label="H. Keith Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360344" start="9757" end="9772" title="Eustace Mullins" label="Eustace Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="9778" end="9788" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="9798" end="9811" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975413" start="9815" end="9827" title="Willis Carto" label="Willis Carto"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="9895" end="9909" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="9919" end="9937" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="10174" end="10193" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="10243" end="10245" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="10421" end="10431" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="10583" end="10600" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="10655" end="10665" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399160" start="10670" end="10691" title="William Luther Pierce" label="William Luther Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q733930" start="10699" end="10716" title="National Alliance (United States)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053757" start="10823" end="10857" title="World Union of National Socialists" label="World Union of National Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="10886" end="10898" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012087" start="10914" end="10941" title="National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962)" label="National Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053757" start="10962" end="10982" title="Cotswold Declaration" label="Cotswold Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086469" start="11007" end="11021" title="Françoise Dior" label="Françoise Dior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749419" start="11075" end="11087" title="John Tyndall (politician)" label="John Tyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641860" start="11255" end="11263" title="62 Group" label="62 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="11359" end="11373" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786365" start="11522" end="11531" title="This Week (Thames Television TV series)" label="This Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954364" start="11556" end="11571" title="World in Action" label="World in Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246080" start="11716" end="11730" title="Matthias Koehl" label="Matthias Koehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="11858" end="11867" title="New Order (Neo-Nazi group)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="11873" end="11892" title="Franco&amp;#x27;s Spain" label="Franco&amp;#x27;s Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q89383" start="11927" end="11940" title="Otto Skorzeny" label="Otto Skorzeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q158844" start="11942" end="11955" title="Léon Degrelle" label="Léon Degrelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q77088" start="11971" end="11983" title="Klaus Barbie" label="Klaus Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023309" start="12007" end="12013" title="CEDADE" label="CEDADE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="12131" end="12140" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294082" start="12188" end="12203" title="Mark Fredriksen" label="Mark Fredriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906749" start="12217" end="12233" title="Salvador Borrego" label="Salvador Borrego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="12265" end="12288" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664761" start="12313" end="12325" title="Ordine Nuovo" label="Ordine Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q790144" start="12330" end="12351" title="Avanguardia Nazionale" label="Avanguardia Nazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850939" start="12375" end="12388" title="Years of Lead (Italy)" label="Years of Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751335" start="12426" end="12438" title="Franco Freda" label="Franco Freda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873489" start="12455" end="12466" title="Nazi-Maoism" label="Nazi-Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156019" start="12569" end="12605" title="National Democratic Party of Germany" label="National Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q877074" start="12633" end="12658" title="National Democratic Party (Austria, 1967–88)" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="12822" end="12838" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="12855" end="12871" title="the Holocaust" label="six million Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="13296" end="13308" title="Historical revisionism" label="revisionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q158629" start="13410" end="13422" title="David Irving" label="David Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q60811" start="13486" end="13498" title="Ernst Zündel" label="Ernst Zündel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123216" start="13723" end="13750" title="Did Six Million Really Die?" label="Did Six Million Really Die?"/>
<link wikidata="Q896663" start="13767" end="13782" title="Richard Verrall" label="Richard Verrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129040" start="13793" end="13826" title="The Hoax of the Twentieth Century" label="The Hoax of the Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q523174" start="13843" end="13854" title="Arthur Butz" label="Arthur Butz"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="14015" end="14027" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702477" start="14035" end="14048" title="Bert Eriksson" label="Bert Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215244" start="14127" end="14136" title="Diksmuide" label="Diksmuide"/>
<link wikidata="Q822870" start="14220" end="14228" title="NSDAP/AO (1972)" label="NSDAP/AO"/>
<link wikidata="Q314858" start="14235" end="14245" title="Gary Lauck" label="Gary Lauck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614688" start="14397" end="14435" title="National Socialist Movement of Denmark" label="National Socialist Movement of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235907" start="14439" end="14456" title="Povl Riis-Knudsen" label="Povl Riis-Knudsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q69753" start="14628" end="14642" title="Michael Kühnen" label="Michael Kühnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101963" start="14644" end="14659" title="Christian Worch" label="Christian Worch"/>
<link wikidata="Q109833" start="14661" end="14679" title="Bela Ewald Althans" label="Bela Ewald Althans"/>
<link wikidata="Q89472" start="14684" end="14700" title="Gottfried Küssel" label="Gottfried Küssel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160201" start="14721" end="14727" title="Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists" label="ANS/NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q702157" start="14777" end="14789" title="Fourth Reich" label="Fourth Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="14864" end="14868" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="14911" end="14922" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q168700" start="14928" end="14942" title="Spandau Prison" label="Spandau Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q485417" start="15112" end="15121" title="skinheads" label="skinheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q166571" start="15246" end="15262" title="British Movement" label="British Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832744" start="15269" end="15287" title="Michael McLaughlin (activist)" label="Michael McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="15302" end="15314" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q828181" start="15379" end="15401" title="Rock Against Communism" label="Rock Against Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q405492" start="15441" end="15444" title="Socialist Workers Party (UK)" label="SWP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543997" start="15452" end="15471" title="Rock Against Racism" label="Rock Against Racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q913786" start="15535" end="15546" title="Skrewdriver" label="Skrewdriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q185468" start="15555" end="15575" title="Ian Stuart Donaldson" label="Ian Stuart Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339848" start="15604" end="15615" title="Nicky Crane" label="Nicky Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q607100" start="15653" end="15671" title="Blood &amp;amp; Honour" label="Blood &amp;amp; Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660366" start="15727" end="15743" title="Harold Covington" label="Harold Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q937662" start="15780" end="15789" title="Combat 18" label="Combat 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="15814" end="15831" title="football hooligan" label="football hooligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452151" start="15850" end="15869" title="Chelsea Headhunters" label="Chelsea Headhunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573857" start="15955" end="15966" title="Hammerskins" label="Hammerskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113455" start="16008" end="16019" title="Tom Metzger" label="Tom Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781344" start="16027" end="16049" title="White Aryan Resistance" label="White Aryan Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q909098" start="16114" end="16128" title="Romper Stomper" label="Romper Stomper"/>
<link wikidata="Q208572" start="16152" end="16170" title="American History X" label="American History X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625151" start="16219" end="16243" title="white power skinheads" label="neo-Nazism and skinheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q676455" start="16341" end="16355" title="Miguel Serrano" label="Miguel Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="16378" end="16387" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q63117" start="16389" end="16398" title="Otto Rahn" label="Otto Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568240" start="16400" end="16414" title="Wilhelm Landig" label="Wilhelm Landig"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="16416" end="16428" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q270337" start="16433" end="16445" title="Savitri Devi" label="Savitri Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q672306" start="16535" end="16571" title="National Socialist Movement of Chile" label="National Socialist Movement of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="16781" end="16797" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="16946" end="16956" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="16986" end="16998" title="Bodhisattvas" label="Bodhisattvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="17035" end="17043" title="Demiurge" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="17080" end="17091" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="17120" end="17130" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333051" start="17252" end="17264" title="Genetic memory (psychology)" label="blood-memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="17446" end="17457" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="17466" end="17494" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136718" start="17627" end="17637" title="revanchism" label="revanchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="17732" end="17735" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048676" start="17787" end="17793" title="Pamyat" label="Pamyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="17974" end="17991" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="18010" end="18025" title="Jewish question" label="Jewish question"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485133" start="18027" end="18043" title="Soviet Anti-Zionism" label="Soviet Zionology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401018" start="18151" end="18173" title="Russian National Unity" label="Russian National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630546" start="18198" end="18217" title="Alexander Barkashov" label="Alexander Barkashov"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="18295" end="18303" title="Swastika" label="Swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972834" start="18330" end="18349" title="Russia for Russians" label="Russia for Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626571" start="18418" end="18442" title="Supreme Soviet of Russia" label="Supreme Soviet of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="18451" end="18464" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862099" start="18476" end="18510" title="1993 Russian constitutional crisis" label="1993 Russian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813795" start="18652" end="18658" title="Remembrance day of the Latvian legionnaires" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211090" start="18660" end="18667" title="20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Estonian)" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188099" start="18672" end="18679" title="14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Galician)" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="18749" end="18755" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q388698" start="18816" end="18827" title="Atlanticist" label="Atlanticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="19135" end="19146" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="19185" end="19206" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="19336" end="19342" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468394" start="19377" end="19398" title="Foreign fighters in the Bosnian War" label="called for volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q882551" start="19420" end="19451" title="Free German Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Free German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q724729" start="19500" end="19514" title="Jacques Doriot" label="Jacques Doriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="19581" end="19586" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q295537" start="19653" end="19667" title="Eduard Limonov" label="Eduard Limonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q321022" start="19675" end="19699" title="National Bolshevik Party" label="National Bolshevik Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="19704" end="19715" title="Golden Dawn (political party)" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148739" start="19735" end="19756" title="Greek Volunteer Guard" label="Greek Volunteer Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q571627" start="19782" end="19801" title="National Bolshevism" label="National Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="19922" end="19935" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="20111" end="20122" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="20489" end="20501" title="neo-fascists" label="neo-fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909427" start="20506" end="20519" title="post-fascists" label="post-fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="20598" end="20604" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="20621" end="20628" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="20634" end="20642" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="20654" end="20664" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="20680" end="20687" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="20689" end="20699" title="Hungarists" label="Hungarists"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="20704" end="20714" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Horthyists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260" start="20865" end="20878" title="Kurt Waldheim" label="Kurt Waldheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q650112" start="20973" end="21020" title="National Socialist German Students&amp;#x27; League" label="National Socialist German Students&amp;#x27; League"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="21157" end="21196" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q541010" start="21324" end="21345" title="World Jewish Congress" label="World Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q44517" start="21413" end="21426" title="Bruno Kreisky" label="Bruno Kreisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348786" start="21521" end="21537" title="Victor Ostrovsky" label="Victor Ostrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="21554" end="21560" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="21737" end="21756" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131692" start="21858" end="21882" title="Freedom Party of Austria" label="Freedom Party of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44274" start="22037" end="22048" title="Jörg Haider" label="Jörg Haider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="22112" end="22118" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q697325" start="22168" end="22190" title="Austrian legislative election, 1994" label="1994 Austrian election"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="22265" end="22274" title="Carinthia (state)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213692" start="22406" end="22420" title="Walter Laqueur" label="Walter Laqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="22525" end="22538" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="22633" end="22647" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q78531" start="22893" end="22904" title="Karl Lueger" label="Karl Lueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="22921" end="22932" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q653833" start="23035" end="23069" title="Alliance for Austria&amp;#x27;s Future" label="Alliance for Austria&amp;#x27;s Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q112165" start="23122" end="23140" title="Barbara Rosenkranz" label="Barbara Rosenkranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q623584" start="23180" end="23221" title="2010 Austrian presidential election" label="Austria&amp;#x27;s 2010 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q112631" start="23313" end="23329" title="Horst Rosenkranz" label="Horst Rosenkranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124290240" start="23575" end="23618" title="Hosank" label="Armenian-Aryan Racialist Political Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="23655" end="23662" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85743247" start="23700" end="23708" title="Aryanism" label="Aryanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906852" start="23795" end="23821" title="Bloed, Bodem, Eer en Trouw" label="Bloed, Bodem, Eer en Trouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q607100" start="23925" end="23941" title="Blood and Honour" label="Blood and Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q574759" start="24078" end="24097" title="Anti-terrorism legislation" label="anti-terrorist laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="24123" end="24135" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q448224" start="24196" end="24213" title="Laurette Onkelinx" label="Laurette Onkelinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992" start="24236" end="24250" title="Patrick Dewael" label="Patrick Dewael"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="24386" end="24393" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029497" start="24628" end="24645" title="Westland New Post" label="Westland New Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088460" start="24654" end="24674" title="Front de la Jeunesse (Belgium)" label="Front de la Jeunesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q736120" start="24761" end="24773" title="Leopoldsburg" label="Leopoldsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q736085" start="24812" end="24816" title="Peer, Belgium" label="Peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q184287" start="24855" end="24863" title="Zedelgem" label="Zedelgem"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="24900" end="24908" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001523" start="25177" end="25199" title="National Alliance (Netherlands)" label="De Nationale Alliantie"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="25248" end="25265" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947409" start="25315" end="25349" title="Bosnian Movement of National Pride" label="Bosnian Movement of National Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="25366" end="25388" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="25420" end="25429" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q141482" start="25430" end="25448" title="13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar (1st Croatian)" label="Handschar Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="25472" end="25479" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="25541" end="25545" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="25555" end="25563" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q334731" start="25569" end="25589" title="Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia" label="Croatian separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="25591" end="25606" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="25608" end="25618" title="Communism" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="25636" end="25642" title="black people" label="blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165235" start="25679" end="25698" title="Bosnian nationalism" label="Bosnian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="25700" end="25718" title="Nazism" label="National Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="25723" end="25740" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21409398" start="26247" end="26287" title="Bulgarian National Union – New Democracy" label="Bulgarian National Union – New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="26400" end="26405" title="Sofia, Bulgaria" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654590" start="26415" end="26427" title="Hristo Lukov" label="Hristo Lukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="26613" end="26620" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="26660" end="26672" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="26681" end="26687" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="26691" end="26698" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26764" end="26772" title="Genocides in history (World War I through World War II)#Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="26781" end="26786" title="World War II persecution of Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144567" start="26788" end="26801" title="The Holocaust in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Jews and Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26817" end="26829" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="26930" end="26939" title="terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="26980" end="26988" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12643863" start="27027" end="27059" title="Square of the Victims of Fascism" label="Square of the Victims of Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="27178" end="27187" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631733" start="27202" end="27221" title="Zagreb City Council" label="Zagreb City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q701960" start="27369" end="27379" title="Mile Budak" label="Mile Budak"/>
<link wikidata="Q397733" start="27622" end="27627" title="Slunj" label="Slunj"/>
<link wikidata="Q662552" start="27671" end="27685" title="Jure Francetić" label="Jure Francetić"/>
<link wikidata="Q19705" start="27881" end="27891" title="penal code" label="penal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="28002" end="28024" title="historical revisionism" label="historical revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="28029" end="28045" title="holocaust denial" label="holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="28253" end="28263" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="28273" end="28277" title="race (classification of human beings)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q853516" start="28279" end="28284" title="Human skin color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="28286" end="28292" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="28294" end="28312" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="28373" end="28384" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="28454" end="28460" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376184" start="28488" end="28496" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Croatia" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066608" start="28508" end="28521" title="spray painting" label="spray-painted"/>
<link wikidata="Q297318" start="28595" end="28608" title="Ante Gotovina" label="Ante Gotovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="28641" end="28654" title="war crime" label="war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="28692" end="28703" title="nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15285649" start="28776" end="28784" title="Thompson (band)" label="Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090009" start="28943" end="28957" title="Za dom spremni" label="Za dom spremni"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="29029" end="29052" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="29174" end="29196" title="Bleiburg commemoration" label="Bleiburg commemoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="29272" end="29286" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="29317" end="29322" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781499" start="29379" end="29425" title="Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic" label="Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614688" start="29605" end="29643" title="National Socialist Movement of Denmark" label="National Socialist Movement of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30177" end="30191" title="Daniel Carlsen" label="Daniel Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165560" start="30224" end="30242" title="Party of the Danes" label="Party of the Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602795" start="30415" end="30431" title="Daniel Stockholm" label="Daniel Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="30539" end="30553" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972" start="30773" end="30778" title="Tartu" label="Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079999" start="31114" end="31126" title="Nazi symbolism" label="Nazi symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="31138" end="31173" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056878" start="31492" end="31511" title="Feuerkrieg Division" label="Feuerkrieg Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q794028" start="31576" end="31619" title="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party of Estonia" label="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442516" start="31771" end="31803" title="Patriotic People&amp;#x27;s Movement" label="Patriotic People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405063" start="31830" end="31846" title="Blues-and-Blacks" label="Blues-and-Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412941" start="31867" end="31881" title="Lapua Movement" label="Lapua Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498272" start="31915" end="31954" title="Patriotic People&amp;#x27;s Movement (1993)" label="Patriotic People&amp;#x27;s Movement (1993)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131341143" start="31956" end="31979" title="Patriotic Popular Front" label="Patriotic Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q11865323" start="31981" end="32008" title="For Independence" label="Patriotic National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q107185626" start="32010" end="32033" title="Blue-and-Black Movement" label="Blue-and-Black Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q634277" start="32138" end="32149" title="Finns Party" label="Finns Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="32336" end="32356" title="Paris Peace Treaties" label="Paris Peace Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q823175" start="32431" end="32445" title="Finlandization" label="Finlandization"/>
<link wikidata="Q569477" start="32541" end="32561" title="Finnish SS Battalion" label="Finnish SS Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479092" start="32571" end="32586" title="Sulo Suorttanen" label="Sulo Suorttanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="32588" end="32600" title="Centre Party (Finland)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161089" start="32606" end="32619" title="Pekka Malinen" label="Pekka Malinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628434" start="32621" end="32640" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Finland (1951)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11882738" start="32653" end="32668" title="Mikko Laaksonen" label="Mikko Laaksonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="32670" end="32685" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32705" end="32723" title="Finnish volunteers in the Waffen-SS#Finnish SS-Company" label="Finnish SS-Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q131191671" start="32818" end="32850" title="Turku Society for the Spiritual Sciences" label="clandestine Nazi occultist group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161103" start="32858" end="32871" title="Pekka Siitoin" label="Pekka Siitoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693982" start="32897" end="32914" title="Kursiivi printing house arson" label="arson and bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341419" start="32945" end="32971" title="Communist Party of Finland" label="Communist Party of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q384080" start="32998" end="33009" title="letter bomb" label="letter bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408241" start="33061" end="33092" title="Left Youth (Finland)" label="Finnish Democratic Youth League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192723" start="33195" end="33209" title="Kansan Uutiset" label="Kansan Uutiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169231" start="33279" end="33297" title="Nordic Realm Party" label="Nordic Realm Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q186237" start="33707" end="33714" title="Joensuu" label="Joensuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359231" start="33918" end="33944" title="Nordic Resistance Movement" label="Nordic Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q634277" start="34113" end="34124" title="Finns Party" label="Finns Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895247" start="34477" end="34497" title="Finland - Fatherland" label="Finland - Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q70336747" start="34542" end="34556" title="Jouni Lanamäki" label="Jouni Lanamäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169231" start="34596" end="34614" title="Nordic Reich Party" label="Nordic Reich Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131341055" start="34637" end="34661" title="National Democratic Party (Finland)" label="National Democracy Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q503862" start="34702" end="34710" title="Naantali" label="Naantali"/>
<link wikidata="Q419595" start="34899" end="34923" title="Independence Day (Finland)" label="Finnish independence day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972543" start="34942" end="34961" title="Hietaniemi cemetery" label="Hietaniemi cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="34994" end="35021" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim" label="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="35447" end="35474" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="German occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086907" start="35488" end="35510" title="National Popular Rally" label="National Popular Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q686084" start="35514" end="35525" title="Marcel Déat" label="Marcel Déat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332068" start="35534" end="35538" title="French Section of the Workers&amp;#x27; International" label="SFIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498858" start="35556" end="35576" title="French Popular Party" label="French Popular Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q724729" start="35580" end="35594" title="Jacques Doriot" label="Jacques Doriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="35603" end="35625" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="35722" end="35731" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="35780" end="35792" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="35852" end="35867" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q697829" start="35948" end="35968" title="liberation of France" label="liberation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="35993" end="36015" title="Fourth French Republic" label="Fourth French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="36104" end="36121" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="36235" end="36248" title="French colonial empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="36268" end="36280" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q918356" start="36315" end="36318" title="Organisation armée secrète" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548547" start="36376" end="36392" title="Maurice Bardèche" label="Maurice Bardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488" start="36412" end="36429" title="Robert Brasillach" label="Robert Brasillach"/>
<link wikidata="Q871235" start="36455" end="36465" title="Marc Augier" label="Saint-Loup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425860" start="36470" end="36480" title="René Binet (neo-Fascist)" label="René Binet"/>
<link wikidata="Q821818" start="36524" end="36548" title="European Social Movement" label="European Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345134" start="36563" end="36581" title="New European Order" label="New European Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178006" start="36662" end="36674" title="Jeune Nation" label="Jeune Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q229788" start="36697" end="36709" title="Celtic cross" label="Celtic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q186229" start="37044" end="37066" title="Jean-François Thiriart" label="Jean-François Thiriart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317762" start="37080" end="37092" title="Jeune Europe" label="Jeune Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="37166" end="37187" title="Fifth French Republic" label="Fifth French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q257758" start="37278" end="37294" title="Protests of 1968" label="Protests of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091523" start="37342" end="37346" title="Fédération d&amp;#x27;action nationale et européenne" label="FANE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294082" start="37350" end="37365" title="Mark Fredriksen" label="Mark Fredriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386994" start="37395" end="37407" title="Pierre Sidos" label="Pierre Sidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083781" start="37414" end="37422" title="Occident (movement)" label="Occident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355772" start="37428" end="37441" title="Ordre Nouveau (1960s)" label="Ordre Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q862627" start="37502" end="37505" title="Revolutionary Communist League (France)" label="LCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117938" start="37529" end="37549" title="Groupe Union Défense" label="Groupe Union Défense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084540" start="37587" end="37602" title="François Duprat" label="François Duprat"/>
<link wikidata="Q205150" start="37637" end="37651" title="National Front (France)" label="Front National"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177" start="37658" end="37675" title="Jean-Marie Le Pen" label="Jean-Marie Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q592832" start="37806" end="37825" title="Integrism" label="Catholic integrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q449523" start="37863" end="37873" title="Poujadists" label="Poujadists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366359" start="37956" end="37982" title="Parti des forces nouvelles" label="Parti des forces nouvelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118106" start="38061" end="38099" title="Revolutionary Nationalist Groups" label="Groupes nationalistes révolutionnaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366193" start="38441" end="38478" title="Parti communautaire national-européen" label="Parti communautaire national-européen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359544" start="38480" end="38494" title="Troisième voie" label="Troisième voie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345226" start="38500" end="38519" title="Nouvelle Résistance" label="Nouvelle Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965079" start="38523" end="38540" title="Christian Bouchet" label="Christian Bouchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q579601" start="38542" end="38556" title="Unité Radicale" label="Unité Radicale"/>
<link wikidata="Q868850" start="38575" end="38591" title="Bloc identitaire" label="Bloc identitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366552" start="38657" end="38696" title="Parti nationaliste français et européen" label="Parti nationaliste français et européen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156019" start="38887" end="38923" title="National Democratic Party of Germany" label="National Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q699580" start="38931" end="38947" title="West German federal election, 1969" label="election of 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q160201" start="39188" end="39242" title="Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists" label="Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="39266" end="39278" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030234" start="39393" end="39411" title="anti-authoritarian" label="anti-authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="39492" end="39500" title="Compact Cassette" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q704608" start="39531" end="39547" title="Turks in Germany" label="Turks in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39653" end="39671" title="Mölln arson attack" label="Mölln arson attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q694586" start="39767" end="39788" title="1993 Solingen arson attack" label="Solingen arson attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q485417" start="39976" end="39984" title="skinhead" label="skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q780056" start="40004" end="40021" title="Hoyerswerda riots" label="Hoyerswerda riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q780058" start="40026" end="40052" title="Rostock-Lichtenhagen riots" label="Rostock-Lichtenhagen riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q833796" start="40200" end="40212" title="Greeks in Germany" label="Greek German"/>
<link wikidata="Q29325" start="40268" end="40298" title="National Socialist Underground" label="National Socialist Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="40356" end="40365" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="40379" end="40391" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="40966" end="40984" title="child prostitution" label="child prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="40989" end="41007" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070" start="41117" end="41125" title="Eisenach" label="Eisenach"/>
<link wikidata="Q813212" start="41229" end="41242" title="Beate Zschäpe" label="Beate Zschäpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778" start="41284" end="41291" title="Zwickau" label="Zwickau"/>
<link wikidata="Q44220" start="41610" end="41632" title="Anders Behring Breivik" label="Anders Behring Breivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618804" start="42107" end="42119" title="Reichsbürger movement" label="Reichsbürger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="42223" end="42239" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q325632" start="42291" end="42312" title="Strafgesetzbuch § 86a" label="Strafgesetzbuch § 86a"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42318" end="42343" title="Laws against Holocaust denial#Germany" label="§ 130 (public incitement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q82256" start="42393" end="42404" title="Golden Dawn (Greece)" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="42549" end="42560" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148739" start="42568" end="42589" title="Greek Volunteer Guard" label="Greek Volunteer Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q156053" start="42616" end="42626" title="Srebrenica" label="Srebrenica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42638" end="42657" title="Srebrenica massacre#Greek Volunteers controversy" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657799" start="42935" end="42950" title="Hellenic Police" label="Hellenic Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="42997" end="43009" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Assad regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409360" start="43193" end="43212" title="Battle of al-Qusayr (2013)" label="Battle of al-Qusayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q429958" start="43221" end="43252" title="Greek legislative election, May 2012" label="6 May 2012 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="43420" end="43440" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q751553" start="43443" end="43458" title="Greek legislative election, June 2012" label="second election"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="43559" end="43575" title="Greek parliament" label="Greek parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605924" start="43655" end="43665" title="Immigration to Greece" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="43667" end="43674" title="leftist" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q892559" start="43680" end="43689" title="Anarchism in Greece" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q394004" start="43750" end="43769" title="Agios Panteleimonas, Athens" label="Agios Panteleimonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="43989" end="44001" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925748" start="44009" end="44022" title="Pavlos Fyssas" label="Pavlos Fyssas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="44038" end="44049" title="hate crimes" label="hate crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="44382" end="44399" title="Arrow Cross Party" label="Arrow Cross Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q156473" start="44403" end="44417" title="Ferenc Szálasi" label="Ferenc Szálasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="44537" end="44546" title="Hungarism" label="Hungarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076980" start="44591" end="44603" title="Árpád Henney" label="Árpád Henney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16410" start="44666" end="44698" title="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="44720" end="44736" title="Marxist–Leninist" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="44763" end="44774" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162116" start="44824" end="44848" title="Hungarian National Front" label="Hungarian National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030717" start="44852" end="44866" title="István Győrkös" label="István Győrkös"/>
<link wikidata="Q571627" start="45070" end="45089" title="National bolshevism" label="national bolshevist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324222" start="45094" end="45106" title="neo-Eurasian" label="neo-Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q438839" start="45130" end="45145" title="Aleksandr Dugin" label="Aleksandr Dugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q584730" start="45168" end="45197" title="Hungarian Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Hungarian Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231688" start="45244" end="45266" title="Pax Hungarica Movement" label="Pax Hungarica Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q633442" start="45309" end="45315" title="Jobbik" label="Jobbik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919282" start="45409" end="45427" title="Randolph L. Braham" label="Randolph L. Braham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399815" start="45836" end="45853" title="Krisztián Ungváry" label="Krisztián Ungváry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="46114" end="46137" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q922336" start="46280" end="46290" title="Pino Rauti" label="Pino Rauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664761" start="46298" end="46310" title="Ordine Nuovo" label="Ordine Nuovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355428" start="46331" end="46342" title="Ordine Nero" label="Ordine Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372194" start="46348" end="46368" title="Stefano Delle Chiaie" label="Stefano Delle Chiaie"/>
<link wikidata="Q790144" start="46376" end="46397" title="National Vanguard (Italy)" label="Avanguardia Nazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="46457" end="46469" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="46519" end="46542" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850939" start="46611" end="46630" title="Years of Lead (Italy)" label="paramiliary attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q891865" start="46685" end="46707" title="Piazza Fontana bombing" label="Piazza Fontana bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q728006" start="46740" end="46762" title="Junio Valerio Borghese" label="Junio Valerio Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099135" start="46806" end="46820" title="Golpe Borghese" label="Golpe Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q111943044" start="46898" end="46936" title="National Socialist Irish Workers Party" label="National Socialist Irish Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374452" start="47210" end="47243" title="National European Social Movement" label="National European Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719258" start="47256" end="47281" title="Dutch People&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Dutch People&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001523" start="47293" end="47310" title="National Alliance (Netherlands)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13878730" start="47325" end="47359" title="Nationalist People&amp;#x27;s Movement" label="Nationalist People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154616" start="47450" end="47465" title="Paul van Tienen" label="Paul van Tienen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231086" start="47509" end="47521" title="Jan Wolthuis" label="Jan Wolthuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q445593" start="47571" end="47600" title="Florentine Rost van Tonningen" label="Florentine Rost van Tonningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869432" start="47620" end="47636" title="Joop Glimmerveen" label="Joop Glimmerveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630669" start="47821" end="47837" title="Constant Kusters" label="Constant Kusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866011" start="47887" end="47928" title="General Intelligence and Security Service" label="General Intelligence and Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014984" start="47983" end="48016" title="anti-fascist research group Kafka" label="anti-fascist research group Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738623" start="48186" end="48208" title="Racial Volunteer Force" label="Racial Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q83583812" start="48214" end="48222" title="The Base (hate group)" label="The Base"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48291" end="48316" title="Accelerationism#Far-right accelerationist terrorism" label="far-right accelerationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q961507" start="48373" end="48392" title="Polish Constitution" label="Polish Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="48435" end="48441" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="48443" end="48450" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="48455" end="48464" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029679" start="48564" end="48581" title="Polish Penal Code" label="Polish Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074046" start="48780" end="48783" title="National Revival of Poland" label="NOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969244" start="48788" end="48791" title="National Radical Camp (1993)" label="ONR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210053" start="48849" end="48867" title="Polish nationalism" label="Polish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="48872" end="48890" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="48946" end="48963" title="ultra-nationalism" label="ultra-nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="49009" end="49020" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="49025" end="49032" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841184" start="49390" end="49402" title="Roman salute" label="Roman salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="49412" end="49423" title="Nazi salute" label="Nazi salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="49535" end="49549" title="anti-Christian" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="49639" end="49652" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="49843" end="49862" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="50173" end="50185" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="50194" end="50209" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="50389" end="50422" title="Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union" label="Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400801" start="50488" end="50496" title="Neo-Nazism in Russia" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="50827" end="50839" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="51016" end="51036" title="Slavic Native Faith" label="Russian neo-paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175394" start="51179" end="51196" title="Valery Yemelyanov" label="Valery Yemelyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163615" start="51280" end="51298" title="Alexey Dobrovolsky" label="Alexey Dobrovolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430450" start="51387" end="51406" title="Peterburgian Vedism" label="Peterburgian Vedism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="51488" end="51504" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="51520" end="51526" title="scientific racism" label="racial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390212" start="51531" end="51551" title="racial antisemitism" label="antisemitic theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="51687" end="51707" title="interracial marriage" label="interracial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q393942" start="51801" end="51805" title="Zhyd" label="Zhyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="51831" end="51838" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737" start="51995" end="52001" title="Kurgan" label="Kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q198820" start="52015" end="52027" title="Yuzhnouralsk" label="Yuzhnouralsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q98967" start="52029" end="52041" title="Nizhny Tagil" label="Nizhny Tagil"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="52043" end="52053" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Sverdlovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110313" start="52175" end="52194" title="Pushkinskaya Square" label="Pushkinskaya Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401018" start="52197" end="52219" title="Russian National Unity" label="Russian National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630546" start="52278" end="52297" title="Alexander Barkashov" label="Alexander Barkashov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212115" start="52517" end="52551" title="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia" label="Liberal Democratic Party of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="53209" end="53219" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056878" start="53442" end="53470" title="Atomwaffen Division Russland" label="Atomwaffen Division Russland"/>
<link wikidata="Q977610" start="53633" end="53659" title="National Socialist Society" label="National Socialist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816" start="53871" end="53879" title="Ulan-Ude" label="Ulan-Ude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957275" start="53992" end="54008" title="Nacionalni stroj" label="Nacionalni stroj"/>
<link wikidata="Q607100" start="54161" end="54186" title="Blood &amp;amp; Honour" label="Blood &amp;amp; Honour Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q937662" start="54191" end="54200" title="Combat 18" label="Combat 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532168" start="54250" end="54295" title="Kotlebists – People&amp;#x27;s Party Our Slovakia" label="Kotlebists – People&amp;#x27;s Party Our Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139204" start="54325" end="54341" title="National Council (Slovakia)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="54346" end="54365" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394738" start="54812" end="54826" title="Na stráž" label="fascist salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="54918" end="54933" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12035354" start="54957" end="54971" title="Marian Kotleba" label="Marian Kotleba"/>
<link wikidata="Q745028" start="55054" end="55068" title="Fourteen Words" label="Fourteen Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="55073" end="55084" title="Heil Hitler" label="Heil Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="55164" end="55173" title="Francoist" label="Francoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431652" start="55178" end="55187" title="Falangism" label="Falangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096772" start="55230" end="55250" title="National Catholicism" label="National Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q287076" start="55281" end="55306" title="ABC (Spain)" label="newspaper &amp;quot;ABC&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690199" start="55308" end="55320" title="Black Spanish people" label="black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859372" start="55401" end="55410" title="Maghrebis" label="Maghrebis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="55415" end="55430" title="Latin Americans" label="Latin Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708121" start="55543" end="55558" title="Murder of Carlos Palomino" label="Carlos Palomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056839" start="55621" end="55642" title="Legazpi (Madrid Metro)" label="Legazpi metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="55644" end="55650" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023309" start="55720" end="55755" title="Spanish Circle of Friends of Europe" label="Spanish Circle of Friends of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737634" start="55912" end="55936" title="Plataforma per Catalunya" label="Plataforma per Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q207308" start="56081" end="56095" title="FE de las JONS" label="FE de las JONS"/>
<link wikidata="Q603477" start="56274" end="56292" title="National Democracy (Spain)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713131" start="56327" end="56353" title="Republican Social Movement" label="Republican Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="56477" end="56494" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359231" start="56600" end="56626" title="Nordic Resistance Movement" label="Nordic Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="56784" end="56790" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="56795" end="56802" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="56818" end="56825" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625151" start="56887" end="56907" title="white power skinhead" label="white power skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q374571" start="57022" end="57060" title="Partei National Orientierter Schweizer" label="Partei National Orientierter Schweizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="57371" end="57382" title="Hate crime" label="hate crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15871713" start="57932" end="57952" title="2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine" label="conflict with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="57960" end="57980" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="escalated into a war"/>
<link wikidata="Q321022" start="58288" end="58312" title="National Bolshevik Party" label="National Bolshevik Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401018" start="58314" end="58336" title="Russian National Unity" label="Russian National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970759" start="58344" end="58364" title="Eurasian Youth Union" label="Eurasian Youth Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58370" end="58384" title="Combatants of the war in Donbas#Cossacks" label="Cossack groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q15902969" start="58454" end="58467" title="Pavel Gubarev" label="Pavel Gubarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q17298092" start="58621" end="58642" title="Russian Orthodox Army" label="Russian Orthodox Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q113391513" start="58772" end="58778" title="Rusich Group" label="Rusich"/>
<link wikidata="Q36597284" start="58800" end="58812" title="Wagner Group" label="Wagner Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="59165" end="59175" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20092524" start="59265" end="59283" title="State propaganda in the Russian Federation" label="Russian propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q111467700" start="59531" end="59546" title="Bucha massacre" label="crimes in Bucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="59613" end="59636" title="Cognitive dissonance" label="internal contradictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="59703" end="59715" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012087" start="59727" end="59754" title="National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962)" label="National Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q166571" start="59784" end="59800" title="British Movement" label="British Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749419" start="59816" end="59828" title="John Tyndall (politician)" label="John Tyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="59897" end="59911" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="59955" end="59977" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q937662" start="60052" end="60061" title="Combat 18" label="Combat 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q159813" start="60243" end="60255" title="Nick Griffin" label="Nick Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056878" start="60403" end="60423" title="Sonnenkrieg Division" label="Sonnenkrieg Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056878" start="60508" end="60527" title="Atomwaffen Division" label="Atomwaffen Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359326" start="60772" end="60792" title="Order of Nine Angles" label="Order of Nine Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q106609936" start="60807" end="60849" title="Murders of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman" label="Murders of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q913786" start="60918" end="60929" title="Skrewdriver" label="Skrewdriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148106" start="61322" end="61331" title="Patrol 36" label="Patrol 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q190828" start="61343" end="61354" title="Petah Tikva" label="Petah Tikva"/>
<link wikidata="Q950320" start="61925" end="61938" title="Law of Return" label="Law of Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141378" start="62078" end="62125" title="National Socialist Japanese Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Socialist Japanese Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="62333" end="62344" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="62481" end="62488" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="62538" end="62542" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="62590" end="62603" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="62608" end="62620" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341086" start="63102" end="63122" title="Education in Mongolia" label="historical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978497" start="63147" end="63177" title="National Socialism Association" label="National Socialism Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="63232" end="63238" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="63309" end="63326" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q495911" start="63339" end="63357" title="Soochow University (Taiwan)" label="Soochow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="63443" end="63466" title="Simon Wiesenthal Centre" label="Simon Wiesenthal Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="63556" end="63560" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q686984" start="63596" end="63609" title="social unrest" label="social unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="63676" end="63681" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089601" start="63706" end="63739" title="Republican Villagers Nation Party" label="Republican Villagers Nation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="63772" end="63798" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="Nationalist Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q97227520" start="63830" end="63864" title="Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf" label="Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="63984" end="63986" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="64009" end="64022" title="Nazi salute" label="Hitler salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q696116" start="64135" end="64146" title="neo-fascist" label="neo-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142831" start="64147" end="64158" title="Grey Wolves (organization)" label="Grey Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="64175" end="64191" title="ultranationalist" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="64192" end="64218" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="Nationalist Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q108248939" start="64612" end="64634" title="Victory Party (Turkey)" label="Victory Party (Turkey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="64849" end="64857" title="South Region, Brazil" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088815" start="64862" end="64881" title="Southeast Region, Brazil" label="Southeastern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="65064" end="65084" title="football hooliganism" label="football hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="65166" end="65173" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="65175" end="65184" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="65189" end="65197" title="atheists" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="65199" end="65214" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Afro-Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130244" start="65300" end="65313" title="Pardo" label="brown-skinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="65334" end="65349" title="Homelessness" label="homeless people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945922" start="65351" end="65362" title="Prostitution in Brazil" label="prostitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="65364" end="65385" title="recreational drug use" label="recreational drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="65389" end="65398" title="Feminism" label="feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="65453" end="65462" title="bisexuals" label="bisexuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="65468" end="65479" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q48279" start="65484" end="65496" title="Third gender" label="third-gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774349" start="65562" end="65596" title="anti-discrimination laws in Brazil" label="anti-discrimination laws in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="65623" end="65634" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="65659" end="65677" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="65682" end="65697" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991747" start="65717" end="65737" title="Neo-Nazism in Canada" label="Neo-Nazism in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030374" start="65770" end="65789" title="Canadian Nazi Party" label="Canadian Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987881" start="65900" end="65919" title="Western Guard Party" label="Western Guard Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q679584" start="65924" end="65945" title="Creativity (religion)" label="Church of the Creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="66079" end="66091" title="white people" label="white people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66100" end="66115" title="Ben Klassen#Racial holy war" label="racial holy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292156" start="66168" end="66179" title="Don Andrews" label="Don Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979789" start="66192" end="66219" title="Nationalist Party of Canada" label="Nationalist Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452537" start="66461" end="66476" title="Wolfgang Droege" label="Wolfgang Droege"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738831" start="66551" end="66565" title="Heritage Front" label="Heritage Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="66632" end="66639" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q708729" start="67055" end="67067" title="George Burdi" label="George Burdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145745" start="67071" end="67089" title="Resistance Records" label="Resistance Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q708729" start="67103" end="67109" title="Rahowa (band)" label="Rahowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q224694" start="67154" end="67171" title="white power music" label="white power music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359326" start="67644" end="67664" title="Order of Nine Angles" label="Order of Nine Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056878" start="68048" end="68062" title="Northern Order" label="Northern Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550862" start="68288" end="68293" title="CJIRU" label="CJIRU"/>
<link wikidata="Q672306" start="68465" end="68501" title="National Socialist Movement of Chile" label="National Socialist Movement of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693749" start="68565" end="68590" title="Partido Agrario Laborista" label="Partido Agrario Laborista"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="68967" end="68979" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="69097" end="69120" title="Chile under Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030408" start="69123" end="69139" title="Nicolás Palacios" label="Nicolás Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="69227" end="69235" title="Visigoth" label="Visigoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="69254" end="69261" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="69391" end="69401" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="69419" end="69427" title="Götaland" label="Götaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513600" start="69459" end="69467" title="homeland" label="homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="69476" end="69481" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="69560" end="69567" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="69867" end="69877" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690173" start="69972" end="69988" title="Afro-Costa Rican" label="Afro-Costa Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="69991" end="70001" title="communism" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="70149" end="70175" title="Public Force of Costa Rica" label="Public Force of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="70295" end="70308" title="Anti-fascism" label="anti-fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q311474" start="70324" end="70347" title="Simon Wiesenthal Center" label="Simon Wiesenthal Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="70405" end="70413" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="70445" end="70461" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="70503" end="70509" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="70546" end="70560" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="70655" end="70672" title="Xenophobia" label="xenophobic hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549308" start="70706" end="70715" title="fake news" label="fake news"/>
<link wikidata="Q219954" start="70998" end="71007" title="hooligans" label="hooligans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="71157" end="71169" title="Public Force of Costa Rica" label="Public Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="71281" end="71298" title="Molotov cocktails" label="Molotov cocktails"/>
<link wikidata="Q36230388" start="72185" end="72211" title="Charlottesville car attack" label="Charlottesville car attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="72216" end="72224" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="72225" end="72240" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008744" start="72396" end="72411" title="James H. Madole" label="James H. Madole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978019" start="72427" end="72453" title="National Renaissance Party (United States)" label="National Renaissance Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="72473" end="72494" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Blavatskian Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="72496" end="72512" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="72542" end="72551" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="72570" end="72580" title="white race" label="white race"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="72627" end="72637" title="Aryan Race" label="Aryan Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="72756" end="72764" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q470970" start="72872" end="72881" title="Lemuria (continent)" label="Lemurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="72883" end="72893" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="73124" end="73136" title="Laws of Manu" label="Laws of Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="73158" end="73170" title="Caste system in India" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073799" start="73264" end="73291" title="National Socialist Movement (United States)" label="National Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978683" start="73496" end="73530" title="National States&amp;#x27; Rights Party" label="National States&amp;#x27; Rights Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15048125" start="73574" end="73586" title="J. B. Stoner" label="J. B. Stoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="73598" end="73616" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="73700" end="73719" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="73732" end="73755" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q699454" start="73849" end="73880" title="Institute for Historical Review" label="Institute for Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="73903" end="73919" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="73977" end="73987" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="74112" end="74121" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="74358" end="74407" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="74419" end="74436" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="74496" end="74507" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895452" start="74719" end="74775" title="National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie" label="National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="75151" end="75173" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="75182" end="75209" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="75225" end="75228" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q30148517" start="75286" end="75296" title="Christopher A. Wray" label="Chris Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057168" start="75302" end="75349" title="Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="75633" end="75643" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="75659" end="75670" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="76142" end="76151" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q841342" start="76335" end="76353" title="Canelones, Uruguay" label="Canelones, Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q691253" start="76418" end="76430" title="Aryan Christianity" label="Aryan church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="76471" end="76483" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980788" start="76995" end="77020" title="Blanke Bevrydingsbeweging" label="Blanke Bevrydingsbeweging"/>
<link wikidata="Q148719" start="77061" end="77086" title="Eugène Terre&amp;#x27;Blanche" label="Eugène Terre&amp;#x27;Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949515" start="77252" end="77287" title="Australian National Socialist Party" label="Australian National Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978511" start="77341" end="77378" title="National Socialist Party of Australia" label="National Socialist Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116036" start="77435" end="77452" title="Jack van Tongeren" label="Jack van Tongeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457322" start="77498" end="77524" title="National Socialist Network" label="National Socialist Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068172" start="77625" end="77637" title="Lads Society" label="Lads Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060600" start="77646" end="77667" title="Antipodean Resistance" label="Antipodean Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073531" start="77788" end="77802" title="Blair Cottrell" label="Blair Cottrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089911" start="77825" end="77846" title="United Patriots Front" label="United Patriots Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="77974" end="78019" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76440450" start="78029" end="78041" title="Mike Burgess (intelligence chief)" label="Mike Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="78389" end="78397" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052396" start="78894" end="78901" title="Unit 88" label="Unit 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314774" start="78910" end="78949" title="National Socialist Party of New Zealand" label="National Socialist Party of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622440" start="78995" end="79021" title="New Zealand National Front" label="New Zealand National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q115823273" start="79026" end="79042" title="Action Zealandia" label="Action Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466593" start="79105" end="79117" title="The Believer (2001 film)" label="The Believer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867869" start="79155" end="79172" title="The Daily Stormer" label="The Daily Stormer"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="79229" end="79245" title="White separatism" label="White separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630382" start="79271" end="79293" title="List of neo-Nazi bands" label="List of neo-Nazi bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862789" start="79296" end="79326" title="List of neo-Nazi organizations" label="List of neo-Nazi organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645208" start="79329" end="79368" title="List of white nationalist organizations" label="List of white nationalist organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="79466" end="79487" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747327" start="79539" end="79564" title="The Lightning and the Sun" label="The Lightning and the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q270337" start="79574" end="79586" title="Savitri Devi" label="Savitri Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="79644" end="79667" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="79737" end="79760" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="79811" end="79853" title="National Socialism: Vanguard of the Future" label="National Socialism: Vanguard of the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="79876" end="79888" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474463" start="79937" end="79949" title="Colin Jordan" label="Colin Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542194" start="79958" end="79976" title="The Turner Diaries" label="The Turner Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399160" start="79986" end="80000" title="William Luther Pierce" label="William Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019466" start="80066" end="80071" title="Siege (Mason book)" label="Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151850" start="80099" end="80110" title="James Mason (National Socialist)" label="James Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928669" start="80142" end="80160" title="Michael M. Jenkins" label="Michael M. Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386158" start="80247" end="80253" title="Hunter (Pierce novel)" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399160" start="80263" end="80277" title="William Luther Pierce" label="William Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246080" start="80395" end="80405" title="Matt Koehl" label="Matt Koehl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80407" end="80416" title="New Order (publisher)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q111192876" start="80447" end="80466" title="Serpent&amp;#x27;s Walk" label="Serpent&amp;#x27;s Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394468" start="80560" end="80569" title="The Nexus (journal)" label="The Nexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394468" start="80597" end="80609" title="Kerry Bolton" label="Kerry Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q175788" start="80701" end="80711" title="David Lane (white nationalist)" label="David Lane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80747" end="80757" title="Katja Lane" label="Katja Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q194200" start="80887" end="80906" title="The Beast Reawakens" label="The Beast Reawakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436678" start="80985" end="80992" title="Fascism (book)" label="Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q705817" start="81019" end="81032" title="Roger Griffin" label="Roger Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899961" start="81050" end="81075" title="Beyond Eagle and Swastika" label="Beyond Eagle and Swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="81132" end="81151" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914872" start="81192" end="81247" title="Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890" label="Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184273" start="81264" end="81275" title="Philip Rees" label="Philip Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871983" start="81294" end="81317" title="Hitler&amp;#x27;s Priestess" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s Priestess"/>
<link wikidata="Q270337" start="81319" end="81331" title="Savitri Devi" label="Savitri Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366669" start="81379" end="81403" title="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke" label="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386299" start="81445" end="81466" title="Francis Parker Yockey" label="Francis Parker Yockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080232" start="81793" end="81821" title="University of Illinois Press" label="University of Illinois Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436679" start="81949" end="81962" title="Fascism Today" label="Fascism Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763643" start="82113" end="82137" title="Anglo-Jewish Association" label="Anglo-Jewish Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82227" end="82245" title="Tete Harens Tetens" label="Tete Harens Tetens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82464" end="82475" title="Kevin Flynn (author)" label="Kevin Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375725" start="82878" end="82905" title="Encyclopedia of White Power" label="Encyclopedia of White Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274207" start="82957" end="82971" title="Jeffrey Kaplan (academic)" label="Jeffrey Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12102950" start="83023" end="83040" title="Blood in the Face" label="Blood in the Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="83046" end="83058" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q717920" start="83060" end="83073" title="Aryan Nations" label="Aryan Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625151" start="83075" end="83089" title="White power skinhead" label="Nazi Skinheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142099" start="83136" end="83150" title="James Ridgeway" label="James Ridgeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759198" start="83399" end="83414" title="The Racist Mind" label="The Racist Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921939" start="83547" end="83556" title="Black Sun (Goodrick-Clarke book)" label="Black Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366669" start="83625" end="83649" title="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke" label="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="83877" end="83897" title="Edinburgh University" label="Edinburgh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759217" start="84098" end="84133" title="The Radical Right in Western Europe" label="The Radical Right in Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84557" end="84574" title="Robert S. Griffin" label="Robert S. Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970058" start="84605" end="84620" title="Nation and Race" label="Nation and Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535917" start="85025" end="85047" title="Jewish Virtual Library" label="Jewish Virtual Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54364" wikidata="Q785941" url="?curid=54364" title="Pasigraphy">
<text>A pasigraphy (from Greek πᾶσι &quot;pasi&quot; &quot;to all&quot; and γράφω &quot;grapho&quot; &quot;to write&quot;) is a writing system where each written symbol represents a concept (rather than a word or sound or series of sounds in a spoken language).

The aim is to be intelligible to persons of all languages. The term was first applied to a system proposed in 1796, though a number of pasigraphies had been devised prior to that; Leopold Einstein reviews 60 attempts at creating an international auxiliary language, the majority of the 17th–18th century projects being pasigraphies of one kind or another, and several pasigraphies and auxiliary languages, including some sample texts, are also reviewed in Arika Okrent&#x27;s book on constructed languages. Leibniz wrote about the alphabet of human thought and Alexander von Humboldt corresponded with Peter Stephen Du Ponceau who proposed a universal phonetic alphabet.

Examples of pasigraphies include Blissymbols, Real Character, IConji and Yerkish.

== See also ==
* Cave Beck
* Constructed language
* Emoji
* Engineered language
* Ideogram
* Jacob Linzbach
* Joseph de Maimieux
* Philosophical language

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q785941" start="2" end="12" title="Pasigraphy" label="pasigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="19" end="24" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="122" end="136" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="156" end="162" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q20885" start="437" end="453" title="Leopold Einstein" label="Leopold Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q838296" start="489" end="521" title="international auxiliary language" label="international auxiliary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790624" start="713" end="725" title="Arika Okrent" label="Arika Okrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="764" end="771" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893330" start="788" end="813" title="alphabet of human thought" label="alphabet of human thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="818" end="840" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383609" start="859" end="883" title="Peter Stephen Du Ponceau" label="Peter Stephen Du Ponceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="909" end="926" title="phonemic orthography" label="phonetic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q609817" start="962" end="973" title="Blissymbols" label="Blissymbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851253" start="975" end="989" title="An Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language" label="Real Character"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969886" start="991" end="997" title="IConji" label="IConji"/>
<link wikidata="Q153630" start="1002" end="1009" title="Yerkish" label="Yerkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051814" start="1029" end="1038" title="Cave Beck" label="Cave Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q33215" start="1041" end="1061" title="Constructed language" label="Constructed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="1064" end="1069" title="Emoji" label="Emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519134" start="1072" end="1091" title="Engineered language" label="Engineered language"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="1094" end="1102" title="Ideogram" label="Ideogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118949" start="1105" end="1119" title="Jacob Linzbach" label="Jacob Linzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185852" start="1122" end="1140" title="Joseph de Maimieux" label="Joseph de Maimieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758144" start="1143" end="1165" title="Philosophical language" label="Philosophical language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54366" wikidata="Q1635824" url="?curid=54366" title="Namadgi National Park">
<text>Namadgi National Park is a protected area in the southwest of the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), bordering Kosciuszko National Park in New South Wales. It lies approximately southwest of Canberra, and occupies approximately 46 percent of the ACT&#x27;s land area. 

Created in 1984, the park is on the Australian National Heritage List. It suffered badly in the 2019–20 Australian bushfire season, with around 80% of its vegetation burnt.

==History==
===Aboriginal history and custodianship===
&quot;Namadgi&quot; is a local Aboriginal name for the mountains situated to the south-west of Canberra. Aboriginal presence in the area has been dated to at least 21,000 years. With radiocarbon dates of cultural deposits dating back to 9000–6000 years. There are numerous Aboriginal sites in the national park including rock paintings at Yankee Hat, dating from at least 800 years ago.

The area is one of cultural significance to the Aboriginal Australian peoples of the Australian Alps region who inhabited the ACT region before European settlers arrived, and the national park&#x27;s management plan is exercised with their consultation. In April 2001, representatives of the Ngambri communities entered into an agreement with the ACT government which recognised their traditional association with the national park lands, and their role and duty to their ancestors and descendants as custodians of the area, and established a system of cooperative management. However, , the Ngunnawal people are recognised as the traditional owners of the land.


===After European settlement===
The area has a European history dating back to the 1830s, when settlers moved into the area and cleared the valleys for farming. The mountains and ridges remain forested.

Namadgi National Park was created in 1984.

===2020 bushfire===
In January 2020, the Orroral Valley bushfire during the Black Summer season burnt about 80% of the national park (). An army MRH-90 Taipan helicopter, as part of &quot;Operation Bushfire Assist&quot; conducting reconnaissance for landing sites for remote area fire-fighting teams, attempted to land for a break when their landing light ignited the fire in dry grass.

==Description==
Namadgi National Park lies approximately southwest of Canberra, and makes up approximately 46 percent of the ACT&#x27;s land area. The Visitor Centre is located south of Tharwa on the Boboyan-Naas Road. 

The water catchment area of the park supplies approximately 85% of water for the nation&#x27;s capital city, Canberra.

The national park is classified as an IUCN Category II protected area.

===Flora and fauna===

The national park protects part of the northern end of the Australian Alps. Its habitat ranges from grassy plains over snow gum forests to alpine meadows and wetlands.

The fauna is also varied: eastern grey kangaroos, wallabies, wombats, magpies, rosellas and ravens are commonly seen. The park includes fens with sedges, and sphagnum moss bogs that provide habitat for the northern corroboree frog (&quot;Pseudophryne pengilleyi&quot;), an endangered species.

A single specimen of a new species of spider wasp in the Epipompilus genus was found in the park in 2018 and identified in 2020. The species has been named &quot;Epipompilus namadji&quot;. efforts are ongoing by teams from the Australian National Insect Collection at the CSIRO to find more of the wasps, as the bushfire has destroyed 80% of the park since the sighting.

==Australian National Heritage List==

On 7 November 2008, the national park was one of eleven protected areas added to the Australian National Heritage List under the title of the Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves.

==Climate==
In this sub-alpine region, the weather ranges from cold winter nights to warm summer days, and it can change very quickly. Snow normally falls on the Bimberi and Brindabella Ranges during winter, and is not uncommon throughout most of the park. The highest mountain is Bimberi Peak at , the highest peak in the Australian Capital Territory.

==Winter sports==
The Namadgi National Park Draft Management Plan (September 2005) downplayed the future development of skiing as a sport in the Park,
noting that no facilities existed for alpine or downhill skiing within Namadgi, despite a history of downhill skiing associated with the Canberra Alpine Ski Club and the Mt Franklin Chalet (destroyed in the 2003 bushfires). The report predicted that it would be &quot;unlikely that Namadgi will be suitable for this activity in the future as climate change is causing conditions to become less favourable&quot;. However, since the report was written, limited downhill ski facilities have returned at nearby Corin Forest, and cross country skiing takes place within the Park at various locations when conditions allow.

; Mt Franklin

In the 1930s, with construction of the new capital city of Canberra under way, Canberrans explored the possibilities for developing skiing and snow sports in the Brindabellas. On 30 June 1936, the &quot;Canberra Times&quot; newspaper reported:

The Mount Franklin chalet was constructed at Mount Franklin in 1938 to service the Canberra Alpine Club. Ski runs were cleared and ski tows were improvised. The club also cleared runs elsewhere, completing a new ski run and jump on nearby Mount Ginini in 1951 - then judged to be the superior slope. Built on leased land, the Mount Franklin Chalet reverted to the Government when Namadgi National Park was created in 1984 and later operated as a museum before being destroyed in the 2003 bushfires. A new shelter designed and built by University of Adelaide students opened in 2008. Today, cross-country skiing is possible in the area when conditions allow.

==See also==
* Bendora Arboretum, located within the park
* Booroomba Rocks
* Ginini Flats Wetlands Ramsar Site
* List of national parks of Australia
* Protected areas of the Australian Capital Territory

==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;Nationale Parken in Australië&quot; (2000) (Dutch translation of &quot;Discover Australia National Parks&quot; by Ron and Viv Moon)

==External links==
* 
*Namadgi National Park official webpage
*Entry for Namadgi National Park on protected planet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1635824" start="0" end="21" title="Namadgi National Park" label="Namadgi National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="27" end="41" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="66" end="94" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="112" end="136" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="140" end="155" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="192" end="200" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q781601" start="307" end="340" title="Australian National Heritage List" label="Australian National Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q77924746" start="367" end="401" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season" label="2019–20 Australian bushfire season"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="531" end="541" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="683" end="699" title="radiocarbon date" label="radiocarbon date"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="821" end="834" title="rock painting" label="rock painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021935" start="1180" end="1187" title="Ngambri" label="Ngambri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969638" start="1389" end="1399" title="traditional owners" label="custodians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701590" start="1480" end="1489" title="Ngunnawal" label="Ngunnawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969638" start="1519" end="1537" title="traditional owners" label="traditional owners"/>
<link wikidata="Q77924746" start="1877" end="1889" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season" label="Black Summer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1946" end="1959" title="NHIndustries NH90#Australia" label="MRH-90 Taipan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1989" end="2014" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season#Military" label="Operation Bushfire Assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="2259" end="2267" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451942" start="2375" end="2381" title="Tharwa, Australian Capital Territory" label="Tharwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="2414" end="2429" title="water catchment" label="water catchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="2519" end="2527" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="2568" end="2572" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2573" end="2599" title="IUCN protected area categories#Category II – National Park" label="Category II protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q390226" start="2684" end="2699" title="Australian Alps" label="Australian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165298" start="2744" end="2752" title="snow gum" label="snow gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149452" start="2764" end="2777" title="alpine tundra" label="alpine meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="2783" end="2791" title="wetlands" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q270098" start="2820" end="2841" title="eastern grey kangaroo" label="eastern grey kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623169" start="2844" end="2853" title="wallaby" label="wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23175" start="2855" end="2861" title="wombat" label="wombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="2864" end="2870" title="Australian magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q850942" start="2873" end="2880" title="rosella" label="rosella"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="2886" end="2891" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="2930" end="2933" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="2940" end="2945" title="sedge" label="sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30019" start="2952" end="2960" title="sphagnum" label="sphagnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="2966" end="2969" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670177" start="3000" end="3024" title="northern corroboree frog" label="northern corroboree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="3067" end="3085" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q252859" start="3126" end="3137" title="spider wasp" label="spider wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383184" start="3145" end="3156" title="Epipompilus" label="Epipompilus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3250" end="3269" title="Epipompilus namadji" label="Epipompilus namadji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="3315" end="3352" title="Australian National Insect Collection" label="Australian National Insect Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="3360" end="3365" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q781601" start="3584" end="3617" title="Australian National Heritage List" label="Australian National Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826297" start="3641" end="3684" title="Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves" label="Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="3707" end="3717" title="sub-alpine" label="sub-alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q863416" start="3849" end="3856" title="Bimberi Nature Reserve" label="Bimberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q492267" start="3861" end="3879" title="Brindabella Ranges" label="Brindabella Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q241762" start="3968" end="3980" title="Bimberi Peak" label="Bimberi Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340636" start="4362" end="4380" title="Mount Franklin, Australian Capital Territory" label="Mt Franklin Chalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4534" end="4548" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057299" start="4699" end="4711" title="Corin Forest" label="Corin Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q495267" start="5029" end="5043" title="Canberra Times" label="Canberra Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920913" start="5310" end="5322" title="Mount Ginini" label="Mount Ginini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017322" start="5554" end="5568" title="2003 Canberra bushfires" label="2003 bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="5661" end="5681" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887154" start="5745" end="5762" title="Bendora Arboretum" label="Bendora Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943771" start="5790" end="5805" title="Booroomba Rocks" label="Booroomba Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563129" start="5808" end="5841" title="Ginini Flats Wetlands Ramsar Site" label="Ginini Flats Wetlands Ramsar Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435301" start="5844" end="5879" title="List of national parks of Australia" label="List of national parks of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438881" start="5882" end="5933" title="Protected areas of the Australian Capital Territory" label="Protected areas of the Australian Capital Territory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54376" wikidata="Q1501926" url="?curid=54376" title="Attorney general">
<text>In most common law jurisdictions, the attorney general (: attorneys general) or attorney-general (AG or Atty.-Gen) is the main legal advisor to the government. In some jurisdictions, attorneys general also have executive responsibility for law enforcement, prosecutions or even responsibility for legal affairs generally. In practice, the extent to which the attorney general personally provides legal advice to the government varies between jurisdictions, and even between individual office-holders within the same jurisdiction, often depending on the level and nature of the office-holder&#x27;s prior legal experience.

Where the attorney general has ministerial responsibility for legal affairs in general (as is the case, for example, with the United States Attorney General or the Attorney-General for Australia, and the respective attorneys general of the states in each country), the ministerial portfolio is largely equivalent to that of a Minister of Justice in some other countries.

The term was originally used to refer to any person who holds a general power of attorney to represent a principal in all matters. In the common law tradition, anyone who represents the state, especially in criminal prosecutions, is such an attorney. Although a government may designate some official as the permanent attorney general, anyone who came to represent the state in the same way could, in the past, be referred to as such, even if only for a particular case. Today, however, in most jurisdictions, the term is largely reserved as a title of the permanently appointed attorney general of the state, sovereign or other member of the royal family.

Civil law jurisdictions have similar offices, which may be variously called &quot;public prosecutor general&quot;, &quot;procurators&quot;, &quot;advocates general&quot;, &quot;public attorneys&quot;, and other titles. Many of these offices also use &quot;attorney general&quot; or &quot;attorney-general&quot; as the English translation of the title, although because of different historical provenance, the nature of such offices is usually different from that of attorneys-general in common law jurisdictions.

==Etymology==
In regard to the etymology of the phrase &quot;Attorney General&quot;, Steven Pinker writes that the earliest citation in the Oxford English Dictionary is from 1292: &quot;Tous attorneyz general purrount lever fins et cirrographer&quot; (All general attorneys may levy fines and make legal documents). The phrase was borrowed from Anglo-Norman French when England was ruled by Normans after the conquest of England in the 11th-century. As a variety of French, which was spoken in the law courts, schools, universities and in sections of the gentry and the bourgeoisie, the term relating to government was introduced into English.

The phrase &quot;attorney general&quot; is composed of a noun followed by the postpositive adjective &quot;general&quot; and as other French compounds its plural form also appears as &quot;attorneys generals&quot;. As compared to &quot;major generals,&quot; a term that also originates from French (&quot;major-général&quot;) and also has a postpositive adjective, it also appears incorrectly as &quot;attorney generals&quot;. While Steven Pinker writes: &quot;So if you are ever challenged for saying &quot;attorney-generals,&quot; &quot;mother-in-laws&quot;, &quot;passerbys&quot; ... you can reply, &#x27;They are the very model of the modern &quot;major general&quot;&#x27;&quot; (a reference to the Major-General&#x27;s Song, from the operetta &quot;The Pirates of Penzance&quot;).

The modern title of major general is a military rank in which the word &quot;general&quot; is not used as an adjective but as a noun, which can be pluralized.
In modern public discourse, attorneys general are often referred to or addressed as “general”. In this construction, the word “general” is an adjective, and its use as a noun is incorrect. Attorneys general, despite carrying the title of &quot;general&quot;, are not military officers and carry no rank.

==Attorneys-general in common law and hybrid jurisdictions==
Attorneys-General in common law jurisdictions, and jurisdictions with a legal system which is partially derived from the common law tradition, share a common provenance.

===Australia===

In Australia, the attorney-general is the chief law officer of the Crown and a member of the Cabinet. The Attorney-General is the minister responsible for legal affairs, national and public security, and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. Mark Dreyfus is the current Attorney-General. The Australian states each have separate attorneys-general, who are state ministers with similar responsibilities to the federal minister with respect to state law.

Functions of the state and federal attorneys-general include the administration of the selection of persons for nomination to judicial posts, and authorizing prosecutions. In normal circumstances, the prosecutorial powers of the attorney-general are exercised by the Director of Public Prosecutions and staff; however, the attorney-general maintains formal control, including the power to initiate and terminate public prosecutions and take over private prosecutions. Statutory criminal law provides that prosecutions for certain offences require the individual consent of the attorney-general. This is generally for offences whose illegality is of a somewhat controversial nature or where there is perceived to be a significant risk that prosecutions of a political nature may be embarked upon. The Attorney-General also generally has the power to issue certificates legally conclusive of certain facts (e.g., that the revelation of certain matters in court proceedings might constitute a risk to national security); the facts stated in such certificates must be accepted by the courts and cannot legally be disputed by any parties. The Attorney-General also has the power to issue a &quot;nolle prosequi&quot; with respect to a case, which authoritatively determines that the state (in whose name prosecutions are brought) does not wish to prosecute the case, so preventing any person from doing so.

For the attorneys-general of the various states and territories of Australia see:
* Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory
* Attorney-General of New South Wales
* Attorney-General of the Northern Territory
* Attorney-General of Queensland
* Attorney-General of South Australia
* Attorney-General of Tasmania
* Attorney-General of Victoria
* Attorney-General of Western Australia

===Bangladesh===
===Barbados===
===British Virgin Islands===
===Canada===

The Attorney General of Canada () is a separate title held by the Canadian Minister of Justice (&quot;&quot;), a member of the Cabinet. The Minister of Justice is concerned with questions of policy and their relationship to the justice system. In their role as attorney general, they are the chief law officer of the Crown.

A separate cabinet position, the Minister of Public Safety (), formerly the &quot;Solicitor General&quot;, administers the law enforcement agencies (police, prisons, and security) of the federal government.

For the attorneys-general of the various provinces of Canada see:
* Alberta Minister of Justice and Attorney General
* Attorney General of British Columbia
* Minister of Justice and Attorney General (Manitoba)
* Office of the Attorney General (New Brunswick)
* Minister of Justice and Public Safety and Attorney General of Newfoundland and Labrador
* Minister of Justice of the Northwest Territories
* Attorney General and Minister of Justice of Nova Scotia
* Minister of Justice of Nunavut
* Attorney General of Ontario
* Minister of Justice and Public Safety and Attorney General of Prince Edward Island
* Ministry of Justice (Quebec) (also as attorney general)
* Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Saskatchewan
* Minister of Justice (Yukon)

===Cyprus===

The Attorney General of the Republic is an independent official of the Republic of Cyprus, head of the Legal Service of the state.[1] He is the legal advisor of the Government of Cyprus.[1] Hierarchically, it is the 3rd highest institution of the state, after the President of the Republic and the President of the Parliament. This institution originates from the time of the British rule, and was preserved even after the independence of Cyprus in 1960 due to the Anglo-Saxon law which continues to exist in Cyprus, as in other Commonwealth states.

===Fiji===

In Fiji, the role of the attorney general is defined as &quot;providing essential legal expertise and support to the Government&quot;. More specific functions include &quot;legislative drafting&quot;, &quot;legal aid&quot;, &quot;the prerogative of mercy&quot; (advising the President), &quot;liquor licensing&quot; and &quot;film censorship&quot;.

The current Attorney General is Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum. In January 2008, he sparked controversy by accepting other government positions in addition to his role as attorney general. Sayed-Khaiyum is currently responsible also for &quot;Public Enterprise, Electoral Reform and Anti-Corruption&quot;. An article in the &quot;Fiji Times&quot; pointed out that &quot;never before in the history of this nation has the Attorney-General held a portfolio dealing with matters other than the law and the judiciary&quot;, and criticised the decision.

===Grenada===
===Hong Kong===

The Secretary for Justice, known as the attorney-general before the handover of Hong Kong in 1997, is the legal adviser to the Hong Kong Government and heads the Department of Justice. They are assisted by five law officers, namely:
* the Solicitor General who heads the Legal Policy Division,
* the Director of Public Prosecutions who head the Prosecutions Division,
* the Law Officer (Civil Law) who heads the Civil Law Division,
* the Law Officer (International Law) who heads the International Law Division, and
* the Law Draftsman who heads the Law Drafting Division
(The Administration and Development Division is headed by an Administrative Officer.)

Crimes and offences are prosecuted at the suit of the Secretary of Justice.

The Secretary of Justice, appointed by the Chinese government on the advice of the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, is an &quot;ex officio&quot; member of the Executive Council of Hong Kong. The position is normally held by a legal professional, and was, before July 2002, a civil service position.

===India===
The Attorney General for India is the Indian government&#x27;s chief legal advisor, and is its principal Advocate before the Supreme Court of India. They are appointed by the President of India on the advice of the Union Cabinet under Article 76(1) of the Constitution and hold office during the pleasure of the President. The current Attorney General for India is R. Venkataramani.

===Ireland===

The Attorney General of Ireland is the legal adviser to the Government and is therefore the chief law officer of the State. The attorney general as of 17 December 2022 is Rossa Fanning, SC.

The Office of the Attorney General is made up of a number of different offices:
* The Attorney General&#x27;s Office (located at Merrion Street, Dublin 2) containing the Advisory Counsel to the Attorney General
* The Office of Parliamentary Counsel to the Government (also located at Merrion Street, Dublin 2) containing the Parliamentary Counsel who draft legislation and have responsibilities in the area of Statute Law revision
* The Chief State Solicitor&#x27;s Office (CSSO) (located at Little Ship Street, Dublin 8) containing the solicitors representing the Attorney and the State.

Since the enactment of the Prosecution of Offenses Act 1974, the responsibility for the prosecution of indictable criminal offences is mostly in the hands of the Director of Public Prosecutions who is independent of the attorney general and the State.

===Isle of Man===

In the Isle of Man, the Attorney General is a Crown appointment (appointed by the UK government) and sits in the Legislative Council of the Isle of Man, .

===Israel===

The Attorney General of Israel is the head of the public prosecution from the state, the person who advises the government in legal matters, the person who represents the state&#x27;s authorities in the courts, and advises in preparation of law memoranda of the government in general and the Justice Minister in particular (likewise he examines and advises for private proposals for a law of Knesset members).

===Jamaica===

This is a position which existed in Jamaica for a long time.

The Hon. Marlene Malahoo Forte, QC, MP is the new Attorney General of Jamaica as of March 7, 2016.

===Kenya===

In Kenya the Attorney General is the Principal Legal Adviser to the Government and &quot;ex officio&quot; Member of Parliament and Cabinet. His duties include the formulation of legal policy and ensuring proper administration of Kenya&#x27;s legal system including professional legal education. Assisting the attorney general in the performance of his duties as principal legal adviser to the government are:
* Solicitor general
* Senior Deputy Solicitor General
* Director of Public Prosecutions
* Registrar General
* Administrator General
* Chairman of Advocates Complaints Commission
* Chief Parliamentary Counsel
* Chief State Counsel
The Hon. Justice (Rtd) Paul Kihara Kariuki is the Attorney-General of Kenya as of April 2018.

===Kiribati===

In Kiribati, the attorney general is defined by section 42 of the Constitution as &quot;the principal legal adviser to the Government&quot;. The Constitution specifies: &quot;No person shall be qualified to hold or to act in the office of Attorney-General unless he is qualified to practise in Kiribati as an advocate in the High Court.&quot; The current Attorney General, as of 2016, was the Honourable Tetiro Semilota, until her nomination as Acting Chief Justice in October 2022.

===Leeward Islands===
===Malaysia===

In Malaysia the attorney-general or &quot;Peguam Negara&quot; (as he is referred to in Bahasa Melayu) is the principal legal adviser to the Government. He is also the principal public prosecutor in the country, and is also known as the Public Prosecutor. He has the power, exercisable at his discretion, to institute, conduct or discontinue any proceedings for an offence, other than proceedings before a Syariah court, a native court or a court-martial. The current Attorney-General of Malaysia is Idris Harun since 2020.

===Maldives===
===Mauritius===

In Mauritius, the attorney-general, who should be a barrister, is the principal legal adviser to the government and holds the office of a minister.

The Attorney-General&#x27;s Office is also responsible for the drafting of legislation, and vetting of all contracts or agreements of which the government is a party, including international agreements, treaties or conventions.

===Myanmar===
===Nepal===
In Nepal, the attorney general is the chief legal adviser of the Government of Nepal as well as its chief public prosecutor. An Attorney General is appointed by the President on recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The Attorney General&#x27;s Office is a constitutional body under the Constitution of Nepal (2015). For a person to be eligible for the post of Attorney General, they must also be qualified to be appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court.

===New Zealand===

In New Zealand, the attorney-general is the chief law officer and primary legal advisor of the New Zealand government. The Attorney-General is the Minister responsible for the Crown Law Office, the Parliamentary Counsel Office, and the Serious Fraud Office. Historically, the post could be held either by a politician or by a senior jurist, but today, it is invariably held by a member of Parliament. The Attorney-General attends Cabinet, but the post is not the same as the Minister of Justice. By tradition, persons appointed to the position of Attorney-General have been lawyers. Only two former attorneys-general have not been lawyers, most recently Dr Michael Cullen who held the post in 2005, and again from 2006.

===Pakistan===

The Attorney-General of Pakistan is the legal adviser to the government of the Pakistan and its public prosecutor.

===Philippines===

The Attorney General of the Philippines was an office that existed from 1901 until 1932, when the office was abolished and its functions taken over by the Secretary of Justice. Since then, the Solicitor General of the Philippines, previously the second law officer, has been the principal law officer and legal defender of the Philippine Government. The Office of the Solicitor General is the law firm of the Republic of the Philippines. It is tasked with representing the Philippines, the Philippine Government, and all its officials in any litigation or matter requiring the services of a lawyer especially before appellate courts. It is an independent and autonomous office attached to the Department of Justice for budgetary purposes.

===Samoa===
In Samoa, the attorney general is the legal adviser to the government. Since 2016, the attorney general is Lemalu Hermann Retzlaff (whose father Misa Telefoni Retzlaff also served as attorney general from 1986 to 1988)

===Singapore===

The Attorney-General of Singapore is the legal adviser to the government of the Republic of Singapore and its public prosecutor. The current Attorney-General is Lucien Wong.

===Sri Lanka===

The attorney-general of Sri Lanka is the chief legal adviser of the Government of Sri Lanka and head of the attorney-general department which is the public prosecutor.

===Sudan===
, the Attorney General of Sudan is Tag el-Sir el-Hibir.

===Tonga===

The office of Attorney General was established in Tonga in 1988, and was held jointly with the portfolio of Justice Minister until the two were separated in 2009. The Attorney General is defined as the &quot;Chief Legal Advisor to Government&quot;.

===Trinidad &amp; Tobago===

According to the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago, the supreme law of the nation, The Attorney General shall be responsible for the administration of legal affairs in Trinidad and Tobago and legal proceedings for and against the State shall be taken—
(a) in the case of civil proceedings, in the name of the attorney general;
(b) in the case of criminal proceedings, in the name of the State.

===United Kingdom===

====England and Wales====

The attorney general for England and Wales is similarly the chief law officer of the Crown in England and Wales, and advises and represents the Crown and government departments in court. In practice, the Treasury Solicitor (who also has the title of Procurator General) normally provides the lawyers or briefs Treasury Counsel to appear in court, although the attorney general may appear in person. The person appointed to this role provides legal advice to the Government, acts as the representative of the public interest and resolves issues between government departments.

The attorney general has supervisory powers over the prosecution of criminal offences, but is not personally involved with prosecutions; however, some prosecutions (e.g. riot) cannot be commenced without their consent, and they have the power to halt prosecutions generally. Criminal prosecutions are the responsibility of the Crown Prosecution Service, headed by the Director of Public Prosecutions. The Attorney General may appeal cases to the higher courts where, although the particular case is settled, there may be a point of law of public importance at issue.

The Attorney General&#x27;s deputy is the Solicitor General for England and Wales.

Under the Government of Wales Act 2006, the Counsel General is the chief legal adviser to the Welsh Government.

====Northern Ireland====

Since the prorogation of the Parliament of Northern Ireland in 1972, the Attorney General for England and Wales was also Attorney General for Northern Ireland. The separate office of Attorney General for Northern Ireland was re-created alongside the new office of Advocate General for Northern Ireland upon the devolution of policing and justice powers to the Northern Ireland Assembly in 2010.

====Scotland====

Historically, the Lord Advocate was the equivalent for Scotland of the attorney general for England and Wales, being a legal advisor to the King of Scotland. After the Acts of Union 1707, the Lord Advocate became the chief legal advisor to the British government in respect of Scotland.

Under constitutional reforms enacted in 1999, the Lord Advocate has become an officer of the Scottish Government, while the United Kingdom Government is advised on Scots law by the Advocate General for Scotland, a position created in 1999.

The Lord Advocate is assisted by the Solicitor General for Scotland. The Advocate General is assisted by the Solicitor to the Advocate General for Scotland, based in Edinburgh.

==== Other attorneys-general in the UK ====
The Attorney General of the Duchy of Cornwall is the chief legal adviser to the Prince of Wales, and there is a separate Attorney General for the Duchy of Lancaster, an appointment that is held by the Crown.

===United States===

In the federal government of the United States, the Attorney General is a member of the Cabinet and, as head of the Department of Justice, is the top law enforcement officer and lawyer for the government. The Attorney General may need to be distinguished from the Solicitor General, a high Justice Department official with the responsibility of representing the government before the Supreme Court. In cases of exceptional importance, however, the attorney general may choose personally to represent the government to the Supreme Court.

The individual U.S. states and territories, as well as the federal district of Washington, D.C. also have attorneys general with similar responsibilities. The majority of state attorneys general are chosen by popular election, as opposed to the U.S. Attorney General, who is a presidential appointee confirmed by the Senate.

In nearly all United States jurisdictions, the attorney general is that jurisdiction&#x27;s chief law enforcement officer; as such, an attorney general may also be considered a police rank. The proper way to address a person holding the office is Mister or Madam Attorney General, or just as Attorney General. The plural is &quot;Attorneys General&quot; or &quot;Attorneys-General&quot;.

===Zimbabwe===

The Attorney General is the chief legal advisor of the government of Zimbabwe. The office falls under the Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs.

==Similar offices in non-common law jurisdictions==

Non-common law jurisdictions usually have one or more offices which are similar to attorneys-general in common law jurisdictions, some of which use &quot;attorney-general&quot; as the English translation of their titles.

===Afghanistan===
===Armenia===
===Brazil===
===Crimea===
===Dominican Republic===
===Finland===
===Germany===
===Hungary===
===Iceland===
The state attorney () represents the state in civil lawsuits. The state attorney is appointed by the Prime Minister for a period of 5 years and must have the same qualifications required to serve as a Supreme Court justice. The state prosecutor () represents the state in criminal trials and is appointed by the Minister of Justice for an indefinite period. The Minister of Justice oversees the judiciary, prosecution, policing, prison system et al.

===Indonesia===
===Italy===
===Japan===
===Mexico===
===Netherlands===
In the Netherlands, there are two types of attorneys-general, that are only historically related.

The first type of attorney-general (&quot;advocaat-generaal&quot; in Dutch) is the public prosecutor in criminal cases at appellate courts.

The second type of attorney-general (&quot;procureur-generaal&quot;, while their replacements are called &quot;advocaat-generaal&quot;) is an independent advisor to the Supreme Court. These people give an opinion on cases (called &quot;conclusies&quot;) in any field of law (not just criminal law), supported by a scientific staff. The Supreme Court may either follow or reject the opinion of the attorney-general (which is published together with the eventual decision). In a way, an attorney-general acts as yet another judge, but in the Dutch system that does not allow dissenting opinions to be published, it is the only way to reflect different perceptions on a case. The Procureur-Generaal also prosecutes members of parliament in the case of misfeance.

Dutch attorneys-general do &quot;not&quot; normally advise the government.

===Norway===
===Russia===
===Serbia===
===Soviet Union===
===Spain===
===Vietnam===
== See also ==
* Justice minister
* Public prosecutor general (disambiguation)
* Procurator General (disambiguation)

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="8" end="18" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="38" end="54" title="Attorney general" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="58" end="75" title="Attorney general" label="attorneys general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="80" end="96" title="Attorney general" label="attorney-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="98" end="100" title="Attorney general" label="AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="104" end="113" title="Attorney general" label="Atty.-Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="148" end="158" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="240" end="255" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="749" end="779" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="787" end="817" title="Attorney-General for Australia" label="Attorney-General for Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603658" start="838" end="855" title="State attorney general" label="attorneys general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="949" end="968" title="Justice ministry" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q159733" start="1067" end="1084" title="power of attorney" label="power of attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="1653" end="1662" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="Civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478218" start="1799" end="1816" title="Advocate General" label="advocates general"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="2198" end="2207" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="2252" end="2265" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2307" end="2332" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35214" start="2512" end="2531" title="Anglo-Norman language" label="Anglo-Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="2558" end="2565" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="2576" end="2595" title="Norman conquest of England" label="conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233569" start="2890" end="2912" title="postpositive adjective" label="postpositive adjective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2946" end="2962" title="English plurals#French compounds" label="French compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="3048" end="3061" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3117" end="3130" title=":fr:major-général" label="major-général"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737996" start="3516" end="3541" title="Major-General&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Major-General&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215463" start="3567" end="3590" title="The Pirates of Penzance" label="The Pirates of Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="3620" end="3633" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4316" end="4325" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="4331" end="4347" title="Attorney-General for Australia" label="attorney-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="4376" end="4385" title="King of Australia" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028178" start="4406" end="4413" title="Cabinet of Australia" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="4521" end="4566" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767411" start="4568" end="4580" title="Mark Dreyfus" label="Mark Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="4655" end="4672" title="Attorney-General for Australia" label="attorneys-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280559" start="5047" end="5078" title="Director of Public Prosecutions" label="Director of Public Prosecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178146" start="5971" end="5985" title="nolle prosequi" label="nolle prosequi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="6224" end="6259" title="states and territories of Australia" label="states and territories of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073442" start="6267" end="6319" title="Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory" label="Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818644" start="6322" end="6357" title="Attorney-General of New South Wales" label="Attorney-General of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184344" start="6360" end="6402" title="Attorney-General of the Northern Territory" label="Attorney-General of the Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818604" start="6405" end="6435" title="Attorney-General of Queensland" label="Attorney-General of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818610" start="6438" end="6473" title="Attorney-General of South Australia" label="Attorney-General of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190182" start="6476" end="6504" title="Attorney-General of Tasmania" label="Attorney-General of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818611" start="6507" end="6535" title="Attorney-General of Victoria" label="Attorney-General of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818613" start="6538" end="6575" title="Attorney-General of Western Australia" label="Attorney-General of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315120" start="6656" end="6682" title="Attorney General of Canada" label="Attorney General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315120" start="6718" end="6746" title="Minister of Justice (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="6779" end="6786" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778154" start="6950" end="6974" title="Law officers of the Crown" label="law officer of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q131535190" start="7010" end="7035" title="Minister of Public Safety (Canada)" label="Minister of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7253" end="7301" title="List of Alberta provincial ministers#Minister of Justice and Attorney General" label="Alberta Minister of Justice and Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818629" start="7304" end="7340" title="Attorney General of British Columbia" label="Attorney General of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750083" start="7343" end="7394" title="Minister of Justice and Attorney General (Manitoba)" label="Minister of Justice and Attorney General (Manitoba)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079333" start="7397" end="7443" title="Office of the Attorney General (New Brunswick)" label="Office of the Attorney General (New Brunswick)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419822" start="7446" end="7533" title="Executive Council of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Minister of Justice and Public Safety and Attorney General of Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419831" start="7536" end="7584" title="Executive Council of the Northwest Territories" label="Minister of Justice of the Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419823" start="7587" end="7642" title="Executive Council of Nova Scotia" label="Attorney General and Minister of Justice of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375980" start="7645" end="7675" title="Executive Council of Nunavut" label="Minister of Justice of Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818648" start="7678" end="7705" title="Attorney General of Ontario" label="Attorney General of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419825" start="7708" end="7790" title="Executive Council of Prince Edward Island" label="Minister of Justice and Public Safety and Attorney General of Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315294" start="7793" end="7821" title="Ministry of Justice (Quebec)" label="Ministry of Justice (Quebec)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419826" start="7851" end="7907" title="Executive Council of Saskatchewan" label="Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419829" start="7910" end="7937" title="Executive Council of Yukon" label="Minister of Justice (Yukon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="8024" end="8042" title="Cyprus" label="Republic of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="8519" end="8523" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699401" start="8898" end="8917" title="Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum" label="Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071731" start="9185" end="9195" title="Fiji Times" label="Fiji Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="9504" end="9525" title="handover of Hong Kong" label="handover of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15164" start="9563" end="9583" title="Hong Kong Government" label="Hong Kong Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595322" start="9598" end="9619" title="Department of Justice (Hong Kong)" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557775" start="9675" end="9692" title="Solicitor General of Hong Kong" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280559" start="9736" end="9767" title="Director of Public Prosecutions" label="Director of Public Prosecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250569" start="9781" end="9802" title="Prosecutions Division (Hong Kong)" label="Prosecutions Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778154" start="9810" end="9833" title="Law Officers of the Crown" label="Law Officer (Civil Law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778154" start="9874" end="9905" title="Law Officers of the Crown" label="Law Officer (International Law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55474415" start="9958" end="9971" title="Parliamentary Counsel" label="Law Draftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="10215" end="10233" title="Central People&amp;#x27;s Government" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="10255" end="10283" title="Chief Executive of Hong Kong" label="Chief Executive of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545681" start="10328" end="10358" title="Executive Council of Hong Kong" label="Executive Council of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="10395" end="10413" title="jurist" label="legal professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="10519" end="10536" title="Government of India" label="Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="10606" end="10628" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="10656" end="10674" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q960484" start="10696" end="10709" title="Union Council of Ministers" label="Union Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="10737" end="10749" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q114567638" start="10846" end="10862" title="R. Venkataramani" label="R. Venkataramani"/>
<link wikidata="Q115743765" start="11051" end="11064" title="Rossa Fanning" label="Rossa Fanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450670" start="11066" end="11068" title="Senior Counsel" label="SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q97360435" start="11823" end="11854" title="Director of Public Prosecutions (Ireland)" label="Director of Public Prosecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="11940" end="11951" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818628" start="11957" end="11973" title="Attorney General (Isle of Man)" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q679687" start="12046" end="12084" title="Legislative Council of the Isle of Man" label="Legislative Council of the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="12591" end="12599" title="Honourable" label="The Hon."/>
<link wikidata="Q16499741" start="12600" end="12621" title="Marlene Malahoo Forte" label="Marlene Malahoo Forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818640" start="12641" end="12668" title="Attorney General of Jamaica" label="Attorney General of Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="12707" end="12712" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818637" start="12717" end="12733" title="Attorney General of Kenya" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="12810" end="12830" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="12835" end="12842" title="Cabinet (government)" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557772" start="13115" end="13132" title="Solicitor general" label="Solicitor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q48818015" start="13347" end="13385" title="Paul Kihara Kariuki" label="Hon. Justice (Rtd) Paul Kihara Kariuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818637" start="13393" end="13418" title="Attorney General of Kenya" label="Attorney-General of Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="13457" end="13465" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="13979" end="13987" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="14063" end="14076" title="Malay language" label="Bahasa Melayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="14535" end="14544" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="14939" end="14944" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589267" start="15001" end="15020" title="Government of Nepal" label="Government of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153756" start="15101" end="15110" title="President of Nepal" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="15136" end="15150" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="15222" end="15250" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="Constitution of Nepal (2015)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644951" start="15376" end="15389" title="Supreme Court of Nepal" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="15414" end="15425" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818600" start="15431" end="15447" title="Attorney-General (New Zealand)" label="attorney-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="15800" end="15810" title="Parliament of New Zealand" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932373" start="15841" end="15848" title="New Zealand Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866227" start="15886" end="15905" title="Minister of Justice (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622925" start="16068" end="16082" title="Michael Cullen (politician)" label="Michael Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="16188" end="16193" title="law" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16227" end="16235" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="16244" end="16261" title="public prosecutor" label="public prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925797" start="16610" end="16631" title="Philippine Government" label="Philippine Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550363" start="16976" end="16997" title="Department of Justice (Philippines)" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="17038" end="17043" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17142" end="17165" title="Lemalu Hermann Retzlaff" label="Lemalu Hermann Retzlaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="17313" end="17318" title="law" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="17352" end="17373" title="Republic of Singapore" label="Republic of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="17382" end="17399" title="public prosecutor" label="public prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818655" start="17468" end="17497" title="Attorney-General of Sri Lanka" label="attorney-general of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="17613" end="17630" title="public prosecutor" label="public prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17651" end="17676" title="Attorney General of Sudan" label="Attorney General of Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q70525859" start="17680" end="17699" title="Tag el-Sir el-Hibir" label="Tag el-Sir el-Hibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="17765" end="17770" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="18444" end="18482" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="attorney general for England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836814" start="18644" end="18662" title="Treasury Solicitor" label="Treasury Solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="19187" end="19191" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="19344" end="19369" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280559" start="19385" end="19416" title="Director of Public Prosecutions" label="Director of Public Prosecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="19627" end="19666" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="Solicitor General for England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398140" start="19679" end="19707" title="Government of Wales Act 2006" label="Government of Wales Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176615" start="19713" end="19728" title="Counsel General for Wales" label="Counsel General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="19763" end="19779" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300937" start="19837" end="19867" title="Parliament of Northern Ireland" label="Parliament of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="19881" end="19919" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General for England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818620" start="19991" end="20028" title="Attorney General for Northern Ireland" label="Attorney General for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631272" start="20072" end="20109" title="Advocate General for Northern Ireland" label="Advocate General for Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="20168" end="20193" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="20240" end="20253" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="20390" end="20408" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="20603" end="20622" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="20634" end="20648" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="20674" end="20683" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928362" start="20691" end="20720" title="Advocate General for Scotland" label="Advocate General for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154402" start="20788" end="20818" title="Solicitor General for Scotland" label="Solicitor General for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="21001" end="21018" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="21053" end="21068" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="21119" end="21137" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="21210" end="21249" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="21255" end="21271" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="21291" end="21298" title="United States Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="21319" end="21340" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="21467" end="21484" title="United States Solicitor General" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="21587" end="21600" title="United States Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="21756" end="21766" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="21820" end="21836" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7603658" start="21847" end="21864" title="State Attorney General" label="attorneys general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867319" start="22578" end="22615" title="Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs (Zimbabwe)" label="Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190022" start="23133" end="23147" title="Prime Minister of Iceland" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013941" start="23344" end="23363" title="Minister of Justice (Iceland)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="24732" end="24748" title="Justice minister" label="Justice minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368517" start="24751" end="24793" title="Public prosecutor general (disambiguation)" label="Public prosecutor general (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247538" start="24796" end="24831" title="Procurator General (disambiguation)" label="Procurator General (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54378" wikidata="Q150793" url="?curid=54378" title="Sturmabteilung">
<text>The  (; SA; or &#x27;Storm Troopers&#x27;) was the original paramilitary organisation under Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party of Germany. It played a significant role in Hitler&#x27;s rise to power in the 1920s and early 1930s. Its primary purposes were providing protection for Nazi rallies and assemblies, disrupting the meetings of opposing parties, fighting against the paramilitary units of the opposing parties, especially the &quot;Roter Frontkämpferbund&quot; of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and the &quot;Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold&quot; of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), and intimidating Romani, trade unionists, and especially Jews.

The SA were colloquially called Brownshirts () because of the colour of their uniform&#x27;s shirts, similar to Benito Mussolini&#x27;s blackshirts. The official uniform of the SA was a brown shirt with a brown tie. The color came about because a large shipment of Lettow-shirts, originally intended for the German colonial troops in Germany&#x27;s former East Africa colony, was purchased in 1921 by Gerhard Roßbach for use by his &quot;Freikorps&quot; paramilitary unit. They were later used for his Schill Youth organization in Salzburg, and in 1924 were adopted by the Schill Youth in Germany. The &quot;Schill Sportversand&quot; then became the main supplier for the SA&#x27;s brown shirts. The SA developed pseudo-military titles for its members, with ranks that were later adopted by several other Nazi Party groups.

Following Hitler&#x27;s rise to Nazi Party leadership in 1921, he formalized the party&#x27;s militant supporters into the SA as a group that was to protect party gatherings. In 1923, owing to his growing distrust of the SA, Hitler ordered the creation of a bodyguard unit, which was ultimately abolished after the failed Beer Hall Putsch later that year. Not long after Hitler&#x27;s release from prison, he ordered the creation of another bodyguard unit in 1925 that ultimately became the (SS). During the Night of the Long Knives () purge in 1934, the SA&#x27;s then-leader Ernst Röhm was arrested and executed. The SA continued to exist but lost almost all its influence and was effectively superseded by the SS, which took part in the purge. The SA remained in existence until after Nazi Germany&#x27;s final capitulation to the Allies in 1945, after which it was disbanded and outlawed by the Allied Control Council.

== Rise ==
The term predates the founding of the Nazi Party in 1919. Originally it was applied to the specialized assault troops of Imperial Germany in World War I who used infiltration tactics based on being organized into small squads of a few soldiers each. The first official German stormtrooper unit was authorized on March 2, 1915, on the Western Front. The German high command ordered the VIII Corps to form a detachment to test experimental weapons and develop tactics that could break the deadlock on the Western Front. On October 2, 1916, Erich Ludendorff ordered all German armies in the west to form a battalion of stormtroopers. They were first used during the 8th Army&#x27;s siege of Riga, and again at the Battle of Caporetto. Wider use followed on the Western Front in the German spring offensive in March 1918, when Allied lines were successfully pushed back tens of kilometers.

The DAP (, German Workers&#x27; Party) was formed in Munich in January 1919, and Adolf Hitler joined it in September of that year. His talents for speaking, publicity and propaganda were quickly recognized. By early 1920 he had gained authority in the party, which changed its name to the NSDAP ( or National Socialist German Workers&#x27; Party) in February 1920. The party&#x27;s executive committee added &quot;Socialist&quot; to the name over Hitler&#x27;s objections, to help the party appeal to left-wing workers.

The precursor to the had acted informally and on an &quot;ad hoc&quot; basis for some time before this. Hitler, with an eye to helping the party to grow through propaganda, convinced the leadership committee to invest in an advertisement in the &quot;&quot; (later renamed the ) for a mass meeting in the , to be held in Munich on October 16, 1919. Some 70 people attended, and a second such meeting was advertised for November 13 in the beer hall, also in Munich. About 130 people attended; there were hecklers, but Hitler&#x27;s military friends promptly ejected them by force, and the agitators &quot;flew down the stairs with gashed heads&quot;. The next year on February 24, he announced the party&#x27;s Twenty-Five Point program at a mass meeting of some 2,000 people at the Hofbräuhaus. Protesters tried to shout Hitler down, but his former army companions, armed with rubber truncheons, ejected the dissenters. The basis for the SA had been formed.

A permanent group of party members, who would serve as the (meeting hall protection detachment) for the DAP, gathered around Emil Maurice after the February 1920 incident at the Hofbräuhaus. There was little organization or structure to this group. The group was also called the &quot;Stewards Troop&quot; () around this time. More than a year later, on August 3, 1921, Hitler redefined the group as the &quot;Gymnastic and Sports Division&quot; of the party (), perhaps to avoid trouble with the government. It was by now well recognized as an appropriate, even necessary, function or organ of the party. The future SA developed by organizing and formalizing the groups of ex-soldiers and beer-hall brawlers who were to protect gatherings of the Nazi Party from disruptions from Social Democrats (SPD) and Communists (KPD), and to disrupt meetings of the other political parties. By September 1921 the name (SA) was being used informally for the group. Hitler was the official head of the Nazi Party by this time.

The Nazi Party held a large public meeting in the Munich Hofbräuhaus on November 4, 1921, which attracted many Communists and other enemies of the Nazis. After Hitler had spoken for some time, the meeting erupted into a mêlée in which a small company of SA thrashed the opposition. The Nazis called this event the (), and it assumed legendary proportions in SA lore with the passage of time. Thereafter, the group was officially known as the .

The leadership of the SA passed from Maurice to the young Hans Ulrich Klintzsch in this period. He had been a naval officer and a member of the Brigade, which had taken part in the failed attempted coup. When he took over command of the SA, he was a member of the notorious Organisation Consul (OC). The Nazis under Hitler began to adopt the more professional management techniques of the military.

In 1922, the Nazi Party created a youth section, the , for young men between the ages of 14 and 18 years. Its successor, the Hitler Youth ( or HJ), remained under SA command until May 1932. Hermann Göring joined the Nazi Party in 1922 after hearing a speech by Hitler. He was given command of the SA as the in 1923. He was later appointed an SA- (general) and held this rank on the SA rolls until 1945.

From April 1924 until late February 1925, the SA was reorganized into a front organization known as the to circumvent Bavaria&#x27;s ban on the Nazi Party and its organs. (This had been instituted after the abortive Beer Hall Putsch of November 1923). While Hitler was in prison, Ernst Röhm helped to create the as a legal alternative to the then-outlawed SA. In April 1924, Röhm had also been given authority by Hitler to rebuild the SA in any way he saw fit. When in April 1925 Hitler and Ludendorff disapproved of the proposals under which Röhm was prepared to integrate the 30,000-strong into the SA, Röhm resigned from all political movements and military brigades on May 1, 1925. He felt great contempt for the &quot;legalistic&quot; path the party leaders wanted to follow and sought seclusion from public life. Throughout the 1920s and into the 1930s, members of the SA were often involved in street fights, called (collisions), with members of the Communist Party (KPD). In 1929, the SA added a Motor Corps for better mobility and a faster mustering of units. It also acquired an independent source of funds: royalties from its own Sturm Cigarette Company. Previously, the SA had been financially dependent on the party leadership, as it charged no membership fees; the SA recruited particularly among the many unemployed in the economic crisis. The SA used violence against shops and shopkeepers stocking competing cigarette brands; it also punished any SA member caught with non-Sturm cigarettes. Sturm marketing was also used to make military service more appealing. Cigarettes were sold with collectible sets of images of historical German army uniforms.

In September 1930, as a consequence of the Stennes revolt in Berlin, Hitler assumed supreme command of the SA as its new . He sent a personal request to Röhm, asking him to return to serve as the SA&#x27;s chief of staff. Röhm accepted this offer and began his new assignment on January 5, 1931. He brought radical new ideas to the SA and appointed several close friends to its senior leadership.

Previously, the SA formations were subordinate to the Nazi Party leadership of each . Röhm established new that had no regional Nazi Party oversight. Each Gruppe extended over several regions and was commanded by a SA- who answered only to Röhm or Hitler. Under Röhm as its popular leader and (Staff Chief), the SA grew in importance within the Nazi power structure and expanded to have thousands of members. In the early 1930s, the Nazis expanded from an extremist fringe group to the largest political party in Germany, and the SA expanded with it. By January 1932, the SA numbered approximately 400,000.

Many of these stormtroopers believed in the strasserist promise of nazism. They expected the Nazi regime to take more radical economic action, such as breaking up the vast landed estates of the aristocracy, once they obtained national power. By the time Hitler assumed power in January 1933, SA membership had increased to approximately 2,000,000—twenty times as large as the number of troops and officers in the (German Army).

== Fall ==
After Hitler and the Nazis obtained national power, the SA leadership also became increasingly eager for power. By the end of 1933, the SA numbered more than 3 million men, and many believed they were the replacement for the &quot;antiquated&quot; . Röhm&#x27;s ideal was to absorb the army (then limited by law to no more than 100,000 men) into the SA, which would be a new &quot;people&#x27;s army&quot;. This deeply offended and alarmed the professional army leaders and threatened Hitler&#x27;s goal of co-opting the . The SA&#x27;s increasing power and ambitions also posed a threat to other Nazi leaders. Originally an adjunct to the SA, the (SS) was placed under the control of Heinrich Himmler, in part to restrict the power of the SA and their leaders. The younger SS had evolved to be more than a bodyguard unit for Hitler and demonstrated that it was better suited to carry out Hitler&#x27;s policies, including those of a criminal nature.
Although some of the conflicts between the SS and SA were based on personal rivalries of leaders, the mass of members had key socio-economic differences and related conflicts. SS members generally came from the middle class, while the SA had its base among the unemployed and working class. Politically speaking, the SA was more radical than the SS, with its leaders arguing the Nazi revolution had not ended when Hitler achieved power, but rather needed to implement Strasserism in Germany. Hitler believed that the defiant and rebellious culture encouraged before the seizure of power had to give way to using these forces for community organization. But the SA members resented tasks such as canvassing and fundraising, considering them (&quot;little work&quot;), which had typically been performed by women before the Nazi seizure of power. , the first Gestapo chief, estimated that in 1933 Berlin, 70 percent of new SA recruits were former Communists.

In 1933, General Werner von Blomberg, the Minister of Defence, and General Walter von Reichenau, the chief of the &#x27;s Ministerial Department, became increasingly concerned about the growing power of the SA. Röhm had been given a seat on the National Defence Council and began to demand more say over military matters. On October 2, 1933, Röhm sent a letter to Reichenau that said: &quot;I regard the now only as a training school for the German people. The conduct of war, and therefore of mobilization as well, in the future is the task of the SA.&quot;

Blomberg and von Reichenau began to conspire with Göring and Himmler against Röhm and the SA. Himmler asked Reinhard Heydrich to assemble a dossier on Röhm. Heydrich recognized that for the SS to gain full national power, the SA had to be broken. He manufactured evidence to suggest that Röhm had been paid 12 million marks by French agents to overthrow Hitler. Hitler liked Röhm and initially refused to believe the dossier provided by Heydrich. Röhm had been one of his first supporters and, without his ability to obtain army funds in the early days of the movement, it is unlikely that the Nazis would have ever become established. The SA under Röhm&#x27;s leadership had also played a vital role in destroying the opposition during the elections of 1932 and 1933.

== Night of the Long Knives ==


Hitler had his own reasons for wanting Röhm removed. Some of his powerful supporters had been complaining about Röhm for some time. The generals opposed Röhm&#x27;s desire to have the SA, a force of by then over three million men, absorb the much smaller German Army into its ranks under his leadership. Since the officers had developed the Reichswehr as a professional force of 100,000, they believed that it would be destroyed if merged with millions of untrained SA thugs. Furthermore, the army commanders were greatly concerned about reports of a huge cache of weapons in the hands of SA members. Industrialists, who had provided the funds for the Nazi victory, were unhappy with Röhm&#x27;s socialistic views on the economy and his claims that the real revolution had still to take place. President Hindenburg informed Hitler in June 1934 that if a move to curb the SA was not forthcoming, he would dissolve the government and declare martial law.

Hitler was also concerned that Röhm and the SA had the power to remove him as leader. Göring and Himmler played on this fear by constantly feeding Hitler with new information on Röhm&#x27;s proposed coup. A masterstroke was to claim that Gregor Strasser, whom Hitler felt had betrayed him, was part of the planned conspiracy against him. With this news, Hitler ordered all the SA leaders to attend a meeting in the Hanselbauer Hotel in .

On June 30, 1934, Hitler, accompanied by SS units, arrived at Bad Wiessee, where he personally placed Röhm and other high-ranking SA leaders under arrest. Over the next 48 hours, 200 other senior SA officers were arrested on the way to Wiessee. Many were shot and killed as soon as they were captured, but Hitler decided to pardon Röhm because of his past services to the movement. On July 1, after much pressure from Göring and Himmler, Hitler agreed that Röhm should die. Hitler insisted that Röhm should first be allowed to commit suicide. When Röhm refused to do so, he was shot by two SS officers, Theodor Eicke and Michael Lippert. Though the names of 85 victims are known, estimates place the total number killed at between 150 and 200 men, the rest of whom remain unidentified.

Some Germans were shocked by the executions, but many others perceived Hitler to have restored &quot;order&quot; to the country. Goebbels&#x27; propaganda highlighted the &quot;Röhm-Putsch&quot; in the days that followed. The homosexuality of Röhm and other SA leaders was made public to add &quot;shock value&quot;, although Hitler and other Nazi leaders had known for years about the sexuality of Röhm and other named SA leaders.

== After the purge ==
After the Night of the Long Knives, the SA continued to operate, under the leadership of &quot;Stabschef&quot; Viktor Lutze, but the group was significantly downsized. Within a year&#x27;s time, the SA membership was reduced by more than 40%. However, the Nazis increased attacks against Jews in the early 1930s and used the SA to carry these out.

In November 1938, after the assassination of German diplomat Ernst vom Rath by Herschel Grynszpan (a Polish Jew), the SA was used for &quot;demonstrations&quot; against the act. In violent riots, members of the SA shattered the glass storefronts of about 7,500 Jewish stores and businesses. The events were referred to as (&#x27;Night of Broken Glass&#x27;, more literally &#x27;Crystal Night&#x27;). Jewish homes were ransacked throughout Germany. This pogrom damaged, and in many cases destroyed, about 200 synagogues (constituting nearly all Germany had), many Jewish cemeteries, more than 7,000 Jewish shops, and 29 department stores. Some Jews were beaten to death and more than 30,000 Jewish men were arrested and taken to concentration camps.

Thereafter, the SA became overshadowed by the SS; by 1939 it had little remaining significance in the Nazi Party, though it was never formally disbanded and continued to exist until the war ended. In January 1939, the role of the SA was officially established as a training school for the armed forces, with the establishment of the SA (SA Military Units). With the start of World War II in September 1939, the SA lost most of its remaining members to military service in the (armed forces).

In January 1941, long-standing rivalries between the &quot;Auswärtiges Amt&quot; (Foreign Office) and the SS exploded with the attempted coup d&#x27;état in Bucharest that saw SS back the coup by the Iron Guard under its leader Horia Sima against the Prime Minister, General Ion Antonescu, while the &quot;Auswärtiges Amt&quot; together with the Wehrmacht backed Antonescu. In the aftermath of the coup, the Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop made an effort to curb the power of the SS to conduct a foreign policy independent of the &quot;Auswärtiges Amt&quot;. Taking an advantage of the long-standing rivalries between the SS and the SA, in 1941, Ribbentrop appointed an assemblage of SA men to head the German embassies in Eastern Europe, with Manfred Freiherr von Killinger going to Romania, Siegfried Kasche to Croatia, Adolf-Heinz Beckerle to Bulgaria, Dietrich von Jagow to Hungary, and Hanns Ludin to Slovakia in order to ensure that there would be minimal co-operation with the SS. The role of the SA ambassadors was that of &quot;quasi-&quot;Reich&quot; governors&quot; as they aggressively supervised the internal affairs of the nations they were stationed in, making them very much unlike traditional ambassadors. The SA leaders ambassadors fulfilled Ribbentrop&#x27;s hopes in that all had distant relations with the SS, but as a group they were notably inept as diplomats with Beckerle being so crude and vulgar in his manners that King Boris III almost refused to allow him to present his credentials at the Vrana Palace. As the ambassador in Bratislava, Ludin arranged the deportation of 50,000 Slovak Jews to Auschwitz in 1942. On 23–24 August 1944, Killinger notably bungled the German response to King Michael I&#x27;s Coup that saw King Michael I of Romania dismiss Antonescu, sign an armistice with the Allies, and declare war on Germany, thereby costing the &quot;Reich&quot; its largest source of oil. Of the SA ambassadors, Killinger and Jagow committed suicide in 1944 and 1945 respectively while Kasche and Ludin were executed for war crimes in 1947 in Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia respectively. Beckerle spent 11 years in a Soviet POW camp, was released to West Germany in 1955, was charged with war crimes in 1966 for his role in the deportation of Macedonian Jews, which were dropped on grounds of ill health in 1968 and died in 1976 at a retirement home in West Germany.

In 1943, Viktor Lutze was killed in an automobile accident, and Wilhelm Schepmann was appointed as leader. Schepmann did his best to run the SA for the remainder of the war, attempting to restore the group as a predominant force within the Nazi Party and to mend years of distrust and bad feelings between the SA and SS. On the night of 29–30 March 1945, Austrian SA members were involved in a death march of Hungarian Jews from a work camp at Engerau (modern Petržalka, Slovakia) to Bad Deutsch-Altenburg that saw 102 of the Jews being killed, being either shot or beaten to death.

The SA ceased to exist in May 1945 when Nazi Germany collapsed. It was formally disbanded and outlawed by the Allied Control Council enacting Control Council Law No. 2 on October 10, 1945. In 1946, the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg formally ruled that the SA was not a criminal organization.

== Leadership ==
The leader of the SA was known as the , translated as Supreme SA-Leader. The following men held this position:

* Emil Maurice (1920–1921)
* Hans Ulrich Klintzsch (1921–1923)
* Hermann Göring (1923)
* &quot;None&quot; (1923–1925)
* Franz Pfeffer von Salomon (1926–1930)
* Adolf Hitler (1930–1945)

In September 1930, to quell the Stennes Revolt and to try to ensure the personal loyalty of the SA to himself, Hitler assumed command of the entire organization and remained for the remainder of the group&#x27;s existence until 1945. The day-to-day running of the SA was conducted by the (SA Chief of Staff), a position Hitler designated for Ernst Röhm. After Hitler&#x27;s assumption of the supreme command of the SA, it was the who was generally accepted as the Commander of the SA, acting in Hitler&#x27;s name. The following personnel held the position of :

* Otto Wagener (1929–1931)
* Ernst Röhm (1931–1934)
* Viktor Lutze (1934–1943)
* Max Jüttner (acting, May–August 1943)
* Wilhelm Schepmann (1943–1945)

== Organization ==

The SA was organized into several large regional (&quot;Groups&quot;). The group leader answered only to the
 or Hitler. Each was made up of subordinate
 (&quot;Brigades&quot;). Subordinate to the were the smaller regiment-sized . operated in every major German city and were split into even smaller units, known as and .

The command nexus for the entire SA was the , located in Stuttgart. The SA supreme command had many sub-offices to handle supply, finance and recruiting.

The SA also had several military training units. The largest was the , which served as an auxiliary to the (German Navy) and performed search and rescue operations as well as harbor defense. The SA also had an &quot;army&quot; wing, similar to the Waffen-SS, known as . This formation expanded from regimental size in 1940 to a fully-fledged armored corps () in 1945. As for units formed outside of Germany, after the success of the invasion of Poland in 1939, an SA unit, &quot;Great Government&quot; was formed. The units were renamed SA &quot;Wehrschützen-Bereitschaften&quot; in 1942. The title was abbreviated to SA &quot;Wehrbereitschaften&quot;, thereafter.

== Organization structure August 1934–1945 ==
* (Group): consisting of several brigades
* : 3 to 9 
* : 3 to 5 
* : 3 to 5 
* : 3 to 4 
* : 3 to 4 
* : 1 or 2 
* : 4 to 8 SA-Men

== &quot;Beefsteaks&quot; within the ranks ==

In his 1936 &quot;Hitler: A Biography&quot;, German historian Konrad Heiden remarked that within the SA ranks, there were &quot;large numbers of former Communists and Social Democrats&quot; and that &quot;many of the storm troops were called &#x27;beefsteaks&#x27; – brown outside and red within.&quot; The influx of non-Nazis into the membership was so prevalent that SA men would joke that &quot;In our storm troop there are three Nazis, but we shall soon have spewed them out.&quot;

The number of &quot;beefsteaks&quot; was estimated to be large in some cities, especially in northern Germany, where the influence of Gregor Strasser and Strasserism was significant. The head of the Gestapo from 1933 to 1934, Rudolf Diels, reported that &quot;70 percent&quot; of the new SA recruits in the city of Berlin had been communists. This is evidenced further by historians, &quot;As for the prior youth group memberships, nearly half of the SS members and nearly one-third of the instant stormtroopers were with the Free Corps, vigilantes, or militant veterans&#x27; groups during their first 25 years of life. They also came in disproportionate numbers from left-wing youth groups such as the Socialist or Communist Youth or the Red Front (RFB).&quot;

Some have argued that since most SA members came from working-class families or were unemployed, they were more amenable to Marxist-leaning socialism, expecting Hitler to fulfill the 25-point National Socialist Program. However, historian reports that the repeated efforts by the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) to appeal to the working-class backgrounds of the SA were &quot;doomed to failure&quot;, because most SA men were focused on the nationalistic cult of Hitler and destroying the &quot;Marxist enemy&quot;, a term that was used to identify both the KPD and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).

The &quot;beefsteak&quot; name also referred to party-switching between Nazi and Communist party members, particularly involving those within the SA ranks.

== See also ==

* Uniforms and insignia of the
**Corps colors of the
* Militia
* Political color
* Political uniform
* Glossary of Nazi Germany
* List of Nazi Party leaders and officials
* National Action – Neo-nazi organization which uses logo based on SA
* &quot;SA-Feldjägerkorps&quot; (SA Field Police)

Similar paramilitary organizations

* Albanian Fascist Party – Albania (&quot;Blackshirts&quot;)
* Bangladesh Chhatra League – Student wing of Center-Left Awami League in Bangladesh, which was used to suppress opposition under the rule of Sheikh Hasina
* Black Brigades
* Blackshirts - Italy
* British Union of Fascists – United Kingdom (&quot;Blackshirts&quot;)
* Blue Shirts Society – China ()
* Blueshirts – Ireland
* Black Shortsparody of the blackshirts in the writings of P. G. Wodehouse
* - independent paramilitary organizations of ex-German Army soldiers and unemployed workers who fought against Communist uprisings after World War I
** - paramilitary organizations of the Nazi Germany
* Greenshirts (National Corporate Party) – Ireland
* Gold shirts – Mexico
* Greyshirts – ethnically Dutch South Africans (Afrikaaners)
* – paramilitary wing of the NS, the Norwegian National Socialist party 1940–45.
* Integralismo
* Iron Guard – Romania (&quot;Greenshirts&quot;)
* Italian Social Republic – (&quot;Blackshirts&quot;)
* Militia organizations in the United States
* National Socialist Motor Corps – another Nazi Party organization
* National Socialist Flyers Corps – another Nazi Party organization
* – Canada (&quot;Blueshirts&quot;)
* Portuguese Legion () – Portugal
* Red Shirts (United States)
* Silver Legion of America – United States (&quot;Silvershirts&quot;)
* 
* paramilitary groups
* – paramilitary arm of the NSB, the Dutch fascist and later National Socialist political party 1931–45.
==References==
Informational notes
Citations
Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


Further reading
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="4" end="4" title="Sturmabteilung" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="8" end="10" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="60" end="72" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="92" end="104" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="113" end="123" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="168" end="195" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q702302" start="437" end="459" title="Roter Frontkämpferbund" label="Roter Frontkämpferbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="473" end="499" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q670703" start="520" end="549" title="Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold" label="Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="563" end="597" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="622" end="628" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="630" end="641" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="662" end="666" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="701" end="712" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Brownshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250528" start="747" end="768" title="Uniforms and insignia of the Sturmabteilung" label="uniform&amp;#x27;s shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="781" end="797" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="805" end="816" title="blackshirts" label="blackshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q57203" start="934" end="940" title="Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck" label="Lettow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76768" start="941" end="946" title="shirt" label="shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q513069" start="984" end="999" title="Schutztruppe" label="colonial troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="1003" end="1043" title="German East Africa" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s former East Africa colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q67129" start="1070" end="1085" title="Gerhard Roßbach" label="Gerhard Roßbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="1107" end="1116" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1171" end="1183" title="Schilljugend" label="Schill Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250528" start="1427" end="1432" title="uniforms and insignia of the Sturmabteilung" label="ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16607081" start="1750" end="1766" title="Stoßtrupp-Hitler" label="a bodyguard unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="1816" end="1832" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="2002" end="2026" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="2071" end="2081" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="2282" end="2320" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="Nazi Germany&amp;#x27;s final capitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2328" end="2334" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="2393" end="2415" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2467" end="2477" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2550" end="2566" title="German Empire" label="Imperial Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2570" end="2581" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460942" start="2591" end="2611" title="infiltration tactics" label="infiltration tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304229" start="2705" end="2717" title="Stormtroopers (Imperial Germany)" label="stormtrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506105" start="2814" end="2824" title="VIII Corps (German Empire)" label="VIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="2932" end="2945" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="2967" end="2983" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q270188" start="3092" end="3100" title="8th Army (German Empire)" label="8th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347885" start="3108" end="3113" title="Riga offensive (1917)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="3117" end="3121" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="3140" end="3159" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Battle of Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="3208" end="3231" title="German spring offensive" label="German spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q631205" start="3327" end="3353" title="German Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3369" end="3375" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="3487" end="3497" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q217334" start="4547" end="4572" title="National Socialist Program" label="Twenty-Five Point program"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="4721" end="4731" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="truncheons"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742" start="4921" end="4933" title="Emil Maurice" label="Emil Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="5576" end="5592" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="5603" end="5613" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q72583" start="6315" end="6336" title="Hans Ulrich Klintzsch" label="Hans Ulrich Klintzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q658327" start="6401" end="6408" title="Marinebrigade Ehrhardt" label="Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q702202" start="6531" end="6550" title="Organisation Consul" label="Organisation Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="6782" end="6794" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="6847" end="6861" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="7179" end="7186" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="7277" end="7293" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="7341" end="7351" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091858" start="8202" end="8225" title="Sturm Cigarette Company" label="Sturm Cigarette Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q884351" start="8773" end="8787" title="Stennes revolt" label="Stennes revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q701333" start="9780" end="9791" title="Strasserism" label="strasserist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="9803" end="9809" title="nazism" label="nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="10861" end="10877" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="11338" end="11350" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="11403" end="11416" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q701333" start="11595" end="11606" title="Strasserism" label="Strasserism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="11984" end="11991" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q70992" start="12102" end="12121" title="Werner von Blomberg" label="Werner von Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57144" start="12160" end="12180" title="Walter von Reichenau" label="Walter von Reichenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="12753" end="12770" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="13789" end="13799" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="14242" end="14262" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="President Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="14388" end="14399" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q76638" start="14640" end="14655" title="Gregor Strasser" label="Gregor Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q65098" start="15444" end="15457" title="Theodor Eicke" label="Theodor Eicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q65632" start="15462" end="15477" title="Michael Lippert" label="Michael Lippert"/>
<link wikidata="Q110443235" start="15854" end="15875" title="Röhm scandal" label="homosexuality of Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="16093" end="16117" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484212" start="16178" end="16187" title="Stabschef" label="Stabschef"/>
<link wikidata="Q57703" start="16194" end="16206" title="Viktor Lutze" label="Viktor Lutze"/>
<link wikidata="Q76883" start="16493" end="16507" title="Ernst vom Rath" label="Ernst vom Rath"/>
<link wikidata="Q313863" start="16511" end="16529" title="Herschel Grynszpan" label="Herschel Grynszpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="16886" end="16892" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="16941" end="16950" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="17161" end="17180" title="Internment" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q442004" start="17904" end="17914" title="Horia Sima" label="Horia Sima"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="17951" end="17964" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="18101" end="18123" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q215904" start="18428" end="18458" title="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger" label="Manfred Freiherr von Killinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q215947" start="18477" end="18493" title="Siegfried Kasche" label="Siegfried Kasche"/>
<link wikidata="Q216706" start="18506" end="18526" title="Adolf-Heinz Beckerle" label="Adolf-Heinz Beckerle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216694" start="18540" end="18558" title="Dietrich von Jagow" label="Dietrich von Jagow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213920" start="18575" end="18586" title="Hanns Ludin" label="Hanns Ludin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="19132" end="19141" title="Boris III of Bulgaria" label="Boris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465811" start="19204" end="19216" title="Vrana Palace" label="Vrana Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="19239" end="19249" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="19397" end="19423" title="1944 Romanian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="King Michael I&amp;#x27;s Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="19438" end="19458" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q61120" start="20148" end="20165" title="Wilhelm Schepmann" label="Wilhelm Schepmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013328" start="20544" end="20553" title="Petržalka" label="Petržalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="20555" end="20563" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661194" start="20568" end="20589" title="Bad Deutsch-Altenburg" label="Bad Deutsch-Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="20778" end="20800" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="20870" end="20901" title="Nuremberg trials" label="International Military Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="20905" end="20914" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="20952" end="20973" title="Organized crime" label="criminal organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742" start="21107" end="21119" title="Emil Maurice" label="Emil Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q72583" start="21134" end="21155" title="Hans Ulrich Klintzsch" label="Hans Ulrich Klintzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="21170" end="21184" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q62748" start="21225" end="21250" title="Franz Pfeffer von Salomon" label="Franz Pfeffer von Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="21265" end="21277" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q106014" start="21856" end="21868" title="Otto Wagener" label="Otto Wagener"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="21883" end="21893" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q57703" start="21908" end="21920" title="Viktor Lutze" label="Viktor Lutze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240632" start="21935" end="21946" title="Max Jüttner" label="Max Jüttner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61120" start="21975" end="21992" title="Wilhelm Schepmann" label="Wilhelm Schepmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="22240" end="22248" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="22406" end="22415" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="22639" end="22656" title="search and rescue" label="search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="22752" end="22761" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="22937" end="22955" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78290" start="23458" end="23471" title="Konrad Heiden" label="Konrad Heiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q76638" start="24017" end="24032" title="Gregor Strasser" label="Gregor Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q701333" start="24037" end="24048" title="Strasserism" label="Strasserism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60940" start="24109" end="24121" title="Rudolf Diels" label="Rudolf Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="24771" end="24778" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q217334" start="24839" end="24865" title="National Socialist Program" label="National Socialist Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="24927" end="24953" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="25218" end="25252" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250528" start="25436" end="25464" title="Uniforms and insignia of the Sturmabteilung" label="Uniforms and insignia of the"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150205" start="25467" end="25486" title="Corps colours of the Sturmabteilung" label="Corps colors of the"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="25489" end="25496" title="Militia" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686487" start="25499" end="25514" title="Political color" label="Political color"/>
<link wikidata="Q290656" start="25517" end="25534" title="Political uniform" label="Political uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q682540" start="25537" end="25561" title="Glossary of Nazi Germany" label="Glossary of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q542459" start="25564" end="25604" title="List of Nazi Party leaders and officials" label="List of Nazi Party leaders and officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560868" start="25607" end="25622" title="National Action (UK)" label="National Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q938450" start="25683" end="25700" title="SA-Feldjägerkorps" label="SA-Feldjägerkorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465719" start="25764" end="25786" title="Albanian Fascist Party" label="Albanian Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855285" start="25825" end="25850" title="Bangladesh Chhatra League" label="Bangladesh Chhatra League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="25881" end="25893" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q52183" start="25965" end="25978" title="Sheikh Hasina" label="Sheikh Hasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811988" start="25981" end="25995" title="Black Brigades" label="Black Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="25998" end="26009" title="Blackshirts" label="Blackshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q920343" start="26020" end="26045" title="British Union of Fascists" label="British Union of Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q702156" start="26091" end="26110" title="Blue Shirts Society" label="Blue Shirts Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q689733" start="26124" end="26134" title="Blueshirts" label="Blueshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356682" start="26147" end="26159" title="Roderick Spode" label="Black Shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="26204" end="26219" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="26409" end="26421" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971864" start="26424" end="26462" title="Greenshirts (National Corporate Party)" label="Greenshirts (National Corporate Party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q639548" start="26475" end="26486" title="Gold shirts" label="Gold shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605017" start="26498" end="26508" title="Greyshirts" label="Greyshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="26544" end="26555" title="Afrikaaners" label="Afrikaaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="26586" end="26588" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q592832" start="26640" end="26652" title="Integralismo" label="Integralismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="26655" end="26665" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="26704" end="26727" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631239" start="26758" end="26800" title="Militia organizations in the United States" label="Militia organizations in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q301856" start="26803" end="26833" title="National Socialist Motor Corps" label="National Socialist Motor Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q704721" start="26870" end="26901" title="National Socialist Flyers Corps" label="National Socialist Flyers Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405862" start="26974" end="26994" title="Portuguese Legion (Estado Novo)" label="Portuguese Legion ()"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305032" start="27008" end="27034" title="Red Shirts (United States)" label="Red Shirts (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753311" start="27037" end="27061" title="Silver Legion of America" label="Silver Legion of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980217" start="27110" end="27129" title="Weimar paramilitary groups" label="paramilitary groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q325186" start="27158" end="27161" title="National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands" label="NSB"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54379" wikidata="Q12429" url="?curid=54379" title="Houghton, Michigan">
<text>Houghton (; ) is the largest city and county seat of Houghton County in the U.S. state of Michigan. Located on the Keweenaw Peninsula, Houghton is the largest city in the Copper Country region. It is the fifth-largest city in the Upper Peninsula, with a population of 8,386 at the 2020 United States census. Houghton is the principal city of the Houghton micropolitan area, which includes all of Houghton and Keweenaw counties. Houghton lies upon the Keweenaw Waterway, a partly natural, partly artificial waterway connecting at both ends to Lake Superior. Across the waterway from Houghton lies the city of Hancock.

The city of Houghton was named for Douglass Houghton, an American geologist and physician, primarily known for his exploration of the Keweenaw Peninsula. Houghton is home to Michigan Technological University, a public research university founded in 1885. Michigan Tech hosts a yearly Winter Carnival in February, drawing thousands of visitors from around the world. Michigan Tech&#x27;s athletic teams are nicknamed the Huskies, and compete primarily in the NCAA Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). The Michigan Tech Huskies men&#x27;s ice hockey team competes in the NCAA Division I Central Collegiate Hockey Association (CCHA), and has won three national championships, in 1962, 1965, and 1975.

== History ==
Native Americans mined copper in and around what would later be Houghton thousands of years before European settlement. &quot;French explorers had noted... [its] existence [in the area] as early as the seventeenth century, [and in] 1772 Alexander Henry had prospected for copper on the Ontonagon River near Victoria.&quot;
Many Cornish and Finnish immigrants arrived in the Houghton area to work in the copper mines in the mining boom that made Copper Country on the Keweenaw Peninsula; both groups have had a great influence on the culture and cuisine of the local area. The Finns and others called much of the area Copper Island. Smaller numbers of French-Canadian immigrants moved to Houghton, while more of them settled elsewhere in Houghton County.

The last nearby mines closed in the late 1960s, but a school founded in 1885 by the Michigan State Legislature to teach metallurgy and mining engineering, the Michigan College of Mines, continues today under the name of Michigan Technological University and is the primary employer in the city.

The first known European settler of Houghton was named Ransom Shelden, who set up a store named Ransom&#x27;s near Portage Lake, though it is unclear whether this was in the same building as the 1852 Shelden and Shafer drugs, sometimes described as &quot;the first commercial building constructed in Houghton,&quot; which Shelden owned with his son Ransom B. The main street of Houghton, variously called &quot;Sheldon Avenue,&quot; (incorrectly) Sheldon Street, and Shelden Avenue, is named for him. In the 1970s the construction of a parking deck and the connection of downtown stores to create Shelden Center significantly changed the downtown.

William W. Henderson was appointed the first postmaster of Houghton in 1852.

In 1854, Ernest F. Pletschke platted Houghton, and was incorporated as a village in 1861. In Houghton&#x27;s first days it was said that &quot;only thieves, crooks, murderers and Indians&quot; lived there. The postwar boom and increasing demand for copper wiring fueled the development of Houghton in the 1860s and 1870s.

Houghton gained in importance as a port with the opening of the Keweenaw Waterway in 1873, the waterway being the cumulative dredging and extension of the Portage Lake, Portage Shipping Canal and Lily Pond so as to isolate the northern part of the Keweenaw Peninsula into Copper Island. By 1880 Houghton had become &quot;a burgeoning city&quot; and in 1883, the railroad was extended from Marquette.

1909 saw the founding of what would later become Portage Lake District Library.

During the bitter Copper Country Strike of 1913-1914, the Michigan National Guard was called in after the sheriff petitioned the governor.

Houghton was the birthplace of professional ice hockey in the United States when the Portage Lakers were formed in 1903. Houghton is the home of the Portage Lake Pioneers Senior Hockey Team. The team&#x27;s home ice is Dee Stadium, named after James R. Dee. Dee Stadium was originally called the Amphidrome, before it was severely damaged in a 1927 fire.

Houghton was incorporated as a city in 1970.

In the winter of 2001, Houghton was the site of one of the first lumitalos (Finnish temporary snow houses) to be constructed in the United States.

=== Philatelic history ===
On October 28, 2002, the first day of issue ceremony was held in Houghton for the &quot;snowman stamps&quot; issued by the United States Postal Service.

One of the 2006 United States Postal Service snowflake stamps (&quot;photographed in Houghton by Caltech physicist Kenneth Libbrecht using a digital camera and special microscope&quot;) were unveiled in Houghton.

A pictorial postmark commemorating Winter Carnival 2007, &quot;Ancient Worlds Come to Play in Snowy Drifts of Modern Day&quot;, was applied at the Winter Carnival temporary station in Michigan Technological University&#x27;s Memorial Union Building, February 10, 2007.
==Geography==

The city is located on the south shore of the Keweenaw Waterway, on rolling wooded hills, less than a mile across Portage Lake from Hancock. The city is bounded on the east by Portage Township and Pilgrim, on the west by Dakota Heights and Adams Township, and on the south by Hurontown and Isle Royale Location, unincorporated communities that are part of Portage Township. Houghton is named after Douglass Houghton, discoverer of copper nearby. Houghton is also the home of Michigan Technological University. The city is served by Houghton County Memorial Airport in nearby Oneco.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.

In the West Houghton neighborhood is West Houghton Park, featuring an outdoor ice rink and lawn tennis courts. Along Portage Lake is the Raymond Kestner Waterfront Recreation Area, the principal feature of which is a large &quot;Chutes and Ladders&quot; playground; it also includes Houghton Beach. Along the waterfront, in the area that used to be occupied by the railroad tracks, runs the flat, paved Waterfront Trail for cyclists and pedestrians; at one end of this is the Houghton RV Park, at the other end the Nara Nature Park and midway along this corridor is Mattila Square. Prince&#x27;s Point is also along this trail. Veterans Park is just across the Portage Lake Lift Bridge from Hancock, and contains the memorial to the Houghton Company, which fought in the Civil War. Houghton is the headquarters for Isle Royale National Park.

The Portage Lift Bridge spans Portage Lake, which is part of the river and canal system that crosses the entire peninsula, connecting Hancock and Houghton. The bridge, which provides of vertical clearance for ships when open, is the world&#x27;s heaviest and widest double-decked vertical lift bridge. Since rail traffic was discontinued in the Keweenaw, the lower deck is used to accommodate snowmobile traffic in the winter. The bridge provides the only link between the north and south sections of the Keweenaw peninsula.

===Climate===
Houghton has a humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;) but the (typically) long and snowy (due to lake-effect snow, with an average of ) winters make the city feel as though it is in a climate much farther north. It holds the distinction of having the third-most (behind Duluth and International Falls in Minnesota) maxima below of any incorporated city in the contiguous US, with the top temperature failing to rise above freezing an average of 100.9 days per year. It is sometimes said that Houghton has &quot;two seasons: winter’s here and winter’s coming&quot;.

While Houghton&#x27;s winters may be the subject of humor, residents take the subject of snow and winter very seriously. Houghton is a Winter City—a community that accommodates winter, celebrates it, and whose residents generally enjoy the season by participating in a variety of outdoor activities. Among those activities are cross country skiing, snow-shoeing, ice fishing, snowmobiling, ice skating and outdoor ice hockey, among other activities. Houghton celebrates winter through the “Winter Carnival” organized by Michigan Tech every year in February.

Houghton&#x27;s summer climate tends to be especially pleasant, as hot temperatures are often moderated by the cool waters of nearby Lake Superior. The city&#x27;s record high temperature of was recorded July 7, 1988; this is the only day in the city&#x27;s history with a temperature over . Temperatures below are also relatively infrequent due to the moderating effect of the lake, being reached only on 18.3 nights per year as against over fifty at International Falls. The coldest temperature on record is , set on February 9, 1951. The heaviest monthly snow total was in December 1978; the winter of 1978–1979 saw of snow fall, making it the snowiest in 109 years of continuous records at the county airport (1891–2000). The greatest snow depth recorded was at the end of February 1937; in only two winters between 1891–1892 and 1999–2000 (1925–26 with and 1932–33 with ) has the snow depth never reached at least two feet ().


==People and culture==
Every summer, the city of Houghton hosts a festival known as &quot;Bridgefest&quot;, to commemorate the building of the Portage Lake Lift Bridge; this is often held in conjunction with &quot;Seafoodfest&quot;. Every fall, the Parade of Nations takes place in downtown Houghton to commemorate the ethnic diversity of Michigan Technological University. &quot;Strawberry Fest&quot; is held in neighboring Chassell every summer, which not only celebrates the fruit, but also includes an art market with paintings, photos, sculptures, and crafts.

The city houses two museums. The Carnegie Museum, located in the former Portage Lake District Library building, contains photographs from the Raffaelli Historical Photo Collection, other artifacts on the history of the local area, a mural depicting the history of Houghton, Ontonagon, Baraga and Keweenaw Counties and exhibits of artwork. The AE Seaman Mineral Museum, state mineral museum of Michigan, is located on the campus of Michigan Technological University.

Houghton is often the host of winter sporting events, due to its long winters and many ski hills. The 2006 cross-country skiing Junior Olympics took place in Houghton. The US National Championships for Nordic skiing took place in Houghton in January 2007. In addition, the International Frisbee Tournament (IFT) takes place every year in Houghton and the roll-out of the distance events of the Keweenaw Chain Drive bike races of Houghton and Hancock takes place in downtown Houghton.

Other winter events focus around Michigan Technological University. Michigan Tech hosts a yearly Winter Carnival in which thousands of visitors come to see snow sculptures built by members of fraternities, sororities, other student organizations, as well as a few community groups, and participate in the week-long celebration. Students at the university also receive several days of vacation for Carnival. As part of Winter Carnival 2006, the city of Houghton and the university broke three world records: the largest snowball, the largest snowball fight, and the largest number of people making snow angels in one place. They currently still hold two of these records: largest snowball and largest snowball fight.

&quot;The Daily Mining Gazette&quot; (formerly &quot;The Mining Gazette&quot;) is a daily newspaper published in Houghton.

The town is sometimes referred to by locals as &quot;Hoton&quot; or &quot;Ho-town.&quot; &quot;Hoton&quot; is even stenciled on city property. Since Houghton and Hancock are very near each other, their combined area is often referred to as &quot;Houghton-Hancock,&quot; though the towns are often fierce rivals, something particularly manifested by the sports rivalry between Houghton High School and Hancock Central.

Tourism is a major industry in Houghton. Summer tourism is very popular, especially among those wishing to tour old mines, visit various historical sites, and camp. Winter tourism is also very active from November through April, for snowmobiling, skiing and other winter sports.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the census of 2020, there were 8,386 people residing in the city, living in 2,533 households with an average of 2.30 people per household.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 7,708 people, 2,380 households, and 907 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 2,516 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 85.2% White, 1.0% African American, 0.4% Native American, 11.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.4% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 1.8% of the population.

There were 2,380 households, of which 18.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.6% were married couples living together, 6.3% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.2% had a male householder with no wife present, and 61.9% were non-families. 32.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.82.

The median age in the city was 22.1 years. 10.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 56.2% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 16.1% were from 25 to 44; 10.5% were from 45 to 64; and 7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 64.3% male and 35.7% female.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 7,010 people, 2,114 households, and 877 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 2,222 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 89.24% White, 1.87% Black or African American, 0.40% Native American, 6.79% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.24% from other races, and 1.44% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.77% of the population. 16.4% were of German, 12.7% Finnish, 8.2% Irish, 8.0% English, 6.0% Polish and 5.1% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.8% spoke English, 1.8% Spanish and 1.2% Chinese as their first language.

There were 2,114 households, out of which 21.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 31.6% were married couples living together, 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 58.5% were non-families. 35.2% of all households were one-person households, and 12.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.94.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 12.0% under the age of 18, 55.2% from 18 to 24, 15.3% from 25 to 44, 10.3% from 45 to 64, and 7.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 160.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 173.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $21,186, and the median income for a family was $41,779. Males had a median income of $36,161 versus $28,639 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,750. About 20.3% of families and 36.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.9% of those under age 18 and 18.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

The local school district is Houghton-Portage Township Schools. Students K-12 are served by Houghton Elementary (K-5), Middle (6–8), and High (9–12) Schools. Houghton is also the home of Michigan Technological University.

==Transportation==

===Highways===
* courses north to Hancock and Copper Harbor. To the south and east US 41 routes to L&#x27;Anse and Marquette.
* connects Houghton southwest to US 45.
* provides a loop route from US 41 in neighboring Hancock to McLain State Park. and then back to US 41.

===Bus===
Indian Trails bus lines operates daily intercity bus service between Hancock, Michigan, and Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

Houghton Motor Transit operates both a demand bus and a route bus throughout Houghton and in nearby parts of Portage Township; there are also night trips to Mont Ripley in Ripley.

===Ferry===
Houghton is the port of departure for Isle Royale National Park. Cruise ships on the great lakes formerly (in the 1950s) used to frequently stop in Houghton, but this is now an exceedingly rare occurrence.

===Airport===
Houghton is served by the Houghton County Memorial Airport, which has limited commercial service.

Houghton was formerly served by airship. A seaplane departs from Houghton to Isle Royale National Park.

===Snowmobiling===
Snowmobiling is a major winter activity in the area, both locally (snowmobiles are often the best available means of transportation after a blizzard) and as a tourist industry. The Bill Nichols Snowmobile Trail has a terminus in Houghton.

==Local radio==
*WMPL AM 920
*WCCY (AM) 1400
*WKMJ-FM FM 93.5
*WOLV 97.7
*WUPY FM 101.1
*WHKB FM 102.3
*WMTU-FM 91.9
*WGGL-FM 91.1

==Neighborhoods==

Houghton is generally said to be divided into East Houghton, the Central Houghton area (which includes the downtown) and West Houghton.

*East Houghton runs from Franklin Square to the eastern city limits. A principal street is College Avenue, characterized by Colonial Revival homes, which formerly ran from urbanized Houghton &quot;farms, villas and mining operations... and the Michigan School of Mines, now Michigan Technological University;&quot; today the main campus of MTU has taken over much of the College Avenue area and some of East Houghton generally, though it remains a primarily residential neighborhood. (However, this has changed somewhat with construction of the Pearl Street Mall. The Chassell Sands, which are usually considered apart from it, are partially zoned &quot;Industrial.&quot;) It is home to East Houghton Park. The park was established in 1974 and contains tennis courts and playground equipment. The Chassell sands may be technically said to be part of this neighborhood, but are usually considered as apart from it, as is Minoru Yamasaki-designed Daniell Heights, married-student housing at Tech.
*Central Houghton is a relatively urbanized area of the town, generally considered as being roughly between Franklin Square and the Portage Lake Lift Bridge. The &quot;heart of Houghton&#x27;s commercial district&quot; is characterized by sandstone (frequently mined from Jacobsville or Portage Entry) buildings with the frequent &quot;classical detail&quot;; it is centered on Shelden Avenue, the downtown lying in Central Houghton between Montezuma Avenue and Lake Street / Brew Alley / Lakeshore Drive, which are generally considered one continuous street. South of this area are a series of streets with small wooden houses, primarily from mining days, rising over the arc of the hills that the city is built upon. Northward is the waterfront, which has several dockyards, and older buildings alongside it. While Corktown is the area around St. Ignatius Catholic Church, this neighborhood is rarely spoken of today.
*West Houghton is the site of more recent construction compared to the other two neighborhoods. Therefore, the area has a more modern, suburban feel to it than the other areas. This includes larger middle-class houses built with large wooded lots between them. Most prominent in this area, however, are the retail stores which are becoming the new commercial heart of the city. These include Walmart and several recent strip malls, with numerous small stores housed under a single roof. Several prominent beach areas are located on this side of the city. It is often referred to by locals as &quot;ShopKo Heights (Sho Hi),&quot; the &quot;neighborhood behind ShopKo,&quot; or &quot;ShopKoville&quot; as a ShopKo store had been located there prior to the company&#x27;s closure.

===Micropolitan area===
The Houghton, Michigan micropolitan area is a statistical aggregation of the United States census bureau.

==In popular culture==
Houghton features in the novels &quot;A Superior Death&quot; and &quot;Winter Study&quot; by Nevada Barr and the Robin Hamilton mystery series by Nancy Barr. Much of Ander Monson&#x27;s &quot;Other Electricities&quot; takes place in Houghton.

==Notable people==
* Norm Breyfogle, American comic book artist
* George Brunet, Major League Baseball pitcher for nine teams
* Avis DeVoto, American culinary editor, book reviewer, and cook
* Dolly Gray, baseball player, MLB and Pacific Coast League Hall of Fame
* Chuck Klingbeil, former National Football League player for the Miami Dolphins
* Nancy Harkness Love, World War II pilot
* William A. Longacre, archaeologist
* Charles O. McManiman, former Mayor of Houghton and state Senator
* P.J. Olsson, rock singer
* Eugene Parker, solar astrophysicist and namesake of the Parker Solar Probe
* Emery Ruelle, ice hockey player
* Percy Loomis Sperr, historical photographer

== See also ==

*Keweenaw Brewing Company

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* City of Houghton
* The Daily Mining Gazette Web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12429" start="0" end="8" title="Houghton, Michigan" label="Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="38" end="49" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45441" start="53" end="68" title="Houghton County, Michigan" label="Houghton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="90" end="98" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430" start="115" end="133" title="Keweenaw Peninsula" label="Keweenaw Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q387163" start="171" end="185" title="Copper Country" label="Copper Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="230" end="245" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="281" end="306" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913007" start="346" end="372" title="Houghton micropolitan area, Michigan" label="Houghton micropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q497737" start="409" end="417" title="Keweenaw County, Michigan" label="Keweenaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="451" end="468" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Keweenaw Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="542" end="555" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="608" end="615" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302175" start="653" end="670" title="Douglass Houghton" label="Douglass Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="684" end="693" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="698" end="707" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="792" end="825" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951902" start="902" end="917" title="Michigan Technological University&amp;#x27;s Winter Carnival" label="Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143451" start="1038" end="1045" title="Michigan Tech Huskies" label="Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="1076" end="1092" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599459" start="1093" end="1140" title="Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837751" start="1154" end="1202" title="Michigan Tech Huskies men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Michigan Tech Huskies men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1219" end="1234" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q835207" start="1235" end="1272" title="Central Collegiate Hockey Association" label="Central Collegiate Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969895" start="1299" end="1321" title="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey tournament" label="national championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570783" start="1326" end="1330" title="1962 NCAA men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey tournament" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571954" start="1332" end="1336" title="1965 NCAA University Division men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey tournament" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576695" start="1342" end="1346" title="1975 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey tournament" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1380" end="1392" title="Copper mining in Michigan#Native American" label="mined copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095064" start="1649" end="1664" title="Ontonagon River" label="Ontonagon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883487" start="1670" end="1678" title="Victoria, Michigan" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="1691" end="1698" title="Cornish people" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="1703" end="1710" title="Finnish people" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q387163" start="1808" end="1822" title="Copper Country" label="Copper Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168740" start="1980" end="1993" title="Copper Island" label="Copper Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="2014" end="2029" title="French-Canadian" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270273" start="2202" end="2228" title="Michigan State Legislature" label="Michigan State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="2338" end="2371" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293472" start="2469" end="2483" title="Ransom Shelden" label="Ransom Shelden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3011" end="3025" title="Shelden Center" label="Shelden Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393047" start="3150" end="3169" title="Ernest F. Pletschke" label="Ernest F. Pletschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3320" end="3327" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="3528" end="3545" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Keweenaw Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="3826" end="3834" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12443" start="3853" end="3862" title="Marquette, Michigan" label="Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231421" start="3914" end="3943" title="Portage Lake District Library" label="Portage Lake District Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168713" start="3964" end="3998" title="Copper Country Strike of 1913-1914" label="Copper Country Strike of 1913-1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837629" start="4004" end="4027" title="Michigan National Guard" label="Michigan National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398752" start="4171" end="4185" title="Portage Lakes Hockey Club" label="Portage Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249952" start="4305" end="4316" title="Dee Stadium" label="Dee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q474837" start="4382" end="4392" title="Amphidrome" label="Amphidrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q660747" start="4553" end="4561" title="lumitalo" label="lumitalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q483985" start="4751" end="4758" title="snowman" label="snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="4786" end="4814" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11170094" start="4932" end="4949" title="Kenneth Libbrecht" label="Kenneth Libbrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7219623" start="5033" end="5051" title="pictorial cancellation" label="pictorial postmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951902" start="5066" end="5081" title="Michigan Technological University&amp;#x27;s Winter Carnival" label="Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="5361" end="5378" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Keweenaw Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="5447" end="5454" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231448" start="5491" end="5507" title="Portage Township, Houghton County, Michigan" label="Portage Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210017" start="5536" end="5550" title="Dakota Heights, Michigan" label="Dakota Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997233" start="5555" end="5569" title="Adams Township, Houghton County, Michigan" label="Adams Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850351" start="5591" end="5600" title="Hurontown, Michigan" label="Hurontown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302175" start="5713" end="5730" title="Douglass Houghton" label="Douglass Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5746" end="5752" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="5790" end="5823" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206803" start="5847" end="5879" title="Houghton County Memorial Airport" label="Houghton County Memorial Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5915" end="5942" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q686319" start="6014" end="6027" title="West Houghton" label="West Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6044" end="6062" title="West Houghton Park" label="West Houghton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="6124" end="6136" title="Portage Lake (Keweenaw)" label="Portage Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q697302" start="6236" end="6254" title="Chutes and Ladders" label="Chutes and Ladders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="6261" end="6271" title="playground" label="playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974098" start="6410" end="6426" title="Waterfront Trail" label="Waterfront Trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6573" end="6587" title="Mattila Square" label="Mattila Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231422" start="6668" end="6692" title="Portage Lake Lift Bridge" label="Portage Lake Lift Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6778" end="6787" title="United States Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q163515" start="6822" end="6847" title="Isle Royale National Park" label="Isle Royale National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231422" start="6854" end="6873" title="Portage Lake Lift Bridge" label="Portage Lift Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="6880" end="6892" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Portage Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="6984" end="6991" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="7243" end="7253" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="7405" end="7430" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7432" end="7438" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q485708" start="7672" end="7678" title="Duluth, Minnesota" label="Duluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q946270" start="7683" end="7702" title="International Falls, Minnesota" label="International Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="7706" end="7715" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026208" start="8103" end="8114" title="Winter City" label="Winter City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206803" start="9225" end="9239" title="Houghton County Memorial Airport" label="county airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231422" start="9604" end="9628" title="Portage Lake Lift Bridge" label="Portage Lake Lift Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="9939" end="9944" title="strawberry" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043964" start="10060" end="10075" title="Carnegie Museum of Houghton" label="Carnegie Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45441" start="10291" end="10299" title="Houghton County, Michigan" label="Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45438" start="10301" end="10310" title="Ontonagon County, Michigan" label="Ontonagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q491140" start="10312" end="10318" title="Baraga County, Michigan" label="Baraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q497737" start="10323" end="10331" title="Keweenaw County, Michigan" label="Keweenaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="10357" end="10364" title="Visual arts" label="artwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286347" start="10370" end="10394" title="AE Seaman Mineral Museum" label="AE Seaman Mineral Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="10601" end="10621" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="10696" end="10709" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131689" start="10781" end="10788" title="Frisbee" label="Frisbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="11012" end="11045" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q734898" start="11498" end="11506" title="snowball" label="snowball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066517" start="11520" end="11534" title="snowball fight" label="snowball fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q774460" start="11576" end="11586" title="snow angel" label="snow angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728676" start="11702" end="11726" title="The Daily Mining Gazette" label="The Daily Mining Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="11982" end="11989" title="Hancock, MI" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912952" start="12196" end="12216" title="Houghton High School" label="Houghton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="12564" end="12570" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="12728" end="12734" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="12830" end="12848" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12953" end="12958" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12965" end="12981" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12988" end="13003" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13011" end="13016" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13023" end="13039" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13051" end="13062" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13097" end="13105" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13109" end="13115" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="13274" end="13289" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="13950" end="13956" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14176" end="14181" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14189" end="14214" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14222" end="14237" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14245" end="14250" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14258" end="14274" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14287" end="14298" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14334" end="14342" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14346" end="14352" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="14409" end="14415" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="14423" end="14430" title="Finnish people" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="14437" end="14442" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="14449" end="14456" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="14463" end="14469" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="14479" end="14486" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="14509" end="14520" title="2000 United States Census" label="Census 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="14534" end="14541" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="14548" end="14555" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="14565" end="14572" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="14709" end="14724" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="15521" end="15538" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="15632" end="15644" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989615" start="15764" end="15797" title="Houghton-Portage Township Schools" label="Houghton-Portage Township Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="15922" end="15955" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="16012" end="16019" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168735" start="16024" end="16037" title="Copper Harbor, Michigan" label="Copper Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745129" start="16077" end="16088" title="L&amp;#x27;Anse, Michigan" label="L&amp;#x27;Anse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12443" start="16093" end="16102" title="Marquette, Michigan" label="Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351374" start="16137" end="16142" title="U.S. Route 45 in Michigan" label="US 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802039" start="16205" end="16222" title="McLain State Park" label="McLain State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021774" start="16259" end="16272" title="Indian Trails" label="Indian Trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q12435" start="16328" end="16345" title="Hancock, Michigan" label="Hancock, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="16351" end="16371" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903098" start="16531" end="16542" title="Mont Ripley" label="Mont Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335610" start="16546" end="16552" title="Ripley, Michigan" label="Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q163515" start="16605" end="16630" title="Isle Royale National Park" label="Isle Royale National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206803" start="16814" end="16846" title="Houghton County Memorial Airport" label="Houghton County Memorial Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="16930" end="16938" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953007" start="17268" end="17272" title="WMPL" label="WMPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947689" start="17281" end="17290" title="WCCY (AM)" label="WCCY (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951781" start="17297" end="17304" title="WKMJ-FM" label="WKMJ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953886" start="17314" end="17318" title="WOLV (FM)" label="WOLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956666" start="17325" end="17329" title="WUPY" label="WUPY"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716327" start="17340" end="17344" title="WHKB" label="WHKB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953104" start="17355" end="17362" title="WMTU-FM" label="WMTU-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949757" start="17369" end="17376" title="WGGL-FM" label="WGGL-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050303" start="17509" end="17517" title="downtown" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18084" end="18101" title="Pearl Street Mall (Houghton, Michigan)" label="Pearl Street Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="18292" end="18298" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="18310" end="18320" title="playground" label="playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q347215" start="18459" end="18474" title="Minoru Yamasaki" label="Minoru Yamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18484" end="18499" title="Daniell Heights" label="Daniell Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12427" start="18773" end="18782" title="Jacobsville sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q124282" start="19270" end="19280" title="Dock (maritime)" label="waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="19300" end="19308" title="dockyard" label="dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="19589" end="19597" title="suburban" label="suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="19846" end="19853" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501155" start="20159" end="20165" title="Shopko" label="ShopKo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913007" start="20261" end="20297" title="Houghton, Michigan micropolitan area" label="Houghton, Michigan micropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q447404" start="20480" end="20491" title="Nevada Barr" label="Nevada Barr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20533" end="20543" title="Nancy Barr" label="Nancy Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753693" start="20553" end="20565" title="Ander Monson" label="Ander Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q724391" start="20652" end="20666" title="Norm Breyfogle" label="Norm Breyfogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537362" start="20697" end="20710" title="George Brunet" label="George Brunet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="20712" end="20733" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012227" start="20759" end="20770" title="Avis DeVoto" label="Avis DeVoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289332" start="20824" end="20834" title="Dolly Gray (baseball)" label="Dolly Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="20853" end="20856" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122374" start="20861" end="20894" title="Pacific Coast League Hall of Fame" label="Pacific Coast League Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115564" start="20897" end="20912" title="Chuck Klingbeil" label="Chuck Klingbeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="20921" end="20945" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="20961" end="20975" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061386" start="20978" end="20997" title="Nancy Harkness Love" label="Nancy Harkness Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20999" end="21011" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27067871" start="21020" end="21039" title="William A. Longacre" label="William A. Longacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131404462" start="21057" end="21077" title="Charles O. McManiman" label="Charles O. McManiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117317" start="21124" end="21135" title="P.J. Olsson" label="P.J. Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q503360" start="21151" end="21164" title="Eugene Parker" label="Eugene Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="21172" end="21186" title="Astrophysics" label="astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q899091" start="21207" end="21225" title="Parker Solar Probe" label="Parker Solar Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711074" start="21228" end="21240" title="Emery Ruelle" label="Emery Ruelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54914120" start="21262" end="21280" title="Percy Loomis Sperr" label="Percy Loomis Sperr"/>
<link wikidata="Q96385729" start="21324" end="21348" title="Keweenaw Brewing Company" label="Keweenaw Brewing Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54383" wikidata="Q188546" url="?curid=54383" title="Pangram">
<text>A pangram or holoalphabetic sentence is a sentence using every letter of a given alphabet at least once. Pangrams have been used to display typefaces, test equipment, and develop skills in handwriting, calligraphy, and typing.

==Origins==

The best-known English pangram is &quot;The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog&quot;. It has been used since at least the late 19th century and was used by Western Union to test Telex/TWX data communication equipment for accuracy and reliability. Pangrams like this are now used by a number of computer programs to display computer typefaces.

==Short pangrams==
Short pangrams in English are more difficult to devise and tend to use uncommon words and unnatural sentences. Longer pangrams afford more opportunity for humor, cleverness, or thoughtfulness.

The following are examples of pangrams that are shorter than &quot;The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog&quot; (which has 35 letters) and use standard written English without abbreviations or proper nouns:

*&quot;Waltz, bad nymph, for quick jigs vex.&quot; (28 letters)
*&quot;Glib jocks quiz nymph to vex dwarf.&quot; (28 letters)
*&quot;Sphinx of black quartz, judge my vow.&quot; (29 letters)
*&quot;How quickly daft jumping zebras vex!&quot; (30 letters)
*&quot;The five boxing wizards jump quickly.&quot; (31 letters)
*&quot;Jackdaws love my big sphinx of quartz.&quot; (31 letters)
*&quot;Pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs.&quot; (32 letters)

==Perfect pangrams==
A perfect pangram contains every letter of the alphabet only once and can be considered an anagram of the alphabet. The only perfect pangrams of the English alphabet that are known use abbreviations or other non-dictionary words, such as &quot;Blowzy night-frumps vex&#x27;d Jack Q.&quot; or &quot;Mr. Jock, TV quiz PhD, bags few lynx.&quot; or they include words so obscure that the phrase is challenging to understand, such as &quot;Cwm fjord-bank glyphs vext quiz&quot;, in which &quot;&quot; is a loan word from the Welsh language meaning an amphitheatre-like glaciated depression, &quot;vext&quot; is an uncommon way to spell &quot;vexed&quot;, and &quot;quiz&quot; is used in an archaic sense to mean a puzzling or eccentric person. It means that symbols in the bowl-like depression on the edge of a long steep sea inlet confused an eccentric person.

Other writing systems may present more options: The Iroha is a well-known perfect pangram of the Japanese syllabary, while the Hanacaraka is a perfect pangram for the Javanese script and is commonly used to order its letters in sequence.

==Other languages==
===Using the Latin script===
Whereas the English language uses all 26 letters of the Latin alphabet in native and naturalized words, many other languages using the same alphabet do not. Pangram writers in these languages are forced to choose between only using those letters found in native words or incorporating exotic loanwords into their pangrams. Some words, such as the Gaelic-derived &quot;whisk(e)y&quot;, which has been borrowed by many languages and uses the letters &quot;k&quot;, &quot;w&quot; and &quot;y&quot;, are a frequent fixture of many foreign pangrams.

There are also languages that use other Latin characters that do not appear in the traditional 26 letters of the Latin alphabet. This differs further from English pangrams, with letters such as &quot;ç&quot;, &quot;ä&quot;, and &quot;š&quot;.

;Azerbaijani
: (&quot;Zafar, take your jacket and cap, it will be very cold tonight&quot;)
: (&quot;At the night kind dragon wrapped in paper the rifle of the envious hunter&quot;).
;Czech: &#x27; (&quot;A horse that was too yellow moaned devilish odes&quot;) is the most commonly used one, especially to test alphabet support with fonts. This sentence includes all Czech letters with diacritics, but not all basic letters. To include all basic letters, including letters that only occur in loanwords (&quot;g, q, w, x&quot;), this one is used: &#x27; (&quot;May the sinful saxophones of devils echo through the hall with dreadful melodies of waltz, tango and quickstep.&quot;).

;Danish: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Tall shy groom won naughty sexquiz on wc&quot;) A perfect pangram, using every letter exactly once (Including the more unusual letters as &quot;q&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, and &quot;x&quot;, and including the Danish &quot;æ&quot;, &quot;ø&quot;, and &quot;å&quot;).

;Dutch: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Dad&#x27;s wise lynx piously looked at the sizable aqueduct.&quot;)

;Esperanto: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Maybe every quasi-fitting bungle-choir makes a human type happy.&quot;)
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;According to Ludwig Zamenhof, fresh Czech food with spices tastes good.&quot;)
: (&quot;Echo-changes every Thursday&quot;). Doesn&#x27;t contain every letter but contains all accented letters.

;Estonian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;This little miller can jump on a train&quot;). An imperfect pangram not using any of the special letters used in Estonian only for foreign words (c, f, q, š, z, ž, w, x, y).
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;The puny cellist-feuilletonist Ciqo from Zagreb was freezing in a dreadful garage.&quot;) An imperfect pangram not using some of the special letters used in Estonian only for foreign words (w, x, y)

;Ewe: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Have a nice birthday tonight, it&#x27;s been a long time no see, it&#x27;s been a while since we were in school. Good afternoon, yes, see you again at twelve o&#x27;clock in the morning.&quot;) is a two-part pangram consisting of a statement and response.

;Finnish: &quot;&quot; (Although difficult to translate because of its non-practical use, it roughly means &quot;a whinge of a sleazy lover&quot;.) A perfect pangram not using any of the special letters used in Finnish only for foreign words (&quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;f&quot;, &quot;q&quot;, &quot;š&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, &quot;x&quot;, &quot;z&quot;, &quot;ž&quot;, &quot;å&quot;).
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Albert bought a bassoon and blew a puffing tune&quot;). An imperfect pangram not using some of the special letters used in Finnish only for foreign words (q, w, x, z, å) but which makes perfect everyday sense.
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;It is rather fun that bicycles are a daily phenomenon on the countryroads.&quot;) An imperfect pangram not containing the previously mentioned special letters.
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Viennese rich zombie who can speak Sioux likes Åsa&#x27;s Roquefort tacos&quot;) contains all the letters of the Finnish alphabet.

;French: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Take this old whisky to the blond judge who is smoking&quot;) uses each basic consonant once, though not any letters with diacritics. 

;German: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Victor chases twelve boxers across the Great Levee of Sylt&quot;) contains all letters, including the umlauted vowels (&quot;ä&quot;, &quot;ö&quot;, &quot;ü&quot;) and ß. The letter &quot;y&quot; is limited to loanwords and proper names like &quot;Sylt&quot;.

;Hungarian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;An unfaithful son-in-law is being treated by a sniveling, angry Mexican lord in Quito.&quot;) contains all 44 letters of the Hungarian alphabet, with a total of 50 letters. 
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;An unfaithful son-in-law paints by a sniveling, angry Mexican lord at Wesselényi&#x27;s in Quito.&quot;) Corrected version of the previous sentence, a real pangram.

;Icelandic: &quot;&quot; (&quot;If a new axe were here, thieves would feel increasing deterrence and punishment&quot;) contains all 32 letters in the Icelandic alphabet including the vowels with diacritics (&quot;á&quot;, &quot;é&quot;, &quot;í&quot;, &quot;ó&quot;, &quot;ú&quot;, &quot;ý&quot;, and &quot;ö&quot;) as well as the letters ð, þ, and æ.

;Indonesian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Muharjo is a universal xenophobic who fears the peninsula residents, such as Qatar.&quot;) contains all 26 letters in the Indonesian alphabet, including the foreign letters &quot;q&quot;, &quot;v&quot; and &quot;x&quot;.
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Quran reciter figure gives the xylophone expert a ride on the tour guide&#x27;s moped.&quot;) contains all 26 letters in the Indonesian alphabet. It also contains only the words that are in the Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia.

;Irish: &quot;&quot; (&quot;A large black cat ate the rotten fish promptly&quot;) has 31 letters and includes all 18 letters found in native Irish words, but does not include the accented &quot;á&quot;, &quot;í&quot;, or &quot;ú&quot;, nor the non-accented &quot;e&quot;. 

;Italian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;A lunch of water makes twisted faces&quot;) has 26 letters and includes all 21 letters found in native Italian words. It does not include the five letters which are not found in any Italian words, except for some loanwords: &quot;j&quot;, &quot;k&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, and &quot;x&quot;.
: &quot;Cantami o Diva del pelide Achille l&#x27;ira funesta.&quot; (&quot;Sing to me, O Diva, of Achilles, son of Peleus, the raging wrath.&quot;) has 39 characters without considering any apostrophe and space; it&#x27;s the Italian translation of the first verse of the Iliad and it&#x27;s used in Microsoft Windows operating system if the language is set to Italian (Italiano).

;Kurdish: &quot;&quot; (&quot;There were more than four beautiful flowers near the filthy Feqo&quot;) has 42 letters and includes all 31 letters found in Kurdish words. This pangram was created by Îrec Mêhrbexş in 2023.

;Malay: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Muzafar often prayed and read the Quran while studying at the University of Oxford.&quot;) contains all 26 letters in the Malay Latin alphabet.

;Norwegian: &quot; (&#x27;strange golfplayer with club won sexquiz in hometown&#x27;).

;Polish: &quot; (&quot;Make the ego yellow with a gusle&quot;) - contains all diactrics, but not every letter and is mainly used to test font support
: To test all letters used in Polish language, two perfect pangrams are most commonly used:
: &#x27; (&quot;Push a hedgehog or eight crates of figs in this boat&quot;) - most commonly used, perfect pangram, archaic spelling of &#x27;.
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Be brave, protect your regiment and six flags&quot;) - another pangram in common use.
: &quot;&quot; (&quot;The watchman pushed the bone/dice into a quiz of the musics or a fax of the washes&quot;) - a perfect pangram containing all letters, including those used only in loan words: &quot;q&quot;, &quot;v&quot;, &quot;x&quot;.

;Portuguese: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Lone defendant that sees a sexy hunk forcibly stuff a chopped kiwi in a trunk sets bad judge in a panic.&quot;) uses all diacritics and all 23 letters from the Portuguese alphabet (before the Orthographic Agreement of 1990; the letters &quot;k&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, and &quot;y&quot; are found mainly in loanwords).

;Romanian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;[I&#x27;m] still selling jam, beige whisky, and pink tequila, [with a] fixed price.&quot;) contains all letters, including Romanian diacritics.: ă, â, î, ș, and ț. The letters &quot;q&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, and &quot;y&quot; were introduced in the Romanian alphabet in 1982 with the first DOOM dictionary. They are used for loan words such as &quot;quodlibet&quot;, &quot;watt&quot;, and &quot;yoga&quot;. The letter &quot;k&quot; is also rarely used, mainly for names and international neologisms such as &quot;kilogram&quot; and &quot;folk&quot;.

;Serbian: &#x27; (&quot;A kind lamplighter with a sooty face wants to show me a prank.&quot;) Can equally be written in gajica: &#x27;.

;Spanish: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Benjamin ordered a kiwi and strawberry drink. Noah, without shame, the most exquisite champagne on the menu&quot;) uses all diacritics and the foreign letters &quot;k&quot; and &quot;w&quot;.: &quot;El veloz murciélago hindú comía feliz cardillo y kiwi. La cigüeña tocaba el saxofón detrás del palenque de paja.&quot; (The quick Indian bat was happily eating cardillo and kiwi. The stork was playing the saxophone behind the straw palenque.) contains 2 sentences and 92 letters; it&#x27;s used in Microsoft Windows operating system if the language is set to Spanish (Español).

;Slovak: &quot;&quot; (&quot;A flock of happy woodpeckers by the mouth of the river Váh is teaching a silent horse to nibble on bark and feed on fresh meat&quot;) contains all letters in the Slovak alphabet. It does not include the letters &quot;f&quot;, &quot;g&quot;, &quot;j&quot;, &quot;l&quot;, &quot;q&quot;, &quot;w&quot;, &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, as well as accented vowels &quot;á&quot; and &quot;ó&quot;.

;Swedish: &quot;&quot; (&quot;Flying snipes seek rest on soft tussocks&quot;) is missing q, x and z. Uses archaic spellings.
:&quot;&quot; (&quot;Axe killer Julia Blomqvist on fencing in Switzerland&quot;) uses the name &quot;Julia Blomqvist&quot; and the Swedish name for Switzerland.
:&quot;&quot; (&quot;Switzerland brings luxury feather on branch behind oven&quot;) feels quite contrived. The duplicated letters spell out &quot;serif&quot;.
:&quot;&quot; (&quot;FAQ about Switzerland: Did you cleave a narrow village of ski boots?&quot;) uses the English abbreviation FAQ alongside some made-up compounds.
:&quot;&quot; (&quot;Axe-handle carrier, give our WC zone-maiden IQ support&quot;)
:&quot;&quot; (&quot;God help Zorn&#x27;s maiden quickly get her pants off&quot;) uses both old-fashioned spelling and the dialectal form &quot;byx&quot;.
:&quot;&quot; (&quot;Foal without pants went to the dove show&quot;) is missing q and z.
;Turkish: &quot;&quot; (&quot;The sick person in pyjamas quickly trusted the swarthy driver&quot;) contains all of the letters in the Turkish alphabet.
;Welsh: &quot;&quot; (&quot;I didn&#x27;t park my least favourite pink fabric car and my magical digger full of bitter water by Mabon&#x27;s house on Tuesday, but I parked it in a rusty lagoon&quot;) uses all the letters of the Welsh alphabet including the loan letter &quot;j&quot;.

===Other alphabetic scripts===
Non-Latin alphabetic or phonetic scripts such as Greek, Armenian, and others can also have pangrams. In some writing systems, exactly what counts as a distinct symbol can be debated. For example, many languages have accents or other diacritics, but one might count &quot;é&quot; and &quot;e&quot; as the same for pangrams. A similar problem arises for older English orthography that includes the long s (&quot;ſ&quot;).

;Arabic: (&quot;wise text with a decisive secret and great significance, written on a green cloth and wrapped in blue leather&quot;)
;Armenian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Chinese physicist treats the swollen left arm of the Armenian colonel by spraying it with soapwater&quot;).

;Belarusian: &#x27; (&quot;In Ivy, a thin, lively devil in a green vest ran to eat minced meat with soup&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;I will brutally kill this flowery profile that walks by my house straight to the heart&quot;).

;Bulgarian: &#x27; (&quot;Under a southern tree, blooming in blue, ran a little fluffy bunny&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;For a moment I was in an unfamiliar squeaky plush armchair.&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;Oh, wonderful Bulgarian land, whirl blooming wheats!&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;Hey, Valyo the guard is pretending to watch, but he&#x27;s secretly eating meatballs behind the crates!&quot;).

;Georgian: &quot;&quot; (&quot;We were overcome by smoke, the birds were carried away by chirping in the sky, sleep is disturbed by the clatter of glasses on the ground&quot;) contains all the letters of the Georgian alphabet.

;Hebrew: קזחסטן ארץ מעלפת, גדושה בכי. (&quot;Kazakhstan is a beautiful country, full of tears.&quot;), שפן אכל קצת גזר בטעם חסה, ודי. (&quot;A bunny ate some lettuce-flavored carrots, and he had enough&quot;), איש עם זקן טס לצרפת ודג בחכה. (&quot;A man with a beard flew to France and fished with a fishing pole&quot;), כך התרסק נפץ על גוזל קטן שדחף את צבי למים (&quot;That&#x27;s how the explosives fell on the little chick that pushed the deer into the water&quot;), דג סקרן שט בים, מאוכזב ולפתע מצא חברה (&quot;A curious fish swimming in the sea is disappointed and suddenly finds a friend&quot;).

;Russian: &#x27; (&quot;Eat some more of these soft French pastries and drink some tea&quot;) is most commonly used. Its variation is used by Windows FontView. Another popular pangram is &#x27; (&quot;Would a citrus live in the jungles of the south? Yes, but a fake specimen!&quot;). This pangram is used by GNOME.

;Thai: &quot;&quot; 
(&quot;Mr.Sangkhaphant Hengpithakfang - an elderly man who earns a living by selling bottles - was arrested for prosecution by police because he stole Lady Chatchada Chansamat&#x27;s watch.&quot;) contains all the letters in the Thai alphabet, both obsolete and non-obsolete.

===Non-alphabetic scripts===
Logographic scripts, or writing systems such as Chinese that do not use an alphabet but are composed principally of logograms, cannot produce pangrams in a literal sense (or at least, not pangrams of reasonable size). The total number of signs is large and imprecisely defined, so producing a text with every possible sign is practically impossible. However, various analogies to pangrams are feasible, including traditional pangrams in a romanization.

In Japanese, although typical orthography uses kanji (logograms), pangrams can be made using every kana, or syllabic character. The Iroha is a classic example of a perfect pangram in non-Latin script.

In Chinese, the Thousand Character Classic is a 1000-character poem in which each character is used exactly once; however, it does not include all Chinese characters. The single character (permanence) incorporates all the basic strokes used to write Chinese characters, using each stroke exactly once, as described in the Eight Principles of Yong.

Among abugida scripts, an example of a perfect pangram is the &quot;Hanacaraka (hana caraka; data sawala; padha jayanya; maga bathanga)&quot; of the Javanese script, which is used to write the Javanese language in Indonesia. 
;Bengali: &quot;&quot;All 50 letters of the Bengali alphabet are present in this pangram created by Sahidul and published in &quot;Shubach Little Mag&quot;.

==Self-enumerating pangrams==
A self-enumerating pangram is a pangrammatic autogram, or a sentence that inventories its own letters, each of which occurs at least once. The first example was produced by Rudy Kousbroek, a Dutch journalist and essayist, who publicly challenged Lee Sallows, a British recreational mathematician resident in the Netherlands, to produce an English translation of his Dutch pangram. In the sequel, Sallows built an electronic &quot;pangram machine&quot;, that performed a systematic search among millions of candidate solutions. The machine was successful in identifying the following &#x27;magic&#x27; translation:

:This pangram contains four As, one B, two Cs, one D, thirty Es, six Fs, five Gs, seven Hs, eleven Is, one J, one K, two Ls, two Ms, eighteen Ns, fifteen Os, two Ps, one Q, five Rs, twenty-seven Ss, eighteen Ts, two Us, seven Vs, eight Ws, two Xs, three Ys, &amp; one Z.

Chris Patuzzo was able to reduce the problem of finding a self-enumerating pangram to the boolean satisfiability problem. He did this by using a made-to-order hardware description language as a stepping stone and then applied the Tseytin transformation to the resulting chip.

==Pangrams in literature==
The pangram &quot;The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog&quot;, and the search for a shorter pangram, are the cornerstone of the plot of the novel &quot;Ella Minnow Pea&quot; by Mark Dunn. The search successfully comes to an end when the phrase &quot;Pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs&quot; is discovered (which has only 6 duplicated vowels).

The scientific paper &quot;Cneoridium dumosum&quot; (Nuttall) Hooker F. Collected March 26, 1960, at an Elevation of about 1450 Meters on Cerro Quemazón, 15 Miles South of Bahía de Los Angeles, Baja California, México, Apparently for a Southeastward Range Extension of Some 140 Miles has a pangrammatic title, seemingly by pure chance.

==See also==

*Panalphabetic window
*Pangrammatic window
*Pangrammatic lipogram
*Pandigital number, the same idea for integers in a given base
*Heterogram - word, phrase, or sentence in which no letter of the alphabet occurs more than once
*Lipogram, in which the aim is to omit one or more letters from a sentence
*The New York Times Spelling Bee, a word game which involves the concept of pangrams

==References==
==External links==
*Pangram finder within any text
*List of pangrams | Clagnut
*Fun With Words: Pangrams</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188546" start="2" end="9" title="Pangram" label="pangram"/>
<link wikidata="Q188546" start="13" end="36" title="Pangram" label="holoalphabetic sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796" start="42" end="50" title="Sentence (linguistics)" label="sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="81" end="89" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="140" end="148" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393642" start="189" end="200" title="handwriting" label="handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="202" end="213" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215756" start="219" end="225" title="typing" label="typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q399981" start="281" end="324" title="The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" label="The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="402" end="415" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="424" end="429" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="430" end="433" title="Telex#Teletypewriter Exchange Service" label="TWX"/>
<link wikidata="Q399981" start="870" end="913" title="The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" label="The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="1578" end="1585" title="anagram" label="anagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="1988" end="1997" title="loan word" label="loan word"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2007" end="2021" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q908402" start="2397" end="2402" title="Iroha" label="Iroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="2451" end="2460" title="syllabary" label="syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2472" end="2482" title="Javanese script#Order" label="Hanacaraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q879704" start="2512" end="2520" title="Javanese script" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="2980" end="2986" title="Gaelic languages" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="2995" end="3016" title="whisky" label="&amp;quot;whisk(e)y&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582641" start="3241" end="3254" title="List of Latin-script letters" label="do not appear"/>
<link wikidata="Q11758" start="4631" end="4646" title="Ludwig Zamenhof" label="Ludwig Zamenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="6635" end="6644" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107" start="6732" end="6736" title="Sylt" label="Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q472947" start="6780" end="6788" title="diaeresis (diacritic)" label="umlauted"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="6846" end="6847" title="ß" label="ß"/>
<link wikidata="Q9993" start="7672" end="7673" title="Eth" label="ð"/>
<link wikidata="Q49043" start="7675" end="7676" title="Thorn (letter)" label="þ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9990" start="7682" end="7683" title="æ" label="æ"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="7966" end="7971" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q217673" start="8046" end="8051" title="Vespa" label="moped"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200623" start="8160" end="8188" title="Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia" label="Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="9070" end="9075" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="9098" end="9115" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="9463" end="9468" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="9491" end="9511" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q669370" start="9712" end="9717" title="gusle" label="gusle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113432" start="10623" end="10653" title="Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990" label="Orthographic Agreement of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q336228" start="10924" end="10925" title="ă" label="ă"/>
<link wikidata="Q9985" start="10927" end="10928" title="â" label="â"/>
<link wikidata="Q28622" start="10930" end="10931" title="î" label="î"/>
<link wikidata="Q396845" start="10933" end="10934" title="ș" label="ș"/>
<link wikidata="Q423402" start="10940" end="10941" title="ț" label="ț"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="11448" end="11454" title="Serbian Latin alphabet" label="gajica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="11992" end="12009" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="12157" end="12160" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="12926" end="12931" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q206820" start="13217" end="13221" title="Anders Zorn" label="Zorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="13565" end="13581" title="Turkish alphabet" label="Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56435730" start="13811" end="13825" title="Welsh orthography" label="Welsh alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q484140" start="14295" end="14301" title="long s" label="long s"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="16343" end="16348" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="16601" end="16614" title="Thai alphabet" label="Thai alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="16794" end="16802" title="logogram" label="logogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="17117" end="17129" title="romanization" label="romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="17135" end="17143" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="17179" end="17184" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="17231" end="17235" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="17240" end="17248" title="syllabary" label="syllabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q908402" start="17264" end="17269" title="Iroha" label="Iroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265243" start="17350" end="17376" title="Thousand Character Classic" label="Thousand Character Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="17481" end="17499" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143266" start="17656" end="17680" title="Eight Principles of Yong" label="Eight Principles of Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q335806" start="17689" end="17696" title="abugida" label="abugida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17832" end="17847" title="Javanese script#Order" label="Javanese script"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="17876" end="17893" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="17897" end="17906" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756802" start="17953" end="17969" title="Bengali alphabet" label="Bengali alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826294" start="18142" end="18150" title="autogram" label="autogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q961117" start="18270" end="18284" title="Rudy Kousbroek" label="Rudy Kousbroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15576486" start="18343" end="18354" title="Lee Sallows" label="Lee Sallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410503" start="18366" end="18392" title="recreational mathematician" label="recreational mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q875276" start="19074" end="19104" title="boolean satisfiability problem" label="boolean satisfiability problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q173341" start="19143" end="19172" title="hardware description language" label="hardware description language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315059" start="19214" end="19236" title="Tseytin transformation" label="Tseytin transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364547" start="19446" end="19461" title="Ella Minnow Pea" label="Ella Minnow Pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767434" start="19471" end="19480" title="Mark Dunn" label="Mark Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q67537966" start="19664" end="19926" title="Cneoridium dumosum (Nuttall) Hooker F. Collected March 26, 1960, at an Elevation of about 1450 Meters on Cerro Quemazón, 15 Miles South of Bahía de Los Angeles, Baja California, México, Apparently for a Southeastward Range Extension of Some 140 Miles" label="&amp;quot;Cneoridium dumosum&amp;quot; (Nuttall) Hooker F. Collected March 26, 1960, at an Elevation of about 1450 Meters on Cerro Quemazón, 15 Miles South of Bahía de Los Angeles, Baja California, México, Apparently for a Southeastward Range Extension of Some 140 Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386354" start="19995" end="20015" title="Panalphabetic window" label="Panalphabetic window"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105152" start="20017" end="20036" title="Pangrammatic window" label="Pangrammatic window"/>
<link wikidata="Q836165" start="20038" end="20059" title="Pangrammatic lipogram" label="Pangrammatic lipogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659695" start="20061" end="20078" title="Pandigital number" label="Pandigital number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="20098" end="20105" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="20118" end="20122" title="radix" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145104" start="20124" end="20134" title="Heterogram (literature)" label="Heterogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q836165" start="20221" end="20229" title="Lipogram" label="Lipogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q108208395" start="20296" end="20327" title="The New York Times Spelling Bee" label="The New York Times Spelling Bee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54384" wikidata="Q201369" url="?curid=54384" title="Awá (Brazil)">
<text>The Awá are an Indigenous people of Brazil living in the Amazon rain forest. There are approximately 350 members, and 100 of them have no contact with the outside world. They are considered highly endangered because of conflicts with logging interests in their territory.

The Awá people speak Guajá, a Tupi–Guaraní language. Originally living in settlements, they adopted a nomadic lifestyle around 1800 to escape incursions by Europeans.

==History==
During the 19th century, the Awá came under increasing attack by European settlers in the region, who cleared most of the forests from their land. Beginning around 1800, the Awá people adopted an increasingly nomadic lifestyle in order to avoid European invaders.

From the mid-1980s onward, some Awá moved to government-established settlements. However, for the most part, they were able to maintain their traditional way of life. Sustaining themselves entirely from their forests in nomadic groups of a few dozen people, and with little or no contact with the outside world.

In 1982, the Brazilian government received a loan of US$900 million from the World Bank and the European Union. One condition of the loan was that the lands of certain Indigenous peoples, including the Awá, would be demarcated and protected; this held particular importance for the Awá, whose forests were being increasingly invaded by outsiders, with many cases of tribespeople being killed by settlers, and the forest on which they depended being destroyed by logging and land clearance for farming.

Without government intervention, it seemed very likely that the Awá and their culture would become extinct. However, the Brazilian government was extraordinarily slow to act on its commitment. It took 20 years of sustained pressure from campaigning organisations such as Survival International and, earlier, the Forest Peoples Programme before, in March 2003, the Awá&#x27;s land was finally demarcated.

Meanwhile, encroachment on their land and a series of massacres had reduced their numbers to about 300, only about 60 of whom were still living their traditional hunter-gatherer way of life.

In late 2011, illegal loggers burned an 8-year-old Awá girl alive after she wandered out of her village. The murder happened inside a protected area in the state of Maranhão. Luis Carlos Guajajaras, a leader from another people, said that the girl had been killed as a warning to other native peoples living in the protected area.

According to the Indigenous Missionary Council, about 450 Indigenous people were murdered between 2003 and 2010. An investigation discovered the Awá camp in question had been destroyed by loggers. According to Survival International, a human rights organization which campaigns for the rights of Indigenous tribal peoples and considers them to be the &quot;earth&#x27;s most threatened tribe,&quot; Awá forests are now disappearing faster than in any other Indian area in the Brazilian Amazon.

In April 2012, Survival International launched a worldwide campaign, backed by the actor Colin Firth, to protect the Awá people.

In September 2012, Brazil&#x27;s Indian Affairs Department claimed that loggers were only away from the Awá.

In 2019, Reuters published a rough cut video of uncontacted tribe members, as activists warn of growing threats to this tribe from loggers who are nearing their traditional hunting ground. In July 2021, it was confirmed that one of the tribe&#x27;s members, Karapiru Awá Guajá, had died of COVID-19 earlier in the month, at an estimated age of 75. Guajá, who campaigned against the destruction of Awá land and for the rights of Indigenous Brazilian peoples, had been vaccinated against the virus.

==References==
==External links==
* Guajá – Instituto Socioambiental
* Awa: Earth&#x27;s Most Threatened Tribe – Survival International
*Domeni Pugliesi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201369" start="4" end="7" title="Awá (Brazil)" label="Awá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="15" end="32" title="indigenous peoples of Brazil" label="Indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="36" end="42" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="57" end="75" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="234" end="241" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915506" start="294" end="299" title="Guajá language" label="Guajá"/>
<link wikidata="Q148610" start="303" end="315" title="Tupi–Guaraní" label="Tupi–Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="518" end="549" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European settlers in the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="662" end="669" title="Nomad" label="nomadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153878" start="1044" end="1064" title="Brazilian government" label="Brazilian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1108" end="1118" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1127" end="1141" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q903658" start="1247" end="1257" title="Demarcation line" label="demarcated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887464" start="1805" end="1827" title="Survival International" label="Survival International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469075" start="1846" end="1870" title="Forest Peoples Programme" label="Forest Peoples Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="2101" end="2116" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42362" start="2296" end="2304" title="Maranhão" label="Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887464" start="2673" end="2695" title="Survival International" label="Survival International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="2699" end="2711" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740925" start="2939" end="2955" title="Brazilian Amazon" label="Brazilian Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887464" start="2973" end="2995" title="Survival International" label="Survival International"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="3047" end="3058" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="3207" end="3214" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="3276" end="3285" title="activists" label="activists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3456" end="3474" title="Karapiru Awá Guajá" label="Karapiru Awá Guajá"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="3488" end="3496" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54385" wikidata="Q5097923" url="?curid=54385" title="Child sacrifice">
<text>Child sacrifice is the ritualistic killing of children in order to please or appease a deity, supernatural beings, or sacred social order, tribal, group or national loyalties in order to achieve a desired result. As such, it is a form of human sacrifice.
Child sacrifice is thought to be an extreme extension of the idea that the more important the object of sacrifice, the more devout the person rendering it.

The practice of child sacrifice in Europe and the Near East appears to have ended as a part of the religious transformations of late antiquity.

==Pre-Columbian cultures==
Archaeologists have found the remains of more than 140 children who were sacrificed in Peru&#x27;s northern coastal region.

===Aztec culture===

The Aztecs are well known for their ritualistic human sacrifice as offerings to gods with the goal of restoring cosmological balance. While the demographic of people chosen to sacrifice remains unclear, there is evidence that victims were mostly warriors captured in battle and slaves in the slave trade. Human sacrifice was not limited to adults, however; 16th century Spanish codices chronicled child sacrifice to Aztec rain gods. In 2008, archaeologists found and excavated 43 victims of Aztec sacrifice, 37 of which were subadults. The sacrificial victims were found by Temple R, a temple in Tlatelolco, the ancient Aztec city which is now Mexico City. Temple R was dedicated to the Aztec rain gods, including Tlāloc, Ehecatl, Quetzalcoatl, and Huītzilōpōchtli. A majority (66%) of the excavated subadults were under 3 years old, and 32 subadults as well as 6 adults were identified as male, although the sex determination results could be replicated only for 26 of the 38 individuals.

It is hypothesized that this specific child sacrifice took place during the great drought and famine of 1454–1457, furthering the theory that Aztecs utilized human sacrifice to placate the gods. Osteological and dental pathological evidence shows that many of the child sacrificial victims had varying health issues, and it is suggested that the Tlaloques selected these children who had medical ailments. Because sacrificial victims typically embodied the gods they were being sacrificed to, male child sacrifices were more present at this site due to the masculine nature of the Aztec rain gods.

===Inca culture===
The Inca culture sacrificed children in a ritual called &quot;qhapaq hucha&quot;. Their frozen corpses have been discovered in the South American mountaintops. The first of these corpses, a female child who had died from a blow to the skull, was discovered in 1995 by Johan Reinhard. Other methods of sacrifice included strangulation and simply leaving the children, who had been given an intoxicating drink, to lose consciousness in the extreme cold and low-oxygen conditions of the mountaintop, and to die of hypothermia.

=== Maya culture ===
In Maya culture, people believed that supernatural beings had power over their lives and this is one reason that child sacrifice occurred. The sacrifices were essentially to satisfy the supernatural beings. This was done through &quot;k&#x27;ex&quot;, which is an exchange or substitution of something. Through &quot;k&#x27;ex&quot; infants would substitute more powerful humans. It was thought that supernatural beings would consume the souls of more powerful humans and infants were substituted in order to prevent that. Infants are believed to be good offerings because they have a close connection to the spirit world through liminality. It is also believed that parents in Maya culture would offer their children for sacrifice and depictions of this show that this was a very emotional time for the parents, but they would carry through because they thought the child would continue existing. It is also known that infant sacrifices occurred at certain times. Child sacrifice was preferred when there was a time of crisis and transitional times such as famine and drought.

There is archaeological evidence of infant sacrifice in tombs where the infant has been buried in urns or ceramic vessels. There have also been depictions of child sacrifice in art. Some art includes pottery and steles as well as references to infant sacrifice in mythology and art depictions of the mythology.

===Moche culture===

The Moche of northern Peru practiced mass sacrifices of men and boys. Archeologists found the remains of 137 children and 3 adults, along with 200 camelids, during excavations in 2011, 2014 and 2016, beneath the sands of a 15th-century site called Huanchaquito-Las Llamas. This sacrifice was possibly made during the heavy rains as there was a layer of mud on top of the clean sand.

===Timoto-Cuica culture===
The Timoto-Cuicas offered human sacrifices. Until colonial times children sacrifice persisted secretly in Laguna de Urao (Mérida). It was described by the chronicler Juan de Castellanos, who cited that feasts and human sacrifices were done in honour of Icaque, an Andean prehispanic goddess.

==Ancient Near East==
===Tanakh===
The Tanakh mentions human sacrifice in the history of ancient Near Eastern practice. The king of Moab gives his firstborn son and heir as a whole burnt offering (&quot;olah&quot;, as used of the Temple sacrifice). In the book of the prophet Micah, the question is asked, &#x27;Shall I give my firstborn for my sin, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?&#x27;, and responded to in the phrase, &#x27;He has shown all you people what is good. And what does Yahweh require of you? To act justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.&#x27; The Tanakh also implies that the Ammonites offered child sacrifices to Moloch.

According to scholars such as Otto Eissfeldt, Paul G. Mosca, and Susan Ackerman, Moloch was not a name for a god, but instead is a word for a particular form of child sacrifice practiced in Israel and Judah which was not abandoned until the reforms of Josiah. In the Tanakh mentions are made in books such as Kings, Leviticus, and Jeremiah of children being given &quot;to the &quot;mōlek&quot;&quot;. According to Patrick D. Miller these child sacrifice traditions were not originally part of the Yahwism, but were instead foreign imports. Francesca Stavrakopoulou contradicts this, asserting that sacrifices were native to Israel and part of the royal line&#x27;s attempts to perpetuate itself.

 states &quot;The firstborn of your sons you shall give to me&quot; potentially a demand by Yahweh that the firstborn children of the Israelites must be sacrificed to him. However, Jacob Milgrom argues that Yahweh forbids human sacrifice and that in Exodus 22:28b-29, as in the Day of Atonement, Yahweh instituted substitutionary animal sacrifices for human sin and the redemption of the firstborn in Israelite families (cf. ). Yahweh also states to the prophet Jeremiah, “They have built the high places of Topheth in the Valley of Ben Hinnom to burn their sons and daughters in the fire—something I did not command, nor did it enter my mind,” (Jeremiah 7:31) which some scholars interpret as indicating that it was once viewed as a central part to the law and desire of Yahweh.

====Binding of Isaac====
Genesis 22 relates the binding of Isaac, by Abraham to present his son, Isaac, as a sacrifice on Mount Moriah. It was a test of faith (Genesis 22:12). Abraham agrees to this command without arguing. The story ends with an angel stopping Abraham at the last minute and making Isaac&#x27;s sacrifice unnecessary by providing a ram, caught in some nearby bushes, to be sacrificed instead. Other interpretations of the text have contradicted this version. For example, Martin S. Bergmann states &quot;The Aggadah rabbis asserted that &quot;father Isaac was bound on the altar and reduced to ashes, and his sacrificial dust was cast on Mount Moriah.&quot; A similar interpretation was made in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Margaret Barker notes that &quot;Abraham returned to Bersheeba without Isaac&quot; according to , a possible sign that he was indeed sacrificed. Barker also stated that wall paintings in the ancient Dura-Europos synagogue explicitly show Isaac being sacrificed, followed by his soul traveling to heaven. According to Jon D. Levenson a part of Jewish tradition interpreted Isaac as having been sacrificed. Similarly the German theologians and maintain that due to the grammatical perfect tense used to describe Abraham&#x27;s sacrifice of Isaac, he did, in fact, follow through with the action.

Rabbi A.I. Kook, first Chief Rabbi of Israel, stressed that the climax of the story, commanding Abraham not to sacrifice Isaac, is the whole point: to put an end to, and God&#x27;s total aversion to the ritual of child sacrifice. According to Irving Greenberg the story of the binding of Isaac, symbolizes the prohibition to worship God by human sacrifices, at a time when human sacrifices were the norm worldwide.

====Ban in Leviticus====

In Leviticus 18:21, 20:3 and Deuteronomy 12:30–31, 18:10, the Torah contains a number of imprecations against and laws forbidding child sacrifice and human sacrifice in general. The Tanakh denounces human sacrifice as barbaric customs of Baal worshippers (e.g. Psalms 106:37).
James Kugel argues that the Torah&#x27;s specifically forbidding child sacrifice indicates that it happened in Israel as well. The biblical scholar Mark S. Smith argues that the mention of &quot;Tophet&quot; in Isaiah 30:27–33 indicates an acceptance of child sacrifice in the early Jerusalem practices, to which the law in Leviticus 20:2–5 forbidding child sacrifice is a response. Some scholars have stated that at least some Israelites and Judahites believed child sacrifice was a legitimate religious practice.

====Numbers 31====
In the aftermath of the War against the Midianites narrated in Numbers 31, the Israelites appear to be dedicating 32 captive Midianite virgin girls to be sacrificed to Yahweh as his share in the spoils of war.
====Gehenna and Tophet====
The most extensive accounts of child sacrifice in the Hebrew torah Tanakh refer to those carried out in Gehenna by two kings of Judah, Ahaz and Manasseh of Judah.

====Jephthah&#x27;s daughter====
In the Book of Judges, chapter 11, the figure of Jephthah makes a vow to God, saying, &quot;If you give the Ammonites into my hands, whatever comes out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in triumph from the Ammonites will be the Lord’s, and I will sacrifice it as a burnt offering&quot; (as worded in the New International Version). Jephthah succeeds in winning a victory, but when he returns to his home in Mizpah he sees his daughter, dancing to the sound of timbrels, outside. After allowing her two months preparation, Judges 11:39 states that Jephthah kept his vow. According to the commentators of the rabbinic Jewish tradition, Jepthah&#x27;s daughter was not sacrificed but was forbidden to marry and remained a spinster her entire life, fulfilling the vow that she would be devoted to the Lord. The 1st-century CE Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, however, interpreted this to mean that Jephthah burned his daughter on Yahweh&#x27;s altar, whilst pseudo-Philo, late first century CE, wrote that Jephthah offered his daughter as a burnt offering because he could find no sage in Israel who would cancel his vow. In other words, this story of human sacrifice is not an order or requirement by God, but the punishment for those who vowed to sacrifice humans.

===Phoenicia and Carthage===

The practice of child sacrifice among Canaanite groups is attested by numerous sources spanning over a millennium. One example is in the writings of Diodorus Siculus:

&quot;They also alleged that Kronos had turned against them inasmuch as in former times they had been accustomed to sacrifice to this god the noblest of their sons, but more recently, secretly buying and nurturing children, they had sent these to the sacrifice; and when an investigation was made, some of those who had been sacrificed were discovered to have been substituted by stealth... In their zeal to make amends for the omission, they selected two hundred of the noblest children and sacrificed them publicly; and others who were under suspicion sacrificed themselves voluntarily, in number not less than three hundred. There was in the city a bronze image of Kronos, extending its hands, palms up and sloping towards the ground, so that each of the children when placed thereon rolled down and fell into a sort of gaping pit filled with fire. It is probable that it was from this that Euripides has drawn the mythical story found in his works about the sacrifice in Tauris, in which he presents Iphigeneia being asked by Orestes: &quot;But what tomb shall receive me when I die? A sacred fire within, and earth&#x27;s broad rift.&quot; Also the story passed down among the Greeks from ancient myth that Cronus did away with his own children appears to have been kept in mind among the Carthaginians through this observance.&quot; Library 20.14

Plutarch:

&quot;Again, would it not have been far better for the Carthaginians to have taken Critias or Diagoras to draw up their law-code at the very beginning, and so not to believe in any divine power or god, rather than to offer such sacrifices as they used to offer to Cronos? These were not in the manner that Empedocles describes in his attack on those who sacrifice living creatures: &quot;Changed in form is the son beloved of his father so pious,Who on the altar lays him and slays him. What folly!&quot; No, but with full knowledge and understanding they themselves offered up their own children, and those who had no children would buy little ones from poor people and cut their throats as if they were so many lambs or young birds; meanwhile the mother stood by without a tear or moan; but should she utter a single moan or let fall a single tear, she had to forfeit the money, and her child was sacrificed nevertheless; and the whole area before the statue was filled with a loud noise of flutes and drums so that the cries of wailing should not reach the ears of the people.&quot; Moralia 2, De Superstitione 3

Plato:

&quot;With us, for instance, human sacrifice is not legal, but unholy, whereas the Carthaginians perform it as a thing they account holy and legal, and that too when some of them sacrifice even their own sons to Cronos, as I daresay you yourself have heard.&quot; Minos 315c

Theophrastus:

&quot;And from then on to the present day they perform human sacrifices with the participation of all, not only in Arcadia during the Lykaia and in Carthage to Kronos, but also periodically, in remembrance of the customary usage, they spill the blood of their own kin on the altars, even though the divine law among them bars from the rites, by means of perirrhanteria and the herald&#x27;s proclamation, anyone responsible for the shedding of blood in peacetime.&quot;

Sophocles:

&quot;. . . was chosen as a . . . sacrifice for the city. For from ancient times the barbarians have had a custom of sacrificing human beings to Kronos.&quot;

Quintus Curtius Rufus:

&quot;Some even proposed renewing a sacrifice which had been discontinued for many years, and which I for my part should believe to be by no means pleasing to the gods, of offering a freeborn boy to Saturn —this sacrilege rather than sacrifice, handed down from their founders, the Carthaginians are said to have performed until the destruction of their city—and unless the elders, in accordance with whose counsel everything was done, had opposed it, the awful superstition would have prevailed over mercy. But necessity, more inventive than any art, introduced not only the usual means of defence, but also some novel ones.&quot; History of Alexander IV.III.23

Tertullian:

&quot;In Africa infants used to be sacrificed to Saturn, and quite openly, down to the proconsulate of Tiberius, who took the priests themselves and on the very trees of their temple, under whose shadow their crimes had been committed, hung them alive like votive offerings on crosses; and the soldiers of my own country are witnesses to it, who served that proconsul in that very task. Yes, and to this day that holy crime persists in secret.&quot; Apology 9.2-3

Philo of Byblos:

&quot;Among ancient peoples in critically dangerous situations it was customary for the rulers of a city or nation, rather than lose everyone, to provide the dearest of their children as a propitiatory sacrifice to the avenging deities. The children thus given up were slaughtered according to a secret ritual. Now Kronos, whom the Phoenicians call El, who was in their land and who was later divinized after his death as the star of Kronos, had an only son by a local bride named Anobret, and therefore they called him Ieoud. Even now among the Phoenicians the only son is given this name. When war’s gravest dangers gripped the land, Kronos dressed his son in royal attire, prepared an altar and sacrificed him.&quot;

Lucian:

&quot;There is another form of sacrifice here. After putting a garland on the sacrificial animals they hurl them down alive from the gateway and the animals die from the fall. Some even throw their children off the place, but not in the same manner as the animals. Instead, having laid them in a pallet, they drop them down by hand. At the same time they mock them and say that they are oxen, not children.&quot;

Cleitarchus:

&quot;And Kleitarchos says the Phoenicians, and above all the Carthaginians, venerating Kronos, whenever they were eager for a great thing to succeed, made a vow by one of their children. If they would receive the desired things, they would sacrifice it to the god. A bronze Kronos, having been erected by them, stretched out upturned hands over a bronze oven to burn the child. The flame of the burning child reached its body until, the limbs having shriveled up and the smiling mouth appearing to be almost laughing, it would slip into the oven. Therefore the grin is called “sardonic laughter,” since they die laughing.&quot;

Porphyry:

&quot;The Phoenicians too, in great disasters whether of wars or droughts, or plagues, used to sacrifice one of their dearest, dedicating him to Kronos. And the ‘Phoenician History,’ which Sanchuniathon wrote in Phoenician and which Philo of Byblos translated into Greek in eight books, is full of such sacrifices.&quot;

At Carthage, a large cemetery exists that combines the bodies of both very young children and small animals, and those who assert child sacrifice have argued that if the animals were sacrificed, then so too were the children. Recent archaeology, however, has produced a detailed breakdown of the ages of the buried children and, based on this and especially on the presence of prenatal individuals – that is, still births – it is also argued that this site is consistent with burials of children who had died of natural causes in a society that had a high infant mortality rate, as Carthage is assumed to have had. That is, the data support the view that Tophets were cemeteries for those who died shortly before or after birth. Conversely, Patricia Smith and colleagues from the Hebrew University and Harvard University show from the teeth and skeletal analysis at the Carthage Tophet that infant ages at death (about two months) do not correlate with the expected ages of natural mortality (perinatal), apparently supporting the child sacrifice thesis.

Greek, Roman and Israelite writers refer to Phoenician child sacrifice. Skeptics suggest that the bodies of children found in Carthaginian and Phoenician cemeteries were merely the cremated remains of children that died naturally. Sergio Ribichini has argued that the Tophet was &quot;a child necropolis designed to receive the remains of infants who had died prematurely of sickness or other natural causes, and who for this reason were &quot;offered&quot; to specific deities and buried in a place different from the one reserved for the ordinary dead&quot;.

According to Stager and Wolff, in 1984, there was a consensus among scholars that Carthaginian children were sacrificed by their parents, who would make a vow to kill the next child if the gods would grant them a favor: for instance that their shipment of goods was to arrive safely in a foreign port.

==Europe==
Archaeologist Peter Warren was involved in the British School at Athens excavation of Palekastro for one season and the excavation at Lefkandi for two seasons. Then he led the excavation at Fournou Korifi, Myrtos from 1967 to 1968. During the 1980s, in two archaeology magazines, Warren wrote about &quot;child sacrifice&quot; despite there being no mention of this subject in the official excavation report, which was completed and published along with his book in 1972.
Rodney Castleden uncovered a sanctuary near Knossos where the remains of a 17-year-old were found.
The Ver Sacrum is a religious practice of ancient Italic peoples, especially the Sabelli (or Sabini) and their offshoot Samnites. The practice is related to that of &quot;devotio&quot; in Roman religion. It was customary to resort to it at times of particular danger or strife for the community. Some scholars believe that in earlier times &quot;devoted&quot; or vowed children were actually sacrificed, but later expulsion was substituted. Dionysius of Halicarnassus states the practice of child sacrifice was one of the causes that brought about the fall of the Pelasgians in Italy.

The human children who had been &quot;devoted&quot; were required to leave the community in early adulthood, at 20 or 21 years of age. They were entrusted to a god for protection, and led to the border with a veiled face. Often they were led by an animal under the auspices of the god. As a group, the youth were called &quot;sacrani&quot; and were supposed to enjoy the protection of Mars until they had reached their destination, expelled the inhabitants or forced them into submission, and founded their own settlement. The Waldensians, a medieval sect deemed heretical, were accused of participating in child sacrifice.

==Africa==
===Canary Islands ===

In the heart of the ancient Guanche culture, in Tenerife it was the custom to throw a living child from the &quot;Punta de Rasca&quot; at sunrise at the summer solstice. Sometimes these children came from all parts of the island, even from remote areas of &quot;Punta de Rasca&quot;. It follows that it was a common custom of the island. On this island sacrificing other human victims associated with the death of the king, where adult men rushed to the sea are also known. Embalmers who produced the Guanche mummies also had a habit of throwing themselves into the sea one year after the king&#x27;s death.

Bones of children mixed with lambs and kids were found in Gran Canaria, and in Tenerife amphorae have been found with remains of children inside. This suggests a different kind of ritual infanticide than those who were thrown overboard.

===South Africa===

The continued murder within Black communities of children of all ages, for body parts with which to make muti, for purposes of witchcraft, still occurs in South Africa. Muti murders occur throughout South Africa, especially in rural areas. Traditional healers or witch doctors often grind up body parts and combine them with roots, herbs, seawater, animal parts, and other ingredients to prepare potions and spells for their clients.

===Uganda===

In the early 21st century Uganda has experienced a revival of child sacrifice. In spite of government attempts to downplay the issue, an investigation by the BBC into human sacrifice in Uganda found that ritual killings of children are more common than Ugandan authorities admit. There are many indicators that politicians and politically connected wealthy businessmen are involved in sacrificing children in practice of traditional religion, which has become a commercial enterprise.

==See also==
* Child cannibalism
* Early infanticidal childrearing
* Human sacrifice
* Infanticide
* Religious abuse
* Religious violence

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* 11/04/2008 Child survives sacrifice in Uganda &quot;UGPulse.com&quot;
* Minoan Child Sacrifice</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5097923" start="0" end="15" title="Child sacrifice" label="Child sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="23" end="29" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="46" end="51" title="child" label="child"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="87" end="92" title="deity" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="94" end="106" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="238" end="253" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="447" end="453" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="462" end="471" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="540" end="554" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="734" end="740" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="778" end="793" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1172" end="1186" title="archaeologists" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623034" start="1326" end="1336" title="Tlatelolco (archaeological site)" label="Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1374" end="1385" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q232870" start="1444" end="1450" title="Tlāloc" label="Tlāloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124258" start="1452" end="1459" title="Ehecatl" label="Ehecatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179818" start="1461" end="1473" title="Quetzalcoatl" label="Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q219412" start="1479" end="1494" title="Huītzilōpōchtli" label="Huītzilōpōchtli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="2343" end="2347" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748174" start="2401" end="2413" title="qhapaq hucha" label="qhapaq hucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2470" end="2483" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145328" start="2659" end="2672" title="strangulation" label="strangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="2850" end="2861" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="2888" end="2892" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825499" start="3515" end="3525" title="liminality" label="liminality"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="4176" end="4181" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q208188" start="4301" end="4306" title="Moche (culture)" label="Moche"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4319" end="4323" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807634" start="4712" end="4725" title="Timoto-Cuicas" label="Timoto-Cuicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q549002" start="4814" end="4828" title="Laguna de Urao" label="Laguna de Urao"/>
<link wikidata="Q165582" start="4830" end="4836" title="Mérida (state)" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042774" start="4874" end="4893" title="Juan de Castellanos" label="Juan de Castellanos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4961" end="4967" title="Icaque" label="Icaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="5040" end="5046" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="5090" end="5110" title="ancient Near Eastern" label="ancient Near Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q326304" start="5133" end="5137" title="Moab" label="Moab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804969" start="5277" end="5282" title="Micah (prophet)" label="Micah"/>
<link wikidata="Q473353" start="5625" end="5634" title="Ammon (nation)" label="Ammonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q275010" start="5663" end="5669" title="Moloch" label="Moloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q74879" start="5702" end="5716" title="Otto Eissfeldt" label="Otto Eissfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27813790" start="5737" end="5751" title="Susan Ackerman (biblical scholar)" label="Susan Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313228" start="5924" end="5930" title="Josiah" label="Josiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="5981" end="5986" title="Books of Kings" label="Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41490" start="5988" end="5997" title="Leviticus" label="Leviticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131590" start="6003" end="6011" title="Book of Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732617" start="6087" end="6104" title="Patrick D. Miller" label="Patrick D. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479134" start="6213" end="6237" title="Francesca Stavrakopoulou" label="Francesca Stavrakopoulou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231718" start="6551" end="6564" title="Jacob Milgrom" label="Jacob Milgrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="7199" end="7215" title="binding of Isaac" label="binding of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q671872" start="7248" end="7253" title="Isaac" label="Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978866" start="7273" end="7285" title="Moriah" label="Mount Moriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="7398" end="7403" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776508" start="7641" end="7659" title="Martin S. Bergmann" label="Martin S. Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q393148" start="7677" end="7684" title="Aggadah" label="Aggadah"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978866" start="7807" end="7819" title="Moriah" label="Mount Moriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="7868" end="7890" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759166" start="7892" end="7907" title="Margaret Barker" label="Margaret Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="7945" end="7954" title="Bersheeba" label="Bersheeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577089" start="8091" end="8113" title="Dura-Europos synagogue" label="Dura-Europos synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270562" start="8209" end="8224" title="Jon D. Levenson" label="Jon D. Levenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="8371" end="8384" title="Perfect (grammar)" label="perfect tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="8764" end="8780" title="binding of Isaac" label="binding of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="8827" end="8842" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="8991" end="8996" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="9111" end="9117" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q590467" start="9167" end="9171" title="Baal" label="Baal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137488" start="9206" end="9217" title="James Kugel" label="James Kugel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408776" start="9354" end="9367" title="Mark S. Smith" label="Mark S. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="9634" end="9644" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842271" start="9804" end="9814" title="Numbers 31" label="Numbers 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q558093" start="10082" end="10089" title="Gehenna" label="Gehenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30914" start="10113" end="10117" title="Ahaz" label="Ahaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156328" start="10122" end="10139" title="Manasseh of Judah" label="Manasseh of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q81240" start="10182" end="10196" title="Book of Judges" label="Book of Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133523" start="10224" end="10232" title="Jephthah" label="Jephthah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200072" start="10494" end="10519" title="New International Version" label="New International Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884729" start="10597" end="10603" title="Mizpah in Gilead (Judges)" label="Mizpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804752" start="10650" end="10657" title="timbrel" label="timbrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="10777" end="10822" title="meforshim" label="commentators of the rabbinic Jewish tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="11029" end="11045" title="Flavius Josephus" label="Flavius Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q837700" start="11146" end="11158" title="pseudo-Philo" label="pseudo-Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="11635" end="11651" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="13008" end="13016" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="14136" end="14141" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="14420" end="14432" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="14906" end="14915" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959" start="15078" end="15099" title="Quintus Curtius Rufus" label="Quintus Curtius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="15766" end="15776" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q504771" start="16244" end="16259" title="Philo of Byblos" label="Philo of Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="16983" end="16989" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q201867" start="17406" end="17417" title="Cleitarchus" label="Cleitarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="18050" end="18058" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="18792" end="18803" title="still birth" label="still birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="18939" end="18960" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="19163" end="19180" title="Hebrew University" label="Hebrew University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="19185" end="19203" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065876" start="20329" end="20341" title="Peter Warren (archaeologist)" label="Peter Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q920064" start="20362" end="20386" title="British School at Athens" label="British School at Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q941860" start="20401" end="20411" title="Palekastro" label="Palekastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q634655" start="20449" end="20457" title="Lefkandi" label="Lefkandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921297" start="20505" end="20519" title="Fournou Korifi" label="Fournou Korifi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476546" start="20521" end="20527" title="Myrtos" label="Myrtos"/>
<link wikidata="Q492733" start="20890" end="20900" title="Ver Sacrum" label="Ver Sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810" start="20928" end="20950" title="Ancient peoples of Italy" label="ancient Italic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036346" start="20967" end="20974" title="Sabelli" label="Sabelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="20979" end="20985" title="Sabini" label="Sabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q500272" start="21006" end="21014" title="Samnites" label="Samnites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21057" end="21064" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#devotio" label="devotio"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="21074" end="21088" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="21278" end="21288" title="Human sacrifice" label="sacrificed"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="21327" end="21353" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107822" start="21450" end="21460" title="Pelasgians" label="Pelasgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="21999" end="22010" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q219995" start="22159" end="22166" title="Guanches" label="Guanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="22179" end="22187" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339594" start="22632" end="22647" title="Guanche mummies" label="Guanche mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178925" start="22798" end="22810" title="Gran Canaria" label="Gran Canaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q174519" start="23103" end="23107" title="muti" label="muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174519" start="23167" end="23179" title="Muti murders" label="Muti murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23605" end="23608" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="23633" end="23639" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097826" start="23948" end="23965" title="Child cannibalism" label="Child cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326834" start="23968" end="23999" title="Early infanticidal childrearing" label="Early infanticidal childrearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="24002" end="24017" title="Human sacrifice" label="Human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="24020" end="24031" title="Infanticide" label="Infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492249" start="24034" end="24049" title="Religious abuse" label="Religious abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540524" start="24052" end="24070" title="Religious violence" label="Religious violence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54386" wikidata="Q34417" url="?curid=54386" title="Philip II of Spain">
<text>Philip II (21 May 152713 September 1598), sometimes known in Spain as Philip the Prudent (), was King of Spain from 1556, King of Portugal from 1580, and King of Naples and Sicily from 1554 until his death in 1598. He was also &quot;jure uxoris&quot; King of England and Ireland from his marriage to Queen Mary I in 1554 until her death in 1558. Further, he was Duke of Milan from 1540. From 1555, he was Lord of the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands.

The son of Emperor Charles V and Isabella of Portugal, Philip inherited his father&#x27;s Spanish Empire in 1556, and succeeded to the Portuguese throne in 1580 following a dynastic crisis. The Spanish conquests of the Inca Empire and of the Philippines, named in his honor by Ruy López de Villalobos, were completed during his reign. Under Philip II, Spain reached the height of its influence and power, sometimes called the Spanish Golden Age, and ruled territories in every continent then known to Europeans. Philip led a highly debt-leveraged regime, seeing state defaults in 1557, 1560, 1569, 1575, and 1596. This policy was partly the cause of the declaration of independence that created the Dutch Republic in 1581. Philip finished building the royal palace El Escorial in 1584.

Deeply devout, Philip saw himself as the defender of Catholic Europe against the Ottoman Empire and the Protestant Reformation. In 1584, Philip signed the Treaty of Joinville, funding the French Catholic League over the following decade in its civil war against the French Huguenots. In 1588, he sent an armada to invade Protestant England, with the strategic aim of overthrowing Elizabeth I and re-establishing Catholicism there, but his fleet was defeated in a skirmish at Gravelines (northern France) and then destroyed by storms as it circled the British Isles to return to Spain. The following year Philip&#x27;s naval power was able to recover after the failed invasion of the English Armada into Spain. Two more Spanish armadas unsuccessfully tried to invade England in 1596 and 1597. The Anglo-Spanish War carried on until 1604, six years after Philip&#x27;s death.

Under Philip, an average of about 9,000 soldiers were recruited from Spain each year, rising to as many as 20,000 in crisis years. Between 1567 and 1574, nearly 43,000 men left Spain to fight in Italy and the Low Countries (modern-day Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands).

==Early life: 1527–1548==

A member of the House of Habsburg, Philip was the son of Emperor Charles V, who was also king of Castile and Aragon, and Isabella of Portugal. He was born in the Castilian capital of Valladolid on 21 May 1527 at Palacio de Pimentel, which was owned by Don Bernardino Pimentel (the first Marqués de Távara). The culture and courtly life of Castile were an important influence in his early life. He was entrusted to the royal governess Leonor de Mascareñas, and tutored by Juan Martínez Siliceo, the future archbishop of Toledo. Philip displayed reasonable aptitude in arts and letters alike. Later he would study with more illustrious tutors, including the humanist Juan Cristóbal Calvete de Estrella. Though Philip had good command over Latin, Spanish, and Portuguese, he never managed to equal his father as a polyglot. While Philip was also an archduke of Austria, he was seen as a foreigner in the Holy Roman Empire. The feeling was mutual. Philip felt himself to be culturally Spanish; he had been born in Castile and raised in the Castilian court, his native language was Spanish, and he preferred to live in the Spanish kingdoms. This ultimately impeded his succession to the imperial throne.

In April 1528, when Philip was eleven months old, he received the oath of allegiance as heir to the crown from the Cortes of Castile. From that time until the death of his mother Isabella in 1539, he was raised in the royal court of Castile under the care of his mother and one of her Portuguese ladies, Doña Leonor de Mascarenhas, to whom he was devotedly attached. Philip was also close to his two sisters, María and Juana, and to his two pages, the Portuguese nobleman Rui Gomes da Silva and Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga, the son of his governor. These men would serve Philip throughout their lives, as would Antonio Pérez, his secretary from 1541.

Philip&#x27;s martial training was undertaken by his governor, Juan de Zúñiga y Requesens, a Castilian nobleman who served as the &quot;commendador mayor&quot; of Castile. The practical lessons in warfare were overseen by Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba during the Italian Wars. Philip was present at the Siege of Perpignan in 1542 but did not see action as the Spanish army under Alba decisively defeated the besieging French forces under the Dauphin of France. On his way back to Castile, Philip received the oath of allegiance of the Aragonese Cortes at Monzón. His political training had begun a year previously under his father, who had found his son studious, grave, and prudent beyond his years, and having decided to train and initiate him in the government of the Spanish kingdoms. The king-emperor&#x27;s interactions with his son during his stay in Castile convinced him of Philip&#x27;s precocity in statesmanship, so he determined to leave in his hands the regency of the Spanish kingdoms in 1543. Philip, who had previously been made the Duke of Milan in 1540, began governing the most extensive empire in the world at the young age of sixteen.

Charles left Philip with experienced advisors—notably the secretary Francisco de los Cobos and the general, the Duke of Alba. Philip was also left with extensive written instructions that emphasised &quot;piety, patience, modesty, and distrust&quot;. These principles of Charles were gradually assimilated by his son, who would grow up to become grave, self-possessed and cautious. Personally, Philip spoke softly and had an icy self-mastery; in the words of one of his ministers, &quot;he had a smile that was cut by a sword&quot;. 

In November 1548, Philip traveled with Diego López de Medrano, his first equerry, to Rosas and Genoa aboard the galley belonging to Antonio de Toledo, the senior equerry.

==Domestic policy==

After living in the Netherlands in the early years of his reign, Philip II decided to return to Castile. Although sometimes described as an absolute monarch, Philip faced many constitutional constraints on his authority, influenced by the growing strength of the bureaucracy. The Spanish Empire was not a single monarchy with one legal system but a personal union of separate realms, each jealously guarding its own rights against those of the House of Habsburg. In practice, Philip often found his authority overruled by local assemblies and his word less effective than that of local lords.

Philip carried several titles as heir to the Spanish kingdoms and empire, including Prince of Asturias. The newest constituent kingdom in the empire was Upper Navarre, a realm invaded by Ferdinand II of Aragon mainly with Castilian troops (1512), and annexed to Castile with an ambiguous status (1513). War across Navarre continued until the 1528 (Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai). Charles V proposed to end hostilities with King Henry II of Navarre—the legitimate monarch of Navarre—by marrying his son Philip to the heiress of Navarre, Jeanne III of Navarre. The marriage would provide a dynastic solution to instability in Navarre, making him king of all Navarre (Upper and Lower) and a prince of the independent Béarn, as well as lord of part of southwestern France. However, the French nobility under Francis I opposed the arrangement and successfully ended the prospects of marriage between the heirs of Habsburg and Albret in 1541.

In his will, Charles stated his doubts over Navarre and recommended that his son give the kingdom back. Both King Charles and his son Philip II failed to abide by the elective (contractual) nature of the Crown of Navarre and took the kingdom for granted. This sparked mounting tension not only with King Henry II and Queen Jeanne III of Navarre but also with the Parliament of the Spanish Navarre (&quot;Cortes&quot;, &quot;The Three States&quot;) and the &quot;Diputación&quot; for breach of the realm specific laws (fueros)—violation of the &quot;pactum subjection is&quot; as ratified by Ferdinand. Tensions in Navarre came to a head in 1592 after several years of disagreements over the agenda of the intended parliamentary session.

In November 1592, the Parliament (&quot;Cortes&quot;) of Aragón revolted against another breach of the realm-specific laws, so the Attorney General (&quot;Justicia&quot;) of the kingdom, Juan de Lanuza, was executed on Philip II&#x27;s orders, with his secretary Antonio Pérez taking exile in France. In Navarre, the major strongholds of the kingdom were garrisoned by troops alien to the kingdom (Castilians) in a conspicuous violation of the local laws, and the Parliament had long been refusing to pledge loyalty to Philip II&#x27;s son and heir apparent without a proper ceremony. On 20 November 1592 a ghostly Parliament session was called, pushed by Philip II, who had arrived in Pamplona at the head of an unspecified military force, and with one only point on his agenda—attendance to the session was kept blank on the minutes: unlawful appointments of trusted Castilian officials and imposition of his son as the future king of Navarre at the Santa Maria Cathedral. A ceremony was held before the bishop of Pamplona (22 November), but its customary procedure and terms were altered. Protests erupted in Pamplona, but they were quelled.

Philip II also grappled with the problem of the large Morisco population in the Spanish kingdoms, who had been forcibly converted to Christianity by his predecessors. In 1569, the Morisco Revolt broke out in the southern Kingdom of Granada in defiance of attempts to suppress Moorish customs. Philip ordered the expulsion of the Moriscos from Granada and their dispersal to other provinces.

Despite its immense dominions, the Spanish kingdoms had a sparse population that yielded a limited income to the crown (in contrast to France, for example, which was much more heavily populated). Philip faced major difficulties in raising taxes, and the collection was largely farmed out to local lords. He was able to finance his military campaigns only by taxing and exploiting the local resources of his empire. The flow of income from the New World proved vital to his militant foreign policy, but his exchequer several times faced bankruptcy.

Spanish culture flourished during Philip&#x27;s reign, beginning the &quot;Spanish Golden Age&quot;, creating a lasting legacy in literature, music, and the visual arts. One of the notable artists from Philip II&#x27;s court was Sofonisba Anguissola, who gained fame for her talent and unusual role as a woman artist.

==Economy==
Charles V had left his son Philip with a debt of about 36 million ducats and an annual deficit of 1 million ducats. This debt caused Philip II to default on loans in 1557, 1560, 1575, and 1596 (including debt to Poland, known as Neapolitan sums). Lenders had no power over the King and could not force him to repay his loans. These defaults were just the beginning of Spain&#x27;s economic troubles as its kings would default six more times in the next 65 years. Aside from reducing state revenues for overseas expeditions, the domestic policies of Philip II further burdened the Spanish kingdoms and would, in the following century, contribute to its decline, as maintained by some historians.

The Spanish kingdoms were subject to different assemblies: the Cortes in Castile, the assembly in Navarre, and one each for the four kingdoms of Aragon, which preserved traditional rights and laws from the time when they were separate kingdoms. This made the Spanish kingdoms and its possessions difficult to rule, unlike France, which while divided into regional states, had a single Estates General. The lack of a viable supreme assembly led to power defaulting into Philip II&#x27;s hands, especially as manager and final arbiter of the constant conflict between different authorities. To deal with the difficulties arising from this situation, authority was administered by local agents appointed by the crown and viceroys carrying out crown instructions. Philip II felt it necessary to be involved in the detail, and he presided over specialised councils for state affairs, finance, war, and the Inquisition.

Philip II played groups against each other, leading to a system of checks and balances that managed affairs inefficiently, even to the extent of damaging state business, as in the Perez affair. Following a fire in Valladolid in 1561, he resisted calls to move his Court to Lisbon, an act that could have curbed centralisation and bureaucracy domestically as well as relaxed rule in the Empire as a whole. Instead, with the traditional Royal and Primacy seat of Toledo now essentially obsolete, he moved his Court to the Castilian stronghold of Madrid. Except for a brief period under Philip III of Spain, Madrid has remained the capital of Spain. It was around this time that Philip II converted the Royal Alcázar of Madrid into a royal palace; the works, which lasted from 1561 until 1598, were done by tradesmen who came from the Netherlands, Italy, and France.

King Philip II ruled at a critical turning point in European history toward modernity whereas his father Charles V had been forced to an itinerant rule as a medieval king. He mainly directed state affairs, even when not at Court. Indeed, when his health began failing, he worked from his quarters at the Palace-Monastery-Pantheon of El Escorial that he had built in 1584, a palace built as a monument to Spain&#x27;s role as a center of the Christian world. But Philip did not enjoy the supremacy that King Louis XIV of France would in the next century, nor was such a rule necessarily possible at his time. The inefficiencies of the Spanish state and the restrictively regulated industry under his rule were common to many contemporary countries.

==Foreign policy==
Philip&#x27;s foreign policies were determined by a combination of Catholic fervour and dynastic objectives. He considered himself the chief defender of Catholic Europe, both against the Ottoman Empire and against the forces of the Protestant Reformation. He never relented from his fight against heresy, defending the Catholic faith and limiting freedom of worship within his territories. These territories included his patrimony in the Netherlands, where Protestantism had taken deep root. Following the Revolt of the Netherlands in 1568, Philip waged a campaign against Dutch heresy and secession. It also dragged in the English and the French at times and expanded into the German Rhineland with the Cologne War. This series of conflicts lasted for the rest of his life. Philip&#x27;s constant involvement and focus in European wars took a significant toll on the treasury and caused economic difficulties for the Crown and even bankruptcies.

In 1588, the English defeated Philip&#x27;s Spanish Armada, thwarting his planned invasion of the country to reinstate Catholicism. But war with England continued for the next sixteen years, in a complex series of struggles that included France, Ireland and the main battle zone, the Low Countries. It would not end until all the leading protagonists, including himself, had died. Earlier, however, after several setbacks in his reign and especially that of his father, Philip did achieve a decisive victory against the Turks at Lepanto in 1571, with the allied fleet of the Holy League, which he had put under the command of his illegitimate brother, John of Austria. He also successfully secured his succession to the throne of Portugal.

The administration of overseas conquests was reformed. Extensive questionnaires were distributed to every major town and region in New Spain called relaciones geográficas. These surveys helped the Spanish monarchy to govern Philip&#x27;s overseas possessions more effectively.

===Italy===

Charles V abdicated the throne of Naples to Philip on 25 July 1554, and the young king was invested with the kingdom (officially a Papal fief) on 2 October by Pope Julius III. The date of Charles&#x27; abdication of the throne of Sicily is uncertain, but Philip was invested with this kingdom on 18 November 1554 by Julius. In 1556, Philip decided to invade the Papal States and temporarily held territory there, perhaps in response to Pope Paul IV&#x27;s anti-Spanish outlook. According to Philip II, he was doing it for the benefit of the Church.

In a letter to the Princess Dowager of Portugal, Regent of the Spanish kingdoms, dated 22 September 1556, Francisco de Vargas wrote:
In response to the invasion, Pope Paul IV called for a French military intervention. After minor fights in Lazio and near Rome, Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba, Viceroy of Naples met Cardinal Carlo Carafa and signed the Treaty of Cave as a compromise: French and Spanish forces left the Papal States and the Pope declared a neutral position between France and the Spanish kingdoms.

Philip led the Spanish kingdoms into the final phase of the Italian Wars. A Spanish advance into France from the Low Countries led to their important victory at the Battle of St. Quentin (1557). The French were defeated again at the Battle of Gravelines (1558). The resulting Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis in 1559 secured Piedmont to the Duchy of Savoy, and Corsica to the Republic of Genoa. Both Genoa and Savoy were allies of Spain and, although Savoy subsequently declared its neutrality between France and Spain, Genoa remained a crucial financial ally for Philip during his entire reign. The treaty also confirmed Philip&#x27;s control over Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia. Therefore, all of southern Italy was under Spanish rule as part of the Crown of Aragon. In the north, Milan was a duchy of the Holy Roman Empire held by Philip. Attached to the Kingdom of Naples, the State of Presidi in Tuscany gave Philip the possibility to monitor maritime traffic to southern Italy, whilst the grant of the Duchy of Siena to the new Grand Duchy of Tuscany, ensured it would remain a Spanish ally. The Council of Italy was set up by Philip in order to co-ordinate his rule over the states of Milan, Naples and Sicily. Ultimately, the treaty ended the 60-year Franco-Habsburg wars for supremacy in Italy. It marked also the beginning of a period of peace between the Pope and Philip, as their European interests converged, although political differences remained and diplomatic contrasts eventually re-emerged.

By the end of the wars in 1559, Habsburg Spain had been established as the premier power of Europe, to the detriment of France. In France, Henry II was fatally wounded in a joust held during the celebrations of the peace. His death led to the accession of his 15-year-old son Francis II, who in turn soon died. The French monarchy was thrown into turmoil, which increased further with the outbreak of the French Wars of Religion that would last for several decades. The states of Italy were reduced to second-rate powers, with Spain dominating the peninsula. Mary Tudor&#x27;s death in 1558 enabled Philip to seal the treaty by marrying Henry II&#x27;s daughter, Elisabeth of Valois, later giving him a claim to the throne of France on behalf of his daughter by Elisabeth, Isabella Clara Eugenia.

===France===

The French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) were primarily fought between French Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). The conflict involved the factional disputes between the aristocratic houses of France, such as the House of Bourbon and House of Guise, and both sides received assistance from foreign sources. Philip claimed descent from Constantine I and Charlemagne, justifying his intervention in French Wars of Religion and his continuing efforts to depose Henry IV of France.

Philip signed the Treaty of Vaucelles with Henry II of France in 1556. Based on the terms of the treaty, the territory of Franche-Comté in Burgundy was to be relinquished to Philip. However, the treaty was broken shortly afterwards. France and the Spanish kingdoms waged war in northern France and Italy over the following years. Spanish victories at St. Quentin and Gravelines led to the Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis, in which France recognised Spanish sovereignty over Franche-Comté.

During the War of the Portuguese Succession, the pretender António fled to France following his defeats and, as Philip&#x27;s armies had not yet occupied the Azores, he sailed there with a large Anglo-French fleet under Filippo Strozzi, a Florentine exile in the service of France. The naval Battle of Terceira took place on 26 July 1582, in the sea near the Azores, off São Miguel Island, as part of the War of the Portuguese Succession and the Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604). The Spanish navy defeated the combined Anglo-French fleet that had sailed to preserve control of the Azores under António. The French naval contingent was the largest French force sent overseas before the age of Louis XIV.

The Spanish victory at Terceira was followed by the Battle of the Azores between the Portuguese loyal to the claimant António, supported by French and English troops, and the Spanish-Portuguese forces loyal to Philip commanded by the admiral Don Álvaro de Bazán. Victory in Azores completed the incorporation of Portugal into the Spanish Empire.

Philip financed the Catholic League during the French Wars of Religion. He directly intervened in the final phases of the wars (1589–1598), ordering Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma into France in an effort to unseat Henry IV, and perhaps dreaming of placing his favourite daughter, Isabella Clara Eugenia, on the French throne. Elisabeth of Valois, Philip&#x27;s third wife and Isabella&#x27;s mother, had already ceded any claim to the French Crown with her marriage to Philip and in France the Salic law remained in effect. However, the Parlement of Paris, in power of the Catholic party, gave verdict that Isabella Clara Eugenia was &quot;the legitimate sovereign&quot; of France. Philip&#x27;s interventions in the fighting—sending the Duke of Parma to end Henry IV&#x27;s siege of Paris in 1590 and the siege of Rouen in 1592—contributed in saving the French Catholic Leagues&#x27;s cause against a Protestant monarchy.

In 1593, Henry agreed to convert to Catholicism; weary of war, most French Catholics switched to his side against the hardline core of the Catholic League, who were portrayed by Henry&#x27;s propagandists as puppets of a foreign monarch, Philip. By the end of 1594 certain League members were still working against Henry across the country, but all relied on the support of the Spanish Crown. In January 1595, therefore, Henry officially declared war on the Spanish Crown, to show Catholics that Philip was using religion as a cover for an attack on the French state, and Protestants that he had not become a puppet of the Spanish Crown through his conversion, while hoping to reconquer large parts of northern France from the Franco-Spanish Catholic forces.

French victory at the Battle of Fontaine-Française in Burgundy, 5 June 1595, marked an end to the Catholic League in France. The French also made some progress during an invasion of the Spanish Netherlands. They captured Ham and massacred the small Spanish garrison, provoking anger among the Spanish ranks. The Spanish launched a concerted offensive that year, taking Doullens, Cambrai, and Le Catelet; at Doullens, they massacred 4,000 of its citizens. On 24 April 1596, the Spanish also conquered Calais. Following the Spanish capture of Amiens in March 1597, the French Crown laid siege to it until it managed to reconquer Amiens from the overstretched Spanish forces in September 1597. Henry then negotiated a peace with the Spanish Crown. The war was only drawn to an official close, however, with the Peace of Vervins in May 1598.

The 1598 Treaty of Vervins was largely a restatement of the 1559 Peace of Câteau-Cambrésis and Spanish forces and subsidies were withdrawn; meanwhile, Henry issued the Edict of Nantes, which offered a high degree of religious toleration for French Protestants. The military interventions in France thus failed to oust Henry from the throne or suppress Protestantism in France, and yet they had played a decisive part in helping the French Catholic cause gain the conversion of Henry, ensuring that Catholicism would remain France&#x27;s official and majority faith—matters of paramount importance for the devoutly Catholic Spanish king.

===Mediterranean===


In the early part of his reign Philip was concerned with the rising power of the Ottoman Empire under Suleiman the Magnificent. Fear of Islamic domination in the Mediterranean caused him to pursue an aggressive foreign policy.

In 1558, Turkish admiral Piyale Pasha captured the Balearic Islands, especially inflicting great damage on Menorca and enslaving many, while raiding the coasts of the Spanish mainland. Philip appealed to the Pope and other powers in Europe to bring an end to the rising Ottoman threat. Since his father&#x27;s losses against the Ottomans and against Hayreddin Barbarossa in 1541, the major European sea powers in the Mediterranean, namely the Spanish Crown and Venice, became hesitant in confronting the Ottomans. The myth of &quot;Turkish invincibility&quot; was becoming a popular story, causing fear and panic among the people.

In 1560, Philip II organised a &quot;Holy League&quot; between the Spanish kingdoms and the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, the Papal States, the Duchy of Savoy and the Knights of Malta. The joint fleet was assembled at Messina and consisted of 200 ships (60 galleys and 140 other vessels) carrying a total of 30,000 soldiers under the command of Giovanni Andrea Doria, nephew of the famous Genoese admiral Andrea Doria.

On 12 March 1560, the Holy League captured the island of Djerba, which had a strategic location and could control the sea routes between Algiers and Tripoli. As a response, Suleiman sent an Ottoman fleet of 120 ships under the command of Piyale Pasha, which arrived at Djerba on 9 May 1560. The battle lasted until 14 May 1560, and the forces of Piyale Pasha and Turgut Reis (who joined Piyale Pasha on the third day of the battle) won an overwhelming victory at the Battle of Djerba. The Holy League lost 60 ships (30 galleys) and 20,000 men, and Giovanni Andrea Doria was barely able to escape with a small vessel. The Ottomans retook the Fortress of Djerba, whose Spanish commander, D. Álvaro de Sande, attempted to escape with a ship but was followed and eventually captured by Turgut Reis.

In 1563, capitalizing on the political climate, the Regency of Algiers launched the sieges of Oran and Mers El Kébir in a large scale attempt to dislodge the major Spanish positions in Northern Africa, but the attempt met failure. Philip&#x27;s navy then conquered Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera the following year. The Ottomans sent a large expedition to Malta, which laid siege to several forts on the island and took some of them, but the Spanish sent a relief force under D. García de Toledo and a rescued Álvaro de Sande, which finally drove the Ottoman army out of the island.

The grave threat posed by the increasing Ottoman domination of the Mediterranean was finally reversed in one of history&#x27;s most decisive battles, with the destruction of nearly the entire Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, by the Holy League under the command of Philip&#x27;s half brother, Don John of Austria, and Don Álvaro de Bazán. A fleet sent by Philip, again commanded by Don John, reconquered Tunis from the Ottomans in 1573. The Turks soon rebuilt their fleet, and in 1574 Uluç Ali Reis managed to recapture Tunis with a force of 250 galleys and a siege that lasted 40 days. Thousands of Spanish and Italian soldiers became prisoners. Nevertheless, Lepanto marked a permanent reversal in the balance of naval power in the Mediterranean and the end of the threat of Ottoman control. In 1585 a peace treaty was signed with the Ottomans.

===Strait of Magellan===
During Philip&#x27;s reign Spain considered the Pacific Ocean a &quot;mare clausum&quot;—a sea closed to other naval powers— as the only known entrance from the Atlantic, the Strait of Magellan was at times patrolled by fleets sent to prevent entrance of non-Spanish ships.

To end navigation by rival powers in the Strait of Magellan Spanish viceroy Francisco de Toledo ordered Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa to explore the strait and found settlements on its shores.

In 1584, Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa founded two colonies in the strait: Nombre de Jesús, and Ciudad del Rey Don Felipe. The latter was established north of the strait with 300 settlers. The new colonies suffered from high death rates, likely as a consequence of executions, brawls, violent encounters with indigenous peoples and diseases which were rife. A contributing cause for failure of the settlement may have been poor morale, an issue that plagued the venture almost from the beginning. This can in part be explained by a series of difficulties the expedition had to go through between the departure from Spain and the arrival to the strait. Philip II&#x27;s inaction despite repeated pleas by Sarmiento to aid the ailing colony has been attributed to the strain on Spain&#x27;s resources that resulted from wars with England and Dutch rebels.

In 1587, English corsairs renamed Ciudad del Rey Don Felipe, Puerto del Hambre, or &quot;Port Famine&quot;. Most of the settlers had died from cold or starvation. When Sir Thomas Cavendish landed at the site of Rey Don Felipe in 1587, he found only ruins of the settlement. The Spanish failure at colonizing the Strait of Magellan caused Chiloé Archipelago to assume the role of protecting western Patagonia from foreign intrusions. Valdivia and Chiloé acted as sentries, being hubs where the Spanish collected intelligence from all over Patagonia.

===Revolt in the Netherlands===
Philip&#x27;s rule in the Seventeen Provinces known collectively as the Netherlands faced many difficulties, leading to open warfare in 1568. He appointed his half-sister Margaret of Parma as Governor of the Netherlands, when he left the low countries for the Spanish kingdoms in 1559, but forced her to adjust policy to the advice of Cardinal Granvelle, who was greatly disliked in the Netherlands, after he insisted on direct control over events in the Netherlands despite being over two weeks&#x27; ride away in Madrid. There was discontent in the Netherlands about Philip&#x27;s taxation demands and the incessant persecution of Protestants. In 1566, Protestant preachers sparked anti-clerical riots known as the Iconoclast Fury; in response to growing Protestant influence, the army of the Duke of Alba went on the offensive. In 1568, Alba had Lamoral, Count of Egmont and Philip de Montmorency, Count of Horn executed in Brussels&#x27; central square, further alienating the local aristocracy. There were massacres of civilians in Mechelen, Naarden, Zutphen and Haarlem. In 1571, Alba erected at Antwerp a bronze statue of himself trampling the rebellious Dutch under his horse&#x27;s hooves, cast from the melted-down cannon looted by the Spanish troops after the Battle of Jemmingen in 1568; it was modelled on medieval images of the Spanish patron Saint James &quot;the Moorslayer&quot; riding down Muslims and caused such outrage that Philip had it removed and destroyed.

In 1572, a prominent exiled member of the Dutch aristocracy, William the Silent, Prince of Orange, invaded the Netherlands with a Protestant army, but he only succeeded in holding two provinces, Holland and Zeeland. Because of the Spanish repulse in the Siege of Alkmaar (1573) led by his equally brutal son Fadrique, Alba resigned his command, replaced by Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga. Alba boasted that he had burned or executed 18,600 persons in the Netherlands, in addition to the far greater number he massacred during the war, many of them women and children; 8,000 persons were burned or hanged in one year, and the total number of Alba&#x27;s Flemish victims can not have fallen short of 50,000. Under Requesens, the Army of Flanders reached a peak strength of 86,000 in 1574 and retained its battlefield superiority, destroying Louis of Nassau&#x27;s German mercenary army at the Battle of Mookerheyde on 14 April 1574, killing both him and his brother Henry of Nassau-Dillenburg.

Rampant inflation and the loss of treasure fleets from the New World prevented Philip from paying his soldiers consistently, leading to the so-called Spanish Fury at Antwerp in 1576, where soldiers ran amok through the streets, burning more than 1,000 homes and killing 6,000 citizens. Philip sent in Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, as Governor-General of the Spanish Netherlands from 1578 to 1592. Farnese defeated the rebels at the Battle of Gembloux (1578), and he captured many rebel towns in the south: Maastricht (1579), Tournai (1581), Oudenaarde (1582), Dunkirk (1583), Bruges (1584), Ghent (1584), and Antwerp (1585).
The States General of the northern provinces, united in the 1579 Union of Utrecht, passed an Act of Abjuration in 1581 declaring that they no longer recognised Philip as their king. The southern Netherlands (what is now Belgium and Luxembourg) remained under Spanish rule. In 1584, William the Silent was assassinated by Balthasar Gérard, after Philip had offered a reward of 25,000 crowns to anyone who killed him, calling him a &quot;pest on the whole of Christianity and the enemy of the human race&quot;. The Dutch forces continued to fight on under Orange&#x27;s son Maurice of Nassau, who received modest help from the Queen of England in 1585. The Dutch gained an advantage over the Spanish because of their growing economic strength, in contrast to Philip&#x27;s burgeoning economic troubles. The war came to an end in 1648, when the Dutch Republic was recognised by the Spanish Crown as independent. The eight decades of war came at a massive human cost, with an estimated 600,000 to 700,000 victims, of which 350,000 to 400,000 were civilians killed by disease and what would later be considered war crimes.

==King of Portugal==
In 1578 young King Sebastian of Portugal died at the Battle of Alcácer Quibir without descendants, triggering a succession crisis. His granduncle, the elderly Cardinal Henry, succeeded him as king, but Henry had no descendants either, having taken holy orders. When Henry died two years after Sebastian&#x27;s disappearance, three grandchildren of Manuel I claimed the throne: Infanta Catarina, Duchess of Braganza; António, Prior of Crato; and Philip II of Spain. António was acclaimed King of Portugal in many cities and towns throughout the country, but members of the Council of Governors of Portugal who had supported Philip escaped to the Spanish kingdoms and declared him to be the legal successor of Henry.

In 1580, Philip II marched into Portugal and defeated Prior António&#x27;s troops in the Battle of Alcântara. The Portuguese suffered 4,000 killed, wounded, or captured, while the Spanish sustained only 500 casualties. The troops commanded by Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba imposed subjection to Philip before entering Lisbon, where he seized an immense treasure. Philip II of Spain assumed the Portuguese throne and was crowned &quot;Philip I&quot; of Portugal on 17 July 1580 (recognized as king by the Portuguese Cortes of Tomar) and a near sixty-year personal union under the rule of the Philippine Dynasty began. This gave Philip control of the extensive Portuguese Empire. When Philip left for Madrid in 1583, he made his nephew Albert of Austria his viceroy in Lisbon. In Madrid he established a Council of Portugal to advise him on Portuguese affairs, giving prominent positions to Portuguese nobles in the Spanish courts, and allowing Portugal to maintain autonomous law, currency, and government. This followed on the well-established pattern of rule by councils.

==Relations with England and Ireland==

===King of England and Ireland===
Philip&#x27;s father arranged his marriage to 37-year-old Queen Mary I of England, Charles&#x27; maternal first cousin. His father ceded the crown of Naples, as well as his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, to him. Their marriage at Winchester Cathedral on 25 July 1554 took place just two days after their first meeting. Philip&#x27;s view of the affair was entirely political. Lord Chancellor Stephen Gardiner and the House of Commons petitioned Mary to consider marrying an Englishman, preferring Edward Courtenay.

Under the terms of the Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain, Philip was to enjoy Mary I&#x27;s titles and honours for as long as their marriage should last. All official documents, including Acts of Parliament, were to be dated with both their names, and Parliament was to be called under the joint authority of the couple. Coins were also to show the heads of both Mary and Philip. The marriage treaty also provided that England would not be obliged to provide military support to Philip&#x27;s father in any war. The Privy Council instructed that Philip and Mary should be joint signatories of royal documents, and this was enacted by an Act of Parliament, which gave him the title of king and stated that he &quot;shall aid her Highness ... in the happy administration of her Grace&#x27;s realms and dominions&quot;. In other words, Philip was to co-reign with his wife. As the new King of England could not read English, it was ordered that a note of all matters of state should be made in Latin or Spanish.

Acts making it high treason to deny Philip&#x27;s royal authority were passed by the Parliament of Ireland and England. Philip and Mary appeared on coins together, with a single crown suspended between them as a symbol of joint reign. The Great Seal shows Philip and Mary seated on thrones, holding the crown together. The coat of arms of England was impaled with Philip&#x27;s to denote their joint reign. During their joint reign, they waged war against France, which resulted in the loss of Calais, England&#x27;s last remaining possession in France.

Philip&#x27;s wife had succeeded to the Kingdom of Ireland, but the title of King of Ireland had been created in 1542 by Mary&#x27;s father, Henry VIII, after he was excommunicated, and so it was not recognised by Catholic monarchs. In 1555, Pope Paul IV rectified this by issuing a papal bull recognising Philip and Mary as rightful King and Queen of Ireland. King&#x27;s County and Philipstown in Ireland were named after Philip as King of Ireland in 1556. The couple&#x27;s joint royal style after Philip ascended the Spanish throne in 1556 was: &quot;Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Spain, France, Jerusalem, both the Sicilies and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tirol&quot;.

However, the couple had no children. Mary died in 1558 before the union could revitalise the Roman Catholic Church in England. With her death, Philip lost his rights to the English throne (including the ancient English claims to the French throne) and ceased to be king of England, Ireland and (as claimed by them) France.

Philip&#x27;s great-grandson, Philippe I, Duke of Orléans, married Princess Henrietta of England in 1661; in 1807, the Jacobite claim to the British throne passed to the descendants of their child Anne Marie d&#x27;Orléans.

===After Mary I&#x27;s death===

Upon Mary&#x27;s death, the throne went to Elizabeth I. Philip had no wish to sever his tie with England, and had sent a proposal of marriage to Elizabeth. However, she delayed in answering, and in that time learned Philip was also considering a Valois alliance. Elizabeth I was the Protestant daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn. This union was deemed illegitimate by English Catholics, who disputed the validity of both the annulment of Henry&#x27;s marriage to Catherine of Aragon and of his subsequent marriage to Boleyn, and hence claimed that Mary, Queen of Scots, the Catholic great-granddaughter of Henry VII, was the rightful monarch.

For many years Philip maintained peace with England, and even defended Elizabeth from the Pope&#x27;s threat of excommunication. This was a measure taken to preserve a European balance of power. Ultimately, Elizabeth allied England with the Protestant rebels in the Netherlands. Further, English ships began a policy of privateering against Spain&#x27;s merchant shipping and started threatening the Spanish treasure ships coming from the New World. In one instance, English ships attacked a Spanish port. The last straw for Philip was the Treaty of Nonsuch signed by Elizabeth in 1585—promising troops and supplies to the anti-Spanish rebels in the Netherlands. Although it can be argued this English action was the result of Philip&#x27;s Treaty of Joinville with the Catholic League of France, Philip considered it an act of war by England.

The execution of Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1587 ended Philip&#x27;s hopes of placing a Catholic on the English throne. He turned instead to more direct plans to invade England and return the country to Catholicism. In 1588, he sent a fleet, the Spanish Armada, to rendezvous with the Army of Flanders and convey it across the English Channel. However, the operation had little chance of success from the beginning, because of lengthy delays, lack of communication between Philip II and his two commanders and the lack of a deep bay for the fleet. At the point of attack, a storm struck the English Channel, already known for its harsh currents and choppy waters, which devastated large numbers of the Spanish fleet. There was a tightly fought battle against the English Royal Navy and the Spanish were forced into a retreat, and the overwhelming majority of the Armada was destroyed by the harsh weather. Although the English Royal Navy did not destroy the Armada at the Battle of Gravelines, they prevented it from linking up with the army it was supposed to convey across the channel. Thus, while the English Royal Navy only won a slight tactical victory over the Spanish, it had delivered a major strategic victory—preventing the invasion of England. Through a week of fighting the Spanish had expended 100,000 cannonballs, but no English ship was seriously damaged. However, over 7,000 English sailors died from disease during the time the Armada was in English waters.

The defeat of the Spanish Armada gave great heart to the Protestant cause across Europe. The storm that smashed the Armada was seen by many of Philip&#x27;s enemies as a sign of the will of God. While the invasion had been averted, England was unable to take advantage of this success. An attempt to use her newfound advantage at sea with a counter-armada the following year failed disastrously with 40 ships sunk and 15,000 men lost. Likewise, English buccaneering and attempts to seize territories in the Caribbean were defeated by Spain&#x27;s rebuilt navy and their improved intelligence networks (although Cádiz was sacked by an Anglo-Dutch force after a failed attempt to seize the treasure fleet). The Habsburgs also struck back with the Dunkirkers, who took an increasing toll on Dutch and English shipping.

Eventually, the Spanish attempted two further Armadas, in October 1596 and October 1597. The 1596 Armada was destroyed in a storm off northern Spain; it had lost as many as 72 of its 126 ships and suffered 3,000 deaths. The 1597 Armada was frustrated by adverse weather as it approached the English coast undetected. This Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) would be fought to a grinding end, but not until both Philip II (d. 1598) and Elizabeth I (d. 1603) were dead. Some of the fighting was done on land in Ireland, France, and the Netherlands, with the English sending expeditionary forces to France and the Netherlands to fight Spain, and Spain attempting to assist Irish rebellions in Ireland.

==Death==
Philip II died in El Escorial, near Madrid, on 13 September 1598, of cancer. He was succeeded by his 20-year-old son, Philip III.

==Legacy==

Under Philip II, Spain reached the peak of its power. However, in spite of the great and increasing quantities of gold and silver flowing into his coffers from the American mines, the riches of the Portuguese spice trade, and the enthusiastic support of the Habsburg dominions for the Counter-Reformation, he would never succeed in suppressing Protestantism or defeating the Dutch rebellion. Early in his reign, the Dutch might have laid down their weapons if he had desisted in trying to suppress Protestantism, but his devotion to Catholicism would not permit him to do so. He was a devout Catholic and exhibited the typical 16th century antipathy for religious heterodoxy; he said, &quot;Before suffering the slightest damage to religion in the service of God, I would lose all of my estates and a hundred lives, if I had them, because I do not wish nor do I desire to be the ruler of heretics.&quot;

As he strove to enforce Catholic orthodoxy through an intensification of the Inquisition, students were barred from studying elsewhere, and books printed by Spaniards outside the kingdom were banned. In addition to the banning of books, Philip II authorized the burning of at least 70,000 volumes. Even a highly respected churchman like Archbishop Bartolome Carranza of Toledo was jailed by the Inquisition for 17 years, for publishing ideas that seemed sympathetic in some degree with Protestantism. Such strict enforcement of orthodox belief was successful, and Spain avoided the religiously inspired strife tearing apart other European dominions.

Although he was deeply dedicated to rooting out heretical titles, he collected forbidden books for his own royal library at the El Escorial. His library contained 40,000 volumes (1,800 of which were Arabic titles) and several thousand manuscripts. The banned books were protected in a room on an upper floor of the library. He was passionate about rare books he personally collected from far and wide and researched and recorded information about previous owners.

The School of Salamanca flourished under his reign. Martín de Azpilcueta, highly honoured at Rome by several popes and looked on as an oracle of learning, published his &quot;Manuale sive Enchiridion Confessariorum et Poenitentium&quot; (Rome, 1568), long a classical text in the schools and in ecclesiastical practice.

Francisco Suárez, generally regarded as the greatest scholastic after Thomas Aquinas and regarded during his lifetime as being the greatest living philosopher and theologian, was writing and lecturing, not only in Spain but also in Rome (1580–1585), where Pope Gregory XIII attended the first lecture that he gave. Luis de Molina published his &quot;De liberi arbitrii cum gratiae donis, divina praescientia, praedestinatione et reprobatione concordia&quot; (1588), wherein he put forth the doctrine attempting to reconcile the omniscience of God with human free will that came to be known as Molinism, thereby contributing to what was one of the most important intellectual debates of the time; Molinism became the &quot;de facto&quot; Jesuit doctrine on these matters, and is still advocated today by William Lane Craig and Alvin Plantinga, among others.

Because Philip II was the most powerful European monarch in an era of war and religious conflict, evaluating both his reign and the man himself has become a controversial historical subject. Even before his death in 1598, his supporters had started presenting him as an archetypical gentleman, full of piety and Christian virtues, whereas his enemies depicted him as a fanatical and despotic monster, responsible for inhuman cruelties and barbarism. This dichotomy, further developed into the so-called Spanish Black Legend and White Legend, was helped by King Philip himself. Philip prohibited any biographical account of his life to be published while he was alive, and he ordered that all his private correspondence be burned shortly before he died. Moreover, Philip did nothing to defend himself after being betrayed by his ambitious secretary Antonio Pérez, who published incredible calumnies against his former master; this allowed Pérez&#x27;s tales to spread all around Europe unchallenged. That way, the popular image of the King that survives to today was created on the eve of his death, at a time when many European princes and religious leaders were turned against Spain as a pillar of the Counter-Reformation. This means that many histories depict Philip from deeply prejudiced points of view, usually negative.

However, some historians classify this anti-Spanish analysis as part of the Black Legend. In a more recent example of popular culture, Philip II&#x27;s portrayal in &quot;Fire Over England&quot; (1937) is not entirely unsympathetic; he is shown as a very hardworking, intelligent, religious, somewhat paranoid ruler whose prime concern is his country, but who had no understanding of the English, despite his former co-monarchy there.

Even in countries that remained Catholic, primarily France and the Italian states, fear and envy of Spanish success and domination created a wide receptiveness for the worst possible descriptions of Philip II. Although some efforts have been made to separate legend from reality, that task has proved extremely difficult, since many prejudices are rooted in the cultural heritage of European countries. Spanish-speaking historians tend to assess his political and military achievements, sometimes deliberately avoiding issues such as the King&#x27;s inflexible Catholicism. English-speaking historians tend to show Philip II as a fanatical, despotical, criminal, imperialist ruler, minimising his military victories (Battle of Lepanto, Battle of Saint Quentin, etc.) to mere anecdotes, and magnifying his defeats (namely the Armada) even though at the time those defeats did not result in great political or military changes in the balance of power in Europe.

He ended French Valois ambitions in Italy and brought about the Habsburg ascendency in Europe. He secured the Portuguese kingdom and empire. He succeeded in increasing the importation of silver in the face of English, Dutch, and French privateers, overcoming multiple financial crises and consolidating Spain&#x27;s overseas empire. Although clashes would be ongoing, he ended the major threat posed to Europe by the Ottoman Navy.

Historian Geoffrey Parker offers a management-psychological explanation, as summarized by Tonio Andrade and William Reger: One might have expected that Philip—being a dedicated, persistent, and hard-working man, and being the head of Western Europe&#x27;s wealthiest and largest empire—would have succeeded in his aims. He didn&#x27;t. His endeavors were doomed by his own character, or at least that&#x27;s how Parker sees it. Drawing on studies in management science and organizational psychology, Parker argues that a successful manager of a large organization must keep attention on the big picture, must have a good strategy for dealing with copious information, must know how to delegate, and must be flexible. Philip failed on all counts. He was a micromanager who got bogged down in details, refusing to delegate and trying to read every dispatch that came to his desk. He obsessed and dithered, so that by the time his decisions were made and his orders reached the men meant to carry them out, the situation on the ground had changed. Philip was also inflexible, unwilling to abandon ineffective policies. Most pernicious of all was Philip&#x27;s tendency toward messianic thinking, a belief that he was doing God&#x27;s work and that heaven would support him with miracles.

== Titles, honours and styles ==

* Heir titles
** Prince of Gerona: 21 May 1527 – 16 January 1556
** Prince of Asturias 1528–1556
* King of Castile as Philip II: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
** King of Castile, of León, of Granada, of Toledo, of Galicia, of Seville, of Cordoba, of Murcia, of Jaen, of the Algarves, of Algeciras, of Gibraltar, of the Canary Islands, of the Indias, the Islands and Mainland of the Ocean Sea; Lord of Molina
** Lord of Biscay
* King of Aragon as Philip I: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
** King of Aragón
** King of the Two Sicilies
*** King of Naples, of Jerusalem (from 25 July 1554)
*** King of Sicily. Duke of Athens, of Neopatria
** King of Valencia
** King of Majorca
** King of Sardinia and of Corsica, Margrave of Oristano, Count of Goceano
** King of Navarre
** Count of Barcelona, of Roussillon, of Cerdanya
* King of Portugal as Philip I: 12 September 1580 – 13 September 1598
** King of Portugal and the Algarves of either side of the sea in Africa, Lord of Guinea and of Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India, etc.
* King of England de &quot;jure uxoris&quot; as Philip I: 25 July 1554 – 17 November 1558
** King of England, France (titular); Defender of the Faith
** King of Ireland
* Imperial and Habsburg patrimonial titles:
** Duke of Milan: 11 October 1540 (secret donation) / 25 July 1554 (public investiture) – 13 September 1598
** Imperial vicar of Siena: since 30 May 1554
** Archduke of Austria
** Princely Count of Habsburg and of Tyrol
** Prince of Swabia
* Burgundian titles
** Lord of the Netherlands: 25 October 1555 – 13 September 1598
*** Duke of Lothier, of Brabant, of Limburg, of Luxemburg, of Guelders. Count of Flanders, of Artois, of Hainaut, of Holland, of Zeeland, of Namur, of Zutphen. Margrave of the Holy Roman Empire, Lord of Frisia, Salins, Mechelen, the cities, towns and lands of Utrecht, Overyssel, Groningen
** Count Palatine of Burgundy from 10 June 1556; Count of Charolais from 21 September 1558
** Duke of Burgundy
** Dominator in Asia, Africa
* Honours
**Knight of the Golden Fleece: 1531 – 13 September 1598
** Grand Master of the Order of the Golden Fleece: 23 October 1555 – 13 September 1598
** Grand Master of the Order of Calatrava: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
** Grand Master of the Order of Alcantara: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
** Grand Master of the Order of Santiago: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
** Grand Master of the Order of Montesa: 8 December 1587 – 13 September 1598

Philip continued his father&#x27;s style of &quot;Majesty&quot; (Latin: &quot;Maiestas&quot;; Spanish: &quot;Majestad&quot;) in preference to that of &quot;Highness&quot; (&quot;Celsitudo&quot;; &quot;Alteza&quot;). In diplomatic texts, he continued the use of the title &quot;Most Catholic&quot; (&quot;Rex Catholicissimus&quot;; &quot;Rey Católico&quot;) first bestowed by Pope Alexander VI on Ferdinand and Isabella in 1496.

Following the Act of Parliament sanctioning his marriage with Mary, the couple was styled &quot;Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Milan, Burgundy and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol&quot;. Upon his inheritance of Spain in 1556, they became &quot;Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both the Sicilies, Jerusalem and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol&quot;.

His coinage typically bore the obverse inscription &quot;&quot; (Latin: &quot;Philip, by the grace of God King of Spain et cetera&quot;), followed by the local title of the mint (&quot;&quot; for Duke of Brabant, &quot;&quot; for Count of Holland, &quot;&quot; for Lord of Overissel, etc.). The reverse would then bear a motto such as &quot;&quot; (&quot;For Peace and Justice&quot;) or &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Lord is my helper&quot;). A medal struck in 1583 bore the inscriptions &quot;&quot; (&quot;Philip II, King of Spain and the New World&quot;) and &quot;&quot; (&quot;The world is not enough&quot;).

==Heraldry==

==Family==
Philip was married four times and had children with three of his wives. He also had two long-term relationships with Isabel Osorio and Eufrasia de Guzmán.

===First marriage===
Philip&#x27;s first wife was his double first cousin, Maria Manuela, Princess of Portugal. She was a daughter of Philip&#x27;s maternal uncle, John III of Portugal, and paternal aunt, Catherine of Austria. They were married at Salamanca on 12 November 1543. The marriage produced one son in 1545, after which Maria died four days later due to haemorrhage:
* Carlos, Prince of Asturias (8 July 1545 – 24 July 1568), died unmarried at the age of 23 and without issue.

===Second marriage===
Philip&#x27;s second wife was his first cousin once removed, Queen Mary I of England. The marriage, which took place on 25 July 1554 at Winchester Cathedral, was political. By this marriage, Philip became &quot;jure uxoris&quot; King of England and Ireland, although the couple was apart more than together as they ruled their respective countries. The marriage produced no children, although there was a false pregnancy, and Mary died in 1558, ending Philip&#x27;s reign in England and Ireland.

===Third marriage===
Philip&#x27;s third wife was Elisabeth of Valois, the eldest daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de&#x27; Medici. The original ceremony was conducted by proxy (the Duke of Alba standing in for Philip) at Notre Dame prior to Elisabeth&#x27;s departure from France. The actual ceremony was conducted in Guadalajara upon her arrival in Spain. During their marriage (1559–1568) they conceived five daughters, though only two of the girls survived. Elisabeth died a few hours after the loss of her last child. Their children were:
* Miscarried twin daughters (August 1564)
* Isabella Clara Eugenia (12 August 1566 – 1 December 1633, aged 67), married Albert VII, Archduke of Austria
* Catherine Michaela (10 October 1567 – 6 November 1597, aged 30), married Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, and had issue
* Joan (3 October 1568) died shortly after birth.

===Fourth marriage===
Philip&#x27;s fourth and final wife was his niece, Anna of Austria. Pope Pius V initially refused to grant Philip the dispensation needed to marry Anna, citing biblical prohibitions and the danger of birth defects. The pope reluctantly gave his permission when Philip threatened to abandon the Holy League in their fight against the Ottoman Turks. By contemporary accounts, this was a convivial and satisfactory marriage (1570–1580) for both Philip and Anna. This marriage produced four sons and one daughter. Anna died of heart failure 8 months after giving birth to Maria in 1580.

Their children were:
* Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias (4 December 1571 – 18 October 1578, aged six)
* Charles Laurence (12 August 1573 – 30 June 1575, aged one)
* Diego Félix (15 August 1575 – 21 November 1582, aged seven)
* Philip III of Spain (14 April 1578 – 31 March 1621, aged 42)
* Maria (14 February 1580 – 5 August 1583, aged three).

==Ancestry==
==Male-line family tree==
== See also ==
* Library of the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial
* Descendants of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile
* The empire on which the sun never sets
* List of Spanish monarchs
* Royal Armoury of Madrid
* Ruy Gómez de Silva, 1st Prince of Éboli

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Boyden, James M. &quot;The Courtier and the King: Ruy Gómez De Silva, Philip II, and the Court of Spain&quot; (University of California Press, 1995).
* Elliott, J. H. &quot;Imperial Spain: 1469–1716&quot; (1966).
* Elliott, John H. &quot;The decline of Spain&quot;. &quot;Past &amp; Present&quot; 20 (1961): 52–75.
* Grierson, Edward. &quot;The Fatal Inheritance: Philip II and the Spanish Netherlands&quot; (1969).
* Gwynn, Aubrey. &quot;A Catholic King: Philip II of Spain&quot;. &quot;Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review&quot;, vol. 22, no. 85 (1933), pp. 48–64.
* Hume, M. A. S. &quot;Philip II of Spain&quot; (1903).
* Israel, Jonathan. &quot;King Philip II of Spain as a symbol of &#x27;Tyranny. &quot;Co-herencia&quot; 15.28 (2018): 137–154.
* Kamen, Henry. &quot;Philip of Spain&quot; (Yale University Press, 1999), a major scholarly biography. Online free to borrow
* Kelsey, Harry. &quot;Philip of Spain, King of England: The Forgotten Sovereign&quot; (London, I.B. Tauris, 2011).
* Koenigsberger, H. G. &quot;The Habsburgs and Europe, 1516–1660&quot; (1971). Online free to borrow
* López, Anna Santamaría. Great Faith is Necessary to Drink from this Chalice&#x27;: Philip II in the Court of Mary Tudor, 1554–58.&quot; in &quot;Early Modern Dynastic Marriages and Cultural Transfer&quot; ed. by Joan-Lluis Palos and Magdalena S. Sanchez (2017) pp: 115–138.
* Lynch, John. &quot;Spain Under the Habsburgs: vol I: Empire and Absolutism: 1516–1598&quot; (1965)
* Lynch, John. &quot;Philip II and the Papacy&quot;. &quot;Transactions of the Royal Historical Society&quot; 11 (1961): 23–42.
* Merriman, R. B. &quot;The Rise of the Spanish Empire in the Old World and in the New&quot; (4 vols, 1918). Vol. 4 has in-depth coverage of Philip II.
* Parker, Geoffrey. &quot;Imprudent King: A New Life of Philip II&quot; (2014), a major scholarly biography.
* Parker, Geoffrey. &quot;The Grand Strategy of Philip II&quot; (Yale University Press, 1998). online review
* Parker, Geoffrey. &quot;Philip II&quot; (1995), short scholarly biography
* Parker, Geoffrey. &quot;The World is Not Enough: The Imperial Vision of Philip II of Spain&quot; (Baylor University Press, 2001).
* Parker, Geoffrey. &quot;The Place of Tudor England in the Messianic Vision of Philip II of Spain&quot;. &quot;Transactions of the Royal Historical Society&quot; (2002): 167–221.
* Patterson, Benton Rain. &quot;With the Heart of a King: Elizabeth I of England, Philip II of Spain &amp; the Fight for a Nation&#x27;s Soul &amp; Crown&quot; (2007).
* Petrie, Charles. &quot;Philip II of Spain&quot; (1963), short scholarly biography.
* Pierson, Peter. &quot;Philip II of Spain&quot; (1975).
* Prescott, William Hickling. &quot;A History of the Reign of Philip II&quot;, London, Boston, Philadelphia. 1855–1902.
* Redworth, Glyn. &quot;Philip (1527–1598)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,&quot; online edition, May 2011. Retrieved 25 August 2011.
* Rodriguez-Salgado, M. J. &quot;The Court of Philip II of Spain&quot;. In &quot;Princes, Patronage, and the Nobility: The Court at the Beginning of the Modern Age, cc. 1450–1650.&quot; Edited by Ronald G. Asch and Adolf M. Birke. (Oxford University Press, 1991). .
* Samson, Alexander. &quot;Mary and Philip: The Marriage of Tudor England and Habsburg Spain&quot; (Manchester University Press, 2020) excerpt.
* Samson, Alexander. &quot;Power Sharing: The Co-monarchy of Philip and Mary&quot;, in &quot;Tudor Queenship: The Reigns of Mary and Elizabeth&quot;, ed. by Alice Hunt and Anna Whitelock (Palgrave Macmillan, New York, 2010), pp. 159–172.
* Thomas, Hugh. &quot;World Without End: The Global Empire of Philip II&quot; (Penguin UK, 2014); &quot;World Without End: Spain, Philip II, and the First Global Empire&quot; (Random House, 2015) popular history.
* Waxman, Matthew C. &quot;Strategic Terror: Philip II and Sixteenth-Century Warfare&quot;. &quot;War in History&quot;, vol. 4, no. 3 (1997): 339–347.
* Wilbur, Marguerite Eyer. &quot;The Unquenchable Flame: The Life of Philip II&quot;. P. Owen, 1956.
* Williams, Patrick. &quot;Philip II&quot; (Macmillan International Higher Education, 2017), a scholarly biography; excerpt

===Economic and cultural history===

* Braudel, Fernand. &quot;The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II&quot; (2 vols., 1976) vol. 1 free to borrow
* Clouse, Michele L. &quot;Medicine, Government and Public Health in Philip II&#x27;s Spain: Shared Interests, Competing Authorities&quot; (Ashgate, 2013).
* Conklin, James. &quot;The Theory of Sovereign Debt and Spain under Philip II&quot;. &quot;Journal of Political Economy&quot; 106.3 (1998): 483–513, statistical
* Drelichman, Mauricio, and Hans-Joachim Voth. &quot;Lending to the Borrower from Hell: Debt, Taxes, and Default in the Age of Philip II&quot; (Princeton University Press, 2016).
* Goodman, David. &quot;Philip II&#x27;s Patronage of Science and Engineering&quot;. &quot;British Journal for the History of Science&quot; 16.1 (1983): 49–66.
* Henriques, Antonio, and Nuno Pedro G. Palma. &quot;Comparative European Institutions and the Little Divergence, 1385–1800&quot; . (2019), economics
* Kagan, Richard L. &quot;Philip II and the Art of the Cityscape&quot;. &quot;Journal of Interdisciplinary History&quot; 17.1 (1986): 115–135.
* Lazure, Guy. &quot;Possessing the Sacred: Monarchy and Identity in Philip II&#x27;s Relic Collection at the Escorial&quot;. &quot;Renaissance Quarterly&quot; 60.1 (2007): 58–93.
* Matthews, P. G. &quot;Portraits of Philip II of Spain as King of England&quot;. &quot;Burlington Magazine&quot; 142.1162 (2000): 13–19.
* Miller, Stephanie R. &quot;A Tale of Two Portraits: Titian&#x27;s Seated Portraits of Philip II&quot;. &quot;Visual Resources&quot; 28.1 (2012): 103–116.
* Samson, Alexander. &quot;Changing Places: The Marriage and Royal Entry of Philip, Prince of Austria, and Mary Tudor, July-August 1554&quot;. &quot;Sixteenth Century Journal&quot; (2005): 761–784.
* Scully, Robert E. In the Confident Hope of a Miracle&#x27;: The Spanish Armada and Religious Mentalities in the Late Sixteenth Century&quot;. &quot;Catholic Historical Review&quot; 89.4 (2003): 643–670.
* Wilkinson-Zerner, Catherine. &quot;Juan de Herrera: Architect to Philip II of Spain&quot; (Yale University Press, 1993).
== External links ==
* Letters of Philip II, King of Spain 1592–1597, online edition at Brigham Young University
* 



|-




|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="0" end="9" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="70" end="88" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip the Prudent"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="97" end="110" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="122" end="138" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="154" end="168" title="King of Naples" label="King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="173" end="179" title="List of Sicilian monarchs" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q728870" start="233" end="244" title="jure uxoris" label="jure uxoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="251" end="266" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736547" start="271" end="278" title="List of Irish monarchs" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q114415247" start="284" end="296" title="Wedding of Mary I of England and Philip of Spain" label="his marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="306" end="312" title="Mary I" label="Mary I"/>
<link wikidata="Q692686" start="362" end="375" title="Duke of Milan" label="Duke of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="417" end="436" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="444" end="455" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="469" end="486" title="Emperor Charles V" label="Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q331575" start="491" end="511" title="Isabella of Portugal, Holy Roman Empress" label="Isabella of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="548" end="562" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="593" end="610" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portuguese throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="670" end="688" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="of the Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="700" end="711" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q449551" start="735" end="758" title="Ruy López de Villalobos" label="Ruy López de Villalobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q530936" start="884" end="902" title="Spanish Golden Age" label="Spanish Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="990" end="1011" title="national debt" label="debt-leveraged regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092023" start="1020" end="1034" title="Sovereign default" label="state defaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q634839" start="1112" end="1139" title="Act of Abjuration" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="1157" end="1171" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="1223" end="1234" title="El Escorial" label="El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1326" end="1340" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1349" end="1371" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940069" start="1400" end="1419" title="Treaty of Joinville" label="Treaty of Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="1440" end="1455" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="1518" end="1527" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="1549" end="1555" title="Spanish Armada" label="armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1625" end="1636" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q145934" start="1928" end="1942" title="English Armada" label="English Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977854" start="2022" end="2026" title="2nd Spanish Armada" label="1596"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919490" start="2031" end="2035" title="3rd Spanish Armada" label="1597"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="2041" end="2058" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)" label="Anglo-Spanish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="2329" end="2342" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2355" end="2362" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="2364" end="2374" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2384" end="2395" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="2442" end="2459" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="2483" end="2500" title="Emperor Charles V" label="Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="2523" end="2530" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="2535" end="2541" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q331575" start="2547" end="2567" title="Isabella of Portugal, Holy Roman Empress" label="Isabella of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="2609" end="2619" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697419" start="2638" end="2657" title="Palacio de Pimentel" label="Palacio de Pimentel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234249" start="2860" end="2880" title="Leonor de Mascareñas" label="Leonor de Mascareñas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369930" start="2897" end="2918" title="Juan Martínez Siliceo" label="Juan Martínez Siliceo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423027" start="2931" end="2951" title="archbishop of Toledo" label="archbishop of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3163" end="3168" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="3237" end="3245" title="polyglot" label="polyglot"/>
<link wikidata="Q154615" start="3272" end="3291" title="archduke of Austria" label="archduke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="3327" end="3344" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="3741" end="3747" title="Cortes Generales" label="Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="3911" end="3921" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q159660" start="4035" end="4040" title="Maria of Austria, Holy Roman Empress" label="María"/>
<link wikidata="Q170264" start="4045" end="4050" title="Joan of Austria, Princess of Portugal" label="Juana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232284" start="4098" end="4116" title="Ruy Gómez de Silva" label="Rui Gomes da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q182094" start="4121" end="4147" title="Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga" label="Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q772704" start="4236" end="4249" title="Antonio Pérez (statesman)" label="Antonio Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417901" start="4255" end="4264" title="Secretary of State (Ancient Regime in Spain)" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301354" start="4340" end="4366" title="Juan de Zúñiga y Requesens" label="Juan de Zúñiga y Requesens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="4413" end="4424" title="commendador" label="commendador"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="4499" end="4543" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15542964" start="4555" end="4567" title="Italian War of 1542–1546" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510304" start="4595" end="4613" title="Siege of Perpignan (1542)" label="Siege of Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="4734" end="4751" title="Henry II of France" label="Dauphin of France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4827" end="4843" title="Cortes of Aragon#Early Cortes" label="Aragonese Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123" start="4847" end="4853" title="Monzón" label="Monzón"/>
<link wikidata="Q58330709" start="5260" end="5291" title="List of Spanish regents" label="regency of the Spanish kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q692686" start="5342" end="5355" title="Duke of Milan" label="Duke of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q546413" start="5518" end="5540" title="Francisco de los Cobos" label="Francisco de los Cobos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6024" end="6046" title="Diego López de Medrano y Vergara#Diego López de Medrano" label="Diego López de Medrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785507" start="6058" end="6065" title="equerry" label="equerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="6080" end="6085" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="6097" end="6103" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="6198" end="6209" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="6458" end="6472" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="6527" end="6541" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="6622" end="6639" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6787" end="6801" title="List of titles and honours of the Heir Apparent to the Spanish Throne#Titles held by the heir apparent to the Spanish Throne" label="several titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622150" start="6805" end="6844" title="List of heirs to the Spanish throne" label="heir to the Spanish kingdoms and empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q835706" start="6856" end="6874" title="Prince of Asturias" label="Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="6925" end="6938" title="Upper Navarre" label="Upper Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="6959" end="6981" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312328" start="7075" end="7093" title="Spanish conquest of Iberian Navarre" label="War across Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7120" end="7150" title="Treaty of Madrid (1526)#Madrid" label="Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q317506" start="7201" end="7220" title="Henry II of Navarre" label="Henry II of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="7309" end="7330" title="Jeanne III of Navarre" label="Jeanne III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q638503" start="7448" end="7453" title="Lower Navarre" label="Lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137677" start="7487" end="7492" title="Viscounty of Béarn" label="Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="7577" end="7586" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870496" start="8208" end="8236" title="Fueros of Navarre" label="realm specific laws (fueros)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17628015" start="8452" end="8465" title="Cortes of Tarazona (1592)" label="November 1592"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417901" start="8702" end="8711" title="Secretary of State (Ancient Regime in Spain)" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q772704" start="8712" end="8725" title="Antonio Pérez (statesman)" label="Antonio Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282" start="9135" end="9143" title="Pamplona" label="Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q389210" start="9401" end="9422" title="Pamplona Cathedral" label="Santa Maria Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="9649" end="9656" title="Morisco" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q685757" start="9775" end="9789" title="Morisco Revolt" label="Morisco Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796202" start="9816" end="9834" title="Kingdom of Granada (Crown of Castile)" label="Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="10122" end="10128" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="10430" end="10439" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q530936" start="10611" end="10629" title="Spanish Golden Age" label="Spanish Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q236038" start="10765" end="10785" title="Sofonisba Anguissola" label="Sofonisba Anguissola"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="10933" end="10938" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348126" start="11096" end="11111" title="Neapolitan sums" label="Neapolitan sums"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="11626" end="11632" title="Cortes Generales" label="Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="11636" end="11643" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="11661" end="11668" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="11708" end="11714" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="11948" end="11963" title="Estates General (France)" label="Estates General"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="12464" end="12475" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q772704" start="12658" end="12670" title="Antonio Pérez (statesman)" label="Perez affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="12692" end="12702" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="12751" end="12757" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378634" start="12923" end="12930" title="Primate of Spain" label="Primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="12939" end="12945" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="13022" end="13028" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="13062" end="13081" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832241" start="13178" end="13201" title="Royal Alcázar of Madrid" label="Royal Alcázar of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="13419" end="13428" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="13676" end="13687" title="El Escorial" label="El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="13850" end="13869" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="14298" end="14312" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="14343" end="14365" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="14408" end="14414" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="14617" end="14642" title="Revolt of the Netherlands" label="Revolt of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q524189" start="14815" end="14826" title="Cologne War" label="Cologne War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="15103" end="15117" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="15195" end="15211" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)" label="war with England"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="15343" end="15356" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="15588" end="15595" title="Battle of Lepanto (1571)" label="Lepanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q698215" start="15634" end="15645" title="Holy League (1571)" label="Holy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q157107" start="15711" end="15726" title="John of Austria" label="John of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="15789" end="15797" title="Iberian Union" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732157" start="15948" end="15970" title="relaciones geográficas" label="relaciones geográficas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="16115" end="16131" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="throne of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q169911" start="16250" end="16265" title="Pope Julius III" label="Pope Julius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="16311" end="16327" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="throne of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="16453" end="16465" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="16527" end="16539" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Pope Paul IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16632" end="16638" title="Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30899410" start="16747" end="16766" title="Francisco de Vargas y Mexia" label="Francisco de Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="16803" end="16815" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Pope Paul IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="16902" end="16946" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041979" start="16979" end="16991" title="Carlo Carafa" label="Carlo Carafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q177726" start="17017" end="17021" title="Cave, Lazio" label="Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="17074" end="17086" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="17230" end="17242" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066129" start="17335" end="17363" title="Battle of St. Quentin (1557)" label="Battle of St. Quentin (1557)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236963" start="17403" end="17430" title="Battle of Gravelines (1558)" label="Battle of Gravelines (1558)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836963" start="17446" end="17472" title="Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis" label="Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="17489" end="17497" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="17505" end="17519" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Duchy of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="17525" end="17532" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="17540" end="17557" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="17813" end="17818" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="17840" end="17848" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="17921" end="17936" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="17977" end="17994" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778792" start="18050" end="18066" title="State of Presidi" label="State of Presidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="18203" end="18225" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q179786" start="18271" end="18287" title="Council of Italy" label="Council of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567004" start="18428" end="18448" title="French-Habsburg rivalry" label="Franco-Habsburg wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="18712" end="18726" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Habsburg Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="18819" end="18827" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132548" start="18956" end="18966" title="Francis II of France" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="19085" end="19108" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q176041" start="19343" end="19362" title="Elisabeth of Valois" label="Elisabeth of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q158256" start="19453" end="19475" title="Isabella Clara Eugenia" label="Isabella Clara Eugenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="19708" end="19724" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336538" start="19729" end="19743" title="House of Guise" label="House of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="19830" end="19843" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="19848" end="19859" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="19953" end="19971" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524228" start="19992" end="20011" title="Treaty of Vaucelles" label="Treaty of Vaucelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="20096" end="20109" title="County of Burgundy" label="Franche-Comté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="20113" end="20121" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298746" start="20470" end="20502" title="War of the Portuguese Succession" label="War of the Portuguese Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q321325" start="20518" end="20525" title="António, Prior of Crato" label="António"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="20617" end="20623" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414020" start="20679" end="20694" title="Filippo di Piero Strozzi" label="Filippo Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="20698" end="20708" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099190" start="20751" end="20769" title="Battle of Terceira" label="Battle of Terceira"/>
<link wikidata="Q209036" start="20830" end="20847" title="São Miguel Island" label="São Miguel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="20905" end="20934" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)" label="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="21148" end="21157" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162454" start="21212" end="21232" title="Conquest of the Azores" label="Battle of the Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q251441" start="21406" end="21421" title="Álvaro de Bazán, 1st Marquis of Santa Cruz" label="Álvaro de Bazán"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="21472" end="21504" title="Iberian Union" label="Portugal into the Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="21527" end="21542" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="21656" end="21688" title="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="21724" end="21732" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158256" start="21790" end="21812" title="Isabella Clara Eugenia" label="Isabella Clara Eugenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176041" start="21836" end="21855" title="Elisabeth of Valois" label="Elisabeth of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="22004" end="22013" title="Salic law" label="Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="22047" end="22065" title="Parlement of Paris" label="Parlement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485984" start="22285" end="22299" title="Siege of Paris, 1590" label="siege of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510351" start="22316" end="22330" title="Siege of Rouen (1591)" label="siege of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888508" start="23216" end="23244" title="Battle of Fontaine-Française" label="Battle of Fontaine-Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="23380" end="23399" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695354" start="23415" end="23418" title="Ham, Belgium" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509977" start="23563" end="23571" title="Siege of Doullens" label="Doullens"/>
<link wikidata="Q181285" start="23573" end="23580" title="Cambrai" label="Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510184" start="23586" end="23596" title="Siege of Le Catelet (1595)" label="Le Catelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701400" start="23684" end="23700" title="Siege of Calais (1596)" label="conquered Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="23735" end="23741" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485809" start="23811" end="23827" title="Siege of Amiens (1597)" label="reconquer Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188688" start="24002" end="24018" title="Peace of Vervins" label="Peace of Vervins"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="24201" end="24216" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="24774" end="24788" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="24795" end="24819" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q949051" start="24946" end="24958" title="Piyale Pasha" label="Piyale Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="24972" end="24988" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="25028" end="25035" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="25271" end="25291" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Hayreddin Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="25382" end="25388" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="25669" end="25686" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="25692" end="25704" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="25710" end="25724" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Duchy of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="25733" end="25749" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="25784" end="25791" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525723" start="25911" end="25932" title="Giovanni Andrea Doria" label="Giovanni Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156521" start="25971" end="25983" title="Andrea Doria" label="Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="26043" end="26049" title="Djerba" label="Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="26123" end="26130" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="26135" end="26142" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="26349" end="26360" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q613478" start="26453" end="26469" title="Battle of Djerba" label="Battle of Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613440" start="26675" end="26690" title="Álvaro de Sande" label="Álvaro de Sande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="26834" end="26852" title="Regency of Algiers" label="Regency of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510593" start="26866" end="26898" title="sieges of Oran and Mers El Kébir" label="sieges of Oran and Mers El Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q129763948" start="27037" end="27074" title="conquest of Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera" label="conquered Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="27115" end="27140" title="Siege of Malta (1565)" label="large expedition to Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428789" start="27258" end="27274" title="García Álvarez de Toledo y Osorio" label="García de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="27576" end="27593" title="Battle of Lepanto" label="Battle of Lepanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q698215" start="27610" end="27621" title="Holy League (1571)" label="Holy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q157107" start="27675" end="27690" title="John of Austria" label="John of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q251441" start="27700" end="27715" title="Álvaro de Bazán, Marquis of Santa Cruz" label="Álvaro de Bazán"/>
<link wikidata="Q12251145" start="27770" end="27787" title="Conquest of Tunis (1573)" label="reconquered Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q465269" start="27863" end="27876" title="Uluç Ali Reis" label="Uluç Ali Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664371" start="27888" end="27903" title="Conquest of Tunis (1574)" label="recapture Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="28299" end="28312" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799588" start="28321" end="28333" title="mare clausum" label="mare clausum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="28426" end="28444" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186805" start="28602" end="28621" title="Francisco de Toledo" label="Francisco de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205303" start="28630" end="28655" title="Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa" label="Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770842" start="28787" end="28802" title="Nombre de Jesús (Patagonia)" label="Nombre de Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q800201" start="28808" end="28833" title="Puerto del Hambre" label="Ciudad del Rey Don Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q439123" start="29739" end="29755" title="Thomas Cavendish" label="Thomas Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q177608" start="29905" end="29923" title="Chiloé Archipelago" label="Chiloé Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q160687" start="30000" end="30008" title="Valdivia" label="Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="30175" end="30194" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="30221" end="30232" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="30269" end="30281" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="open warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q307815" start="30320" end="30337" title="Margaret of Parma" label="Margaret of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="30484" end="30502" title="Cardinal Granvelle" label="Cardinal Granvelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978029" start="30767" end="30778" title="Inquisition of the Netherlands" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30866" end="30881" title="Dutch Revolt#1566 — Iconoclasm and repression" label="Iconoclast Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="30944" end="30956" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="Duke of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q435844" start="30998" end="31022" title="Lamoral, Count of Egmont" label="Lamoral, Count of Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q700105" start="31027" end="31063" title="Philip de Montmorency, Count of Horn" label="Philip de Montmorency, Count of Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="31076" end="31084" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q215429" start="31091" end="31105" title="Grand-Place" label="central square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726440" start="31186" end="31194" title="Spanish Fury at Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931482" start="31196" end="31203" title="Massacre of Naarden" label="Naarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535" start="31205" end="31212" title="Zutphen" label="Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="31217" end="31224" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="31251" end="31258" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q701367" start="31420" end="31439" title="Battle of Jemmingen" label="Battle of Jemmingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749646" start="31506" end="31544" title="James Matamoros" label="Saint James &amp;quot;the Moorslayer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="31693" end="31711" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="31713" end="31729" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q762943" start="31827" end="31834" title="County of Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="31839" end="31846" title="County of Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350145" start="31886" end="31902" title="Siege of Alkmaar" label="Siege of Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q699726" start="31940" end="31948" title="Fadrique Álvarez de Toledo, 4th Duke of Alba" label="Fadrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q182094" start="31989" end="32015" title="Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga" label="Luis de Requesens y Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="32281" end="32288" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862936" start="32355" end="32371" title="Army of Flanders" label="Army of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q700300" start="32467" end="32482" title="Louis of Nassau" label="Louis of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q695732" start="32519" end="32540" title="Battle of Mookerheyde" label="Battle of Mookerheyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q71441" start="32592" end="32618" title="Henry of Nassau-Dillenburg" label="Henry of Nassau-Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702252" start="32655" end="32670" title="Spanish treasure fleet" label="treasure fleets"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="32680" end="32689" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557492" start="32771" end="32783" title="Spanish Fury" label="Spanish Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q874235" start="32787" end="32794" title="Sack of Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="32922" end="32954" title="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="32983" end="33002" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q764819" start="33057" end="33082" title="Battle of Gembloux (1578)" label="Battle of Gembloux (1578)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758693" start="33131" end="33141" title="Siege of Maastricht (1579)" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="33150" end="33157" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12992" start="33166" end="33176" title="Oudenaarde" label="Oudenaarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="33185" end="33192" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="33201" end="33207" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202319" start="33216" end="33221" title="Siege of Ghent (1583–1584)" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q697823" start="33234" end="33241" title="Fall of Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="33254" end="33268" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="States General"/>
<link wikidata="Q216165" start="33315" end="33331" title="Union of Utrecht" label="Union of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q634839" start="33343" end="33360" title="Act of Abjuration" label="Act of Abjuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581823" start="33436" end="33456" title="southern Netherlands" label="southern Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="33532" end="33550" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q537169" start="33571" end="33587" title="Balthasar Gérard" label="Balthasar Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="33822" end="33839" title="Maurice of Nassau" label="Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="34070" end="34081" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="end in 1648"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="34092" end="34106" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="34356" end="34365" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q272899" start="34409" end="34430" title="Sebastian of Portugal" label="Sebastian of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121532" start="34443" end="34467" title="Battle of Alcácer Quibir" label="Battle of Alcácer Quibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332476" start="34502" end="34519" title="1580 Portuguese succession crisis" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q222123" start="34549" end="34563" title="Henry, King of Portugal" label="Cardinal Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="34738" end="34746" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711789" start="34767" end="34804" title="Infanta Catarina, Duchess of Braganza" label="Infanta Catarina, Duchess of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q321325" start="34806" end="34829" title="António, Prior of Crato" label="António, Prior of Crato"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="34877" end="34893" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q741788" start="35195" end="35214" title="Battle of Alcântara (1580)" label="Battle of Alcântara"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="35349" end="35393" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244869" start="35625" end="35642" title="Portuguese Cortes" label="Portuguese Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q622817" start="35646" end="35651" title="Tomar" label="Tomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="35675" end="35689" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185044" start="35712" end="35730" title="Philippine Dynasty" label="Philippine Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="35780" end="35797" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q311452" start="35855" end="35872" title="Albert VII, Archduke of Austria" label="Albert of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297788" start="35923" end="35942" title="Council of Portugal" label="Council of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325907" start="36176" end="36192" title="Polysynodial System" label="rule by councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="36333" end="36350" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="36455" end="36475" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q114415247" start="36491" end="36499" title="Wedding of Mary I of England and Philip of Spain" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="36503" end="36523" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q719423" start="36665" end="36681" title="Stephen Gardiner" label="Stephen Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="36690" end="36706" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q860118" start="36770" end="36786" title="Edward Courtenay, 1st Earl of Devon" label="Edward Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676667" start="36812" end="36865" title="Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain" label="Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="36997" end="37015" title="Act of Parliament" label="Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="37061" end="37071" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="37904" end="37925" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q643999" start="38142" end="38165" title="coat of arms of England" label="coat of arms of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701253" start="38305" end="38319" title="Siege of Calais (1558)" label="loss of Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="38414" end="38432" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915629" start="38451" end="38466" title="Crown of Ireland Act 1542" label="King of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="38515" end="38525" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q101430" start="38616" end="38628" title="Pope Paul IV" label="Pope Paul IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="38657" end="38667" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q184445" start="38735" end="38753" title="County Offaly" label="King&amp;#x27;s County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475540" start="38758" end="38769" title="Daingean" label="Philipstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="39281" end="39307" title="Catholic Church in England" label="Catholic Church in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059702" start="39393" end="39428" title="English claims to the French throne" label="English claims to the French throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q296555" start="39536" end="39563" title="Philippe I, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe I, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q230921" start="39573" end="39602" title="Princess Henrietta of England" label="Princess Henrietta of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="39625" end="39633" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q230873" start="39703" end="39728" title="Anne Marie d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Anne Marie d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="39807" end="39818" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="40010" end="40016" title="House of Valois" label="Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="40070" end="40080" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="40085" end="40096" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="40316" end="40336" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="40374" end="40383" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="40732" end="40741" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602266" start="40952" end="40969" title="Treaty of Nonsuch" label="Treaty of Nonsuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940069" start="41153" end="41172" title="Treaty of Joinville" label="Treaty of Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="41182" end="41207" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="41501" end="41515" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862936" start="41540" end="41556" title="Army of Flanders" label="Army of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="41846" end="41861" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="42026" end="42036" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145934" start="43072" end="43086" title="English Armada" label="counter-armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535988" start="43342" end="43358" title="Capture of Cádiz" label="Cádiz was sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427781" start="43476" end="43486" title="Dunkirkers" label="Dunkirkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977854" start="43641" end="43652" title="2nd Spanish Armada" label="1596 Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919490" start="43772" end="43783" title="3rd Spanish Armada" label="1597 Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="43870" end="43899" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)" label="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="44271" end="44282" title="El Escorial" label="El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="44322" end="44328" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="44371" end="44381" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="44681" end="44700" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="45378" end="45389" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q809545" start="45649" end="45667" title="Bartolome Carranza" label="Bartolome Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334000" start="46421" end="46440" title="School of Salamanca" label="School of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340260" start="46469" end="46489" title="Martín de Azpilcueta" label="Martín de Azpilcueta"/>
<link wikidata="Q316339" start="46738" end="46754" title="Francisco Suárez" label="Francisco Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="46808" end="46822" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="46994" end="47011" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q436077" start="47053" end="47067" title="Luis de Molina" label="Luis de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="47266" end="47277" title="omniscience" label="omniscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="47296" end="47305" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="47331" end="47339" title="Molinism" label="Molinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="47475" end="47481" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233528" start="47541" end="47559" title="William Lane Craig" label="William Lane Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q355201" start="47564" end="47579" title="Alvin Plantinga" label="Alvin Plantinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="48099" end="48119" title="Spanish Black Legend" label="Spanish Black Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="48124" end="48136" title="White Legend" label="White Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417901" start="48434" end="48443" title="Secretary of State (Ancient Regime in Spain)" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q772704" start="48444" end="48457" title="Antonio Pérez (statesman)" label="Antonio Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="48799" end="48818" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="48999" end="49011" title="Black Legend" label="Black Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297250" start="49094" end="49111" title="Fire Over England" label="Fire Over England"/>
<link wikidata="Q165425" start="50076" end="50093" title="Battle of Lepanto (1571)" label="Battle of Lepanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066129" start="50095" end="50118" title="Battle of St. Quentin (1557)" label="Battle of Saint Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="50184" end="50190" title="Spanish Armada" label="Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="50737" end="50749" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355845" start="50762" end="50777" title="Geoffrey Parker (historian)" label="Geoffrey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q82119066" start="50842" end="50855" title="Tonio Andrade" label="Tonio Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q687246" start="52089" end="52105" title="Prince of Gerona" label="Prince of Gerona"/>
<link wikidata="Q835706" start="52140" end="52158" title="Prince of Asturias" label="Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q326470" start="52171" end="52186" title="List of Castilian monarchs" label="King of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045810" start="52489" end="52503" title="Lord of Biscay" label="Lord of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q238179" start="52506" end="52520" title="List of Aragonese monarchs" label="King of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="52620" end="52634" title="List of kings of Naples" label="King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="52673" end="52687" title="List of monarchs of Sicily" label="King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="52689" end="52703" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duke of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520008" start="52708" end="52717" title="Duchy of Neopatras" label="Neopatria"/>
<link wikidata="Q674645" start="52721" end="52737" title="List of Valencian monarchs" label="King of Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q338297" start="52741" end="52756" title="List of Majorcan monarchs" label="King of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q845435" start="52760" end="52776" title="list of Sardinian monarchs" label="King of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="52835" end="52850" title="List of Navarrese monarchs" label="King of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q640868" start="52854" end="52872" title="Count of Barcelona" label="Count of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="52903" end="52919" title="List of Portuguese monarchs" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="53149" end="53191" title="List of kings of England" label="King of England de &amp;quot;jure uxoris&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q644830" start="53275" end="53296" title="Fidei Defensor" label="Defender of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736547" start="53300" end="53315" title="List of kings of Ireland" label="King of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692686" start="53363" end="53376" title="list of dukes of Milan" label="Duke of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="53623" end="53646" title="Lord of the Netherlands" label="Lord of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058509" start="53693" end="53715" title="Dukes of Brabant" label="of Lothier, of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q572810" start="53717" end="53727" title="Dukes of Limburg" label="of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q878177" start="53729" end="53741" title="Counts, Dukes and Grand Dukes of Luxembourg" label="of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248555" start="53743" end="53754" title="Dukes of Guelders" label="of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="53762" end="53773" title="Counts of Flanders" label="of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q135302" start="53775" end="53784" title="Counts of Artois" label="of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095090" start="53786" end="53796" title="Counts of Hainaut" label="of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q548187" start="53798" end="53808" title="Count of Holland" label="of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="53810" end="53820" title="Count of Zeeland" label="of Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599613" start="53822" end="53830" title="Marquis of Namur" label="of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787007" start="53832" end="53842" title="Count of Zutphen" label="of Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15960093" start="53977" end="54003" title="List of counts of Burgundy" label="Count Palatine of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707090" start="54023" end="54041" title="Charolais (county)" label="Count of Charolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="54068" end="54084" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292861" start="54126" end="54153" title="List of Knights of the Golden Fleece" label="Knight of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594797" start="54183" end="54229" title="Grand Master of the Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Grand Master of the Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572302" start="54270" end="54308" title="List of Grand Masters of the Order of Calatrava" label="Grand Master of the Order of Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q594890" start="54349" end="54387" title="List of Grand Masters of the Order of Alcantara" label="Grand Master of the Order of Alcantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372723" start="54428" end="54465" title="List of Grand Masters of the Order of Santiago" label="Grand Master of the Order of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q631357" start="54506" end="54542" title="Order of Montesa" label="Grand Master of the Order of Montesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q669458" start="54631" end="54638" title="Majesty" label="Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623587" start="54737" end="54745" title="Highness" label="Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736387" start="54858" end="54871" title="Rex Catholicismus" label="Most Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="54956" end="54973" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="54977" end="54999" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Ferdinand and Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676667" start="55024" end="55076" title="Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain" label="Act of Parliament sanctioning his marriage with Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059702" start="55170" end="55176" title="British claims to the French throne" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="55178" end="55184" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="55186" end="55195" title="Kings of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="55201" end="55208" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q644830" start="55210" end="55232" title="Fidei Defensor" label="Defenders of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="55245" end="55250" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="55255" end="55261" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q699964" start="55276" end="55283" title="Archduchy of Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="55294" end="55299" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="55301" end="55309" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="55314" end="55321" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="55333" end="55341" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="55343" end="55351" title="Count of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543832" start="55356" end="55361" title="County of Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="55709" end="55716" title="obverse" label="obverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="55973" end="55980" title="obverse and reverse" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="56085" end="56106" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="The Lord is my helper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920915" start="56429" end="56442" title="Isabel Osorio" label="Isabel Osorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q97483844" start="56447" end="56465" title="Eufrasia de Guzmán" label="Eufrasia de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q230894" start="56543" end="56578" title="Maria Manuela, Princess of Portugal" label="Maria Manuela, Princess of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="56632" end="56652" title="John III of Portugal" label="John III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q157834" start="56673" end="56693" title="Catherine of Austria, Queen of Portugal" label="Catherine of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="56716" end="56725" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q159817" start="56847" end="56873" title="Carlos, Prince of Asturias" label="Carlos, Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="57045" end="57062" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="57114" end="57134" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q728870" start="57189" end="57200" title="jure uxoris" label="jure uxoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="57207" end="57222" title="List of English monarchs" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736547" start="57227" end="57234" title="King of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065846" start="57383" end="57398" title="false pregnancy" label="false pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176041" start="57525" end="57544" title="Elisabeth of Valois" label="Elisabeth of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="57569" end="57587" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="57592" end="57617" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q80847" start="57669" end="57681" title="Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba" label="Duke of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="57709" end="57719" title="Notre Dame de Paris" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q54925" start="57806" end="57817" title="Guadalajara (province)" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q158256" start="58075" end="58097" title="Isabella Clara Eugenia" label="Isabella Clara Eugenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311452" start="58151" end="58182" title="Albert VII, Archduke of Austria" label="Albert VII, Archduke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q233187" start="58185" end="58203" title="Catalina Micaela of Spain" label="Catherine Michaela"/>
<link wikidata="Q318091" start="58258" end="58291" title="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156657" start="58431" end="58446" title="Anna of Austria, Queen of Spain" label="Anna of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q698215" start="58674" end="58685" title="Holy League (1571)" label="Holy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q574024" start="58987" end="59016" title="Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias" label="Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q668424" start="59126" end="59137" title="Diego, Prince of Asturias" label="Diego Félix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="59188" end="59207" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848863" start="59362" end="59416" title="Library of the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial" label="Library of the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263703" start="59419" end="59482" title="Descendants of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile" label="Descendants of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211369" start="59485" end="59523" title="The empire on which the sun never sets" label="The empire on which the sun never sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q173053" start="59526" end="59550" title="List of Spanish monarchs" label="List of Spanish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15845124" start="59553" end="59576" title="Royal Armoury of Madrid" label="Royal Armoury of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232284" start="59579" end="59618" title="Ruy Gómez de Silva, 1st Prince of Éboli" label="Ruy Gómez de Silva, 1st Prince of Éboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341781" start="60424" end="60436" title="Henry Kamen" label="Kamen, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355845" start="61424" end="61440" title="Geoffrey Parker (historian)" label="Parker, Geoffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713740" start="62615" end="62639" title="Maria José Rodriguez-Salgado" label="Rodriguez-Salgado, M. J."/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="63890" end="63906" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Braudel, Fernand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54390" wikidata="Q279650" url="?curid=54390" title="Disassembler">
<text>A disassembler is a computer program that translates machine language into assembly language—the inverse operation to that of an assembler. The output of disassembly is typically formatted for human-readability rather than for input to an assembler, making disassemblers primarily a reverse-engineering tool. Common uses include analyzing the output of high-level programming language compilers and their optimizations, recovering source code when the original is lost, performing malware analysis, modifying software (such as binary patching), and software cracking.

A disassembler differs from a decompiler, which targets a high-level language rather than an assembly language.

Assembly language source code generally permits the use of constants and programmer comments. These are usually removed from the assembled machine code by the assembler. If so, a disassembler operating on the machine code would produce disassembly lacking these constants and comments; the disassembled output becomes more difficult for a human to interpret than the original annotated source code. Some disassemblers provide a built-in code commenting feature where the generated output is enriched with comments regarding called API functions or parameters of called functions. Some disassemblers make use of the symbolic debugging information present in object files such as ELF. For example, IDA allows the human user to make up mnemonic symbols for values or regions of code in an interactive session: human insight applied to the disassembly process often parallels human creativity in the code writing process.

== Challenges ==
It is not always possible to distinguish executable code from data within a binary. While common executable formats, such as ELF and PE, separate code and data into distinct sections, flat binaries do not, making it unclear whether a given location contains executable instructions or non-executable data. This ambiguity might complicate the disassembly process.

Additionally, CPUs often allow dynamic jumps computed at runtime, which makes it impossible to identify all possible locations in the binary that might be executed as instructions.

On computer architectures with variable-width instructions, such as in many CISC architectures, more than one valid disassembly may exist for the same binary.

Disassemblers also cannot handle code that changes during execution, as static analysis cannot account for runtime modifications.

Encryption, packing, or obfuscation are often applied to computer programs, especially as part of digital rights management to deter reverse engineering and cracking. These techniques pose additional challenges for disassembly, as the code must first be unpacked or decrypted before meaningful analysis can begin.

== Examples of disassemblers ==
A disassembler can be either stand-alone or interactive. A stand-alone disassembler generates an assembly language file upon execution, which can then be examined. In contrast, an interactive disassembler immediately reflects any changes made by the user. For example, if the disassembler initially treats a section of the program as data rather than code, the user can specify it as code. The disassembled code will then be updated and displayed instantly, allowing the user to analyze it and make further changes during the same session.

Any interactive debugger will include some way of viewing the disassembly of the program being debugged. Often, the same disassembly tool will be packaged as a standalone disassembler distributed along with the debugger. For example, objdump, part of GNU Binutils, is related to the interactive debugger gdb.

* Binary Ninja
* DEBUG
* Interactive Disassembler (IDA)
* Ghidra
* Hiew
* Hopper Disassembler
* PE Explorer Disassembler
* Netwide Disassembler (Ndisasm), companion to the Netwide Assembler (NASM).
* OLIVER (CICS interactive test/debug) includes disassemblers for Assembler, COBOL, and PL/1
* x64dbg, a debugger for Windows that also performs dynamic disassembly
* OllyDbg is a 32-bit assembler level analysing debugger
* Radare2
* Rizin and Cutter (graphical interface for Rizin)
* SIMON (batch interactive test/debug) includes disassemblers for Assembler, COBOL, and PL/1
* Sourcer, a commenting 16-bit/32-bit disassembler for DOS, OS/2 and Windows by V Communications in the 1990s

== Disassemblers and emulators==
A dynamic disassembler can be integrated into the output of an emulator or hypervisor to trace the real-time execution of machine instructions, displaying them line-by-line. In this setup, along with the disassembled machine code, the disassembler can show changes to registers, data, or other state elements (such as condition codes) caused by each instructions. This provides powerful debugging information for problem resolution. However, the output size can become quite large, particularly if the tracing is active throughout the entire execution of a program. These features were first introduced in the early 1970s by OLIVER as part of its CICS debugging product and are now incorporated into the XPEDITER product from Compuware.

== Length disassembler ==
A length disassembler, also known as length disassembler engine (LDE), is a tool that, given a sequence of bytes (instructions), outputs the number of bytes taken by the parsed instruction. Notable open source projects for the x86 architecture include ldisasm, Tiny x86 Length Disassembler and Extended Length Disassembler Engine for x86-64.

== See also ==
* Control-flow graph
* Data-flow analysis
* Decompiler

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Transformation Wiki on disassembly
* Boomerang A general, open source, retargetable decompiler of machine code programs
* Online Disassembler , a free online disassembler of arms, mips, ppc, and x86 code</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q279650" start="2" end="14" title="Disassembler" label="disassembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="20" end="36" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462013" start="42" end="51" title="translator (computing)" label="translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="53" end="69" title="machine language" label="machine language"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="75" end="92" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129" end="138" title="Assembly language#Assembler" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="283" end="302" title="reverse engineering" label="reverse-engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="353" end="384" title="high-level language" label="high-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="385" end="393" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="431" end="442" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731404" start="481" end="497" title="malware analysis" label="malware analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138423" start="549" end="566" title="software cracking" label="software cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q913697" start="599" end="609" title="decompiler" label="decompiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="627" end="646" title="high-level language" label="high-level language"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="700" end="711" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284190" start="741" end="749" title="constant (programming)" label="constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141067" start="766" end="773" title="comment (computer programming)" label="comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="821" end="833" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181673" start="1297" end="1315" title="symbolic debugging" label="symbolic debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343830" start="1360" end="1363" title="Executable and Linking Format" label="ELF"/>
<link wikidata="Q657224" start="1378" end="1381" title="Interactive Disassembler" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343830" start="1743" end="1746" title="Executable and Linkable Format" label="ELF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076355" start="1751" end="1753" title="Portable Executable" label="PE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2195" end="2222" title="Instruction set architecture#Instruction length" label="variable-width instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189120" start="2240" end="2244" title="complex instruction set computer" label="CISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065594" start="2467" end="2474" title="Executable compression" label="packing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150647" start="2479" end="2490" title="Obfuscation (software)" label="obfuscation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="2553" end="2578" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138423" start="2612" end="2620" title="Software Cracking" label="cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="3359" end="3367" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491191" start="3577" end="3584" title="objdump" label="objdump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144975" start="3594" end="3606" title="GNU Binutils" label="GNU Binutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q464113" start="3647" end="3650" title="gdb" label="gdb"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738360" start="3655" end="3667" title="Binary Ninja" label="Binary Ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q818830" start="3670" end="3675" title="DEBUG (DOS command)" label="DEBUG"/>
<link wikidata="Q657224" start="3678" end="3702" title="Interactive Disassembler" label="Interactive Disassembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q61983083" start="3711" end="3717" title="Ghidra" label="Ghidra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026564" start="3720" end="3724" title="Hiew" label="Hiew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571077" start="3825" end="3842" title="Netwide Assembler" label="Netwide Assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146247" start="3861" end="3865" title="CICS" label="CICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="3928" end="3933" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="3939" end="3943" title="PL/1" label="PL/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q129567481" start="3946" end="3952" title="x64dbg" label="x64dbg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141018" start="4018" end="4025" title="OllyDbg" label="OllyDbg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155039" start="4075" end="4082" title="Radare2" label="Radare2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4229" end="4236" title="Sourcer" label="Sourcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="4282" end="4285" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="4287" end="4291" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="4296" end="4303" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q120411463" start="4307" end="4323" title="V Communications" label="V Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="4434" end="4442" title="emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="4446" end="4456" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146247" start="5018" end="5022" title="CICS" label="CICS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5075" end="5083" title="XPEDITER" label="XPEDITER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122747" start="5097" end="5106" title="Compuware" label="Compuware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187693" start="5495" end="5513" title="Control-flow graph" label="Control-flow graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172416" start="5516" end="5534" title="Data-flow analysis" label="Data-flow analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q913697" start="5537" end="5547" title="Decompiler" label="Decompiler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54395" wikidata="Q1150471" url="?curid=54395" title="Strike zone">
<text>In baseball, the strike zoneis the area of space through which a pitch must pass in order to be called a strike even if the batter does not swing. The strike zone is defined as the volume of space above home plate and between the batter&#x27;s knees and the midpoint of their torso. Whether a pitch passes through the zone is decided by an umpire, who is generally positioned behind the catcher.

Strikes are desirable for the pitcher and the fielding team, as three strikes result in a strikeout of that batter. A pitch that misses the strike zone is called a ball if the batter does not swing at it. Balls are desirable for the batter and the batting team, as four balls allow the batter to take a &quot;walk&quot; to first base as a base on balls.

==Definition==
The strike zone is a volume of space, a vertical right pentagonal prism. Its sides are vertical planes extending up from the edges of home plate. The official rules of Major League Baseball define the top of the strike zone as the midpoint between the top of the batter&#x27;s shoulders and the top of the uniform pants, and the bottom of the strike zone is at the hollow beneath the kneecap, both determined from the batter&#x27;s stance as the batter is prepared to swing at the pitched ball, although the &quot;de facto&quot; enforced strike zone can vary based on the umpire&#x27;s perspective. The official rules define a pitch as a strike &quot;if any part of the ball passes through any part of the strike zone&quot;, with the ball required to have not bounced. Thus, a pitch that touches the outer boundary of the zone is as much a strike as a pitch that is thrown right down the center. A pitch passing outside the front of the strike zone but curving so as to enter this volume farther back (without being hit) is sometimes called a &quot;back-door strike&quot;. Various other rulebooks for baseball and softball define the strike zone slightly differently. 

A pitch is also a strike if the batter swings or offers the bat in an attempt to hit the pitch. A pitch batted into foul territory—a foul ball—is also a strike, unless the batter already has two strikes. Any pitch not called a strike, swung on and missed, or fouled-off, is a &quot;ball&quot; (originally &quot;no ball&quot;). 

A batter who accumulates three strikes in a single batting appearance has struck out and is ruled out (with the exception of an uncaught third strike); a batter who accumulates four balls in a single appearance has drawn a base on balls (or &quot;walk&quot;) and is awarded advancement to first base. In very early iterations of the rules during the 19th century, it took up to nine balls for a batter to earn a walk. However, to make up for this, the batter could request the ball to be pitched high, low, or medium.

==History==
Originally, the word &quot;strike&quot; was used literally: the batter &quot;striking&quot; at the ball in an effort to hit it. For example, the 11th rule of the Knickerbocker Rules (1845) read &quot;Three balls being struck at and missed and the last one caught, is a hand-out.&quot; There was no adverse consequence if the batter did not swing, i.e. the called strike did not exist, the result being batters prepared to wait all day for &quot;their&quot; pitch. It was not until the 1858 NABBP convention that a rule was adopted authorizing the umpire to impose a penalty strike for such conduct: &quot;Should a striker stand at the bat without striking at good balls repeatedly pitched to him, for the purpose of delaying the game or of giving advantage to a player, the umpire, after warning him, shall call one strike, and if he persists in such action, two and three strikes. When three strikes are called, he shall be subject to the same rules as if he had struck at three balls.&quot; The called ball first appeared in the rules of 1863, similarly as a discretionary penalty imposed on the pitcher for persistently delivering &quot;unfair&quot; balls.

Whether or not a pitch was &quot;unfair&quot; or the batter was being unreasonably picky was left entirely to the umpire&#x27;s judgment. Well into the 1870s, umpires were reluctant to make such calls, since they were viewed as penalties for unsportsmanlike play. By the 1880s, they had become routine, and the modern view took hold, that every pitch results in either a swing, a ball or a called strike. The first rule leading to the creation of a defined strike &quot;zone&quot; was enacted by the American Association before the 1886 season. As explained in &quot;The Sporting Life&quot; on March 17, 1886, &quot;the ball must be delivered at the height called for by the batsman. If at such height it passes over any part of the plate then it is a strike. The idea is to give the pitcher a chance against some cranky umpires who compelled the twirlers to almost cut the plate in two before a strike would be called, even if the height was right.&quot; The following year, the National League created the full strike zone, eliminating the batter&#x27;s right to call the height of the pitch, and instead requiring the umpire to call a strike on any pitch that &quot;passes over home plate not lower than the batsman&#x27;s knee, nor higher than his shoulders.&quot;

Major League Baseball has occasionally redefined the strike zone to control the balance of power between pitchers and hitters. After the record home run year by Roger Maris in , the major leagues increased the size of the strike zone by raising the top of the zone from the batter&#x27;s armpit to the top of his shoulder. In , pitchers such as Denny McLain and Bob Gibson dominated hitters, producing 339 shutouts. Carl Yastrzemski was the only American League hitter to finish the season with a batting average higher than .300. In the National League, Gibson posted a 1.12 earned run average, the lowest in 54 years, while Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Don Drysdale threw a record 58⅔ consecutive scoreless innings during the 1968 season. As a result of the dropping offensive statistics, Major League Baseball reduced pitchers&#x27; advantage by lowering the height of the mound from 15 inches to 10 inches, and by reducing the size of the strike zone for the season to extend only from the batter&#x27;s armpits to the top of the knees. In 1985, the top of the strike zone was lowered to the midpoint of the batter&#x27;s torso, as viewed from a vertical angle by the umpire.

==Enforcement==
While baseball rules provide a precise definition for the strike zone, in practice, it is up to the judgment of the umpire to decide whether the pitch passed through the zone.

The Official Baseball Rules (Rule 8.02(a), including Comment) state that objections to judgment calls on the field, including balls and strikes, shall not be tolerated, and any manager, coach, or player who leaves his dugout or field position to contest a judgment call will first be warned, and then ejected.

Many umpires, players and analysts, including the authors of a University of Nebraska study on the subject, believe that due to the QuesTec pitch-tracking system, the enforced strike zone in 2002–2006 was larger compared to the zone in 1996–2000 and thus closer to the rulebook definition. Some commentators believed the zone had changed so much that some pitchers, such as Tom Glavine, had to radically adjust their approach to pitching for strikes. In 2003, a frustrated Curt Schilling took a baseball bat to a QuesTec camera and destroyed it after a loss, saying the umpires should not be changing the strike zone to match the machines.

In 2009, a new system called Zone Evaluation was implemented in all 30 Major League ballparks, replacing the QuesTec system; the new system records the ball&#x27;s position in flight more than 20 times before it reaches home plate. Much of the early resistance from Major League umpires to QuesTec had diminished and the implementation of the new Zone Evaluation system in all the parks went largely unmentioned to fans. Like the old system, the new system will be used to grade umpires on accuracy and used to determine which umpires receive postseason assignments, but games themselves are still subject to their error.

As of 2022, Minor League Baseball has been testing the Automated Ball-Strike System (ABS) on an experimental basis for several seasons. While the umpire continues to call balls and strikes, ABS determines the strike zone and could be used when a team challenged the umpire&#x27;s call. Major League Baseball commissioner Rob Manfred said in October 2022 that ABS would eventually be used in Major League games. ESPN reported that all AAA games would use ABS in the 2023 season. For 2023, the system was used for half of all games, with the other half using umpires, with ABS used for up to three challenges per team for each game.

==See also==

*Glossary of baseball terms

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*2001 Changes in Strike Zone &quot;St. Petersburg Times&quot; article.
*Strike Zone MLB website.
*John Walsh, &quot;Strike Zone: Fact vs. Fiction&quot;, &quot;The Hardball Times&quot;, July 11, 2007
*The Strike Zone: A Chronological Examination of the Official Rules baseball-almanac</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="3" end="11" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150471" start="17" end="28" title="Strike zone" label="strike zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063937" start="65" end="70" title="Pitch (baseball)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="203" end="213" title="Baseball field#Home base" label="home plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160695" start="276" end="281" title="torso" label="torso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="443" end="456" title="Baseball rules#Fielding team" label="fielding team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="487" end="496" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="561" end="565" title="Baseball rules#Batting" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687828" start="630" end="636" title="Batting (baseball)" label="batter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="645" end="657" title="Baseball rules#Batting team" label="batting team"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="736" end="749" title="base on balls" label="base on balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q809889" start="901" end="911" title="home plate" label="home plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="935" end="956" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363" start="1044" end="1052" title="shoulder" label="shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q229081" start="1151" end="1158" title="kneecap" label="kneecap"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1281" end="1289" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011585" start="1518" end="1534" title="In flight" label="have not bounced"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="1881" end="1889" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355676" start="2070" end="2079" title="foul ball" label="foul ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="2340" end="2350" title="Strikeout" label="struck out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153773" start="2364" end="2367" title="Out (baseball)" label="out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069439" start="2394" end="2415" title="uncaught third strike" label="uncaught third strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="2489" end="2502" title="base on balls" label="base on balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="2555" end="2565" title="first base" label="first base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250301" start="2959" end="2978" title="Knickerbocker Rules" label="Knickerbocker Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="3287" end="3292" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="NABBP"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="4458" end="4478" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579581" start="4525" end="4542" title="Sporting Life (American newspaper)" label="The Sporting Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q809889" start="4691" end="4696" title="Home plate" label="plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="4938" end="4953" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="5389" end="5400" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703370" start="5573" end="5585" title="Denny McLain" label="Denny McLain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="5590" end="5600" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="5634" end="5641" title="shutout" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q956100" start="5644" end="5660" title="Carl Yastrzemski" label="Carl Yastrzemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="5674" end="5689" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="5725" end="5740" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="5766" end="5781" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="5854" end="5873" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q972358" start="5882" end="5894" title="Don Drysdale" label="Don Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856798" start="6540" end="6546" title="Umpire (baseball)" label="umpire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271391" start="7044" end="7051" title="QuesTec" label="QuesTec"/>
<link wikidata="Q943668" start="7286" end="7297" title="Tom Glavine" label="Tom Glavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q954975" start="7385" end="7399" title="Curt Schilling" label="Curt Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="8188" end="8209" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q132717908" start="8231" end="8259" title="Automated Ball-Strike System" label="Automated Ball-Strike System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499788" start="8497" end="8508" title="Rob Manfred" label="Rob Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="8610" end="8613" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="AAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237411" start="8823" end="8849" title="Glossary of baseball terms" label="Glossary of baseball terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714356" start="8941" end="8961" title="St. Petersburg Times" label="St. Petersburg Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521204" start="9065" end="9083" title="The Hardball Times" label="The Hardball Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54397" wikidata="Q56875" url="?curid=54397" title="Banawá">
<text>The Banawá (also Banawa, Banavá, Jafí, Kitiya, Banauá) are an indigenous group living along the Banawá River in the Amazonas State, Brazil. Their territory is between the Juruá and Purus Rivers. Approximately 158 Banawá people live in one major village and two smaller settlements containing a single extended family each. The Banawá, who call themselves Kitiya, speak Banawá, a dialect of the Madi language.

==History==
Their territory was invaded at the end of the 19th century, during the rubber boom. In the 1990s, Brazil formally recognized their land rights.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="4" end="10" title="Banawá" label="Banawá"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="17" end="23" title="Banawá" label="Banawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="25" end="31" title="Banawá" label="Banavá"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="33" end="37" title="Banawá" label="Jafí"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="39" end="45" title="Banawá" label="Kitiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="47" end="53" title="Banawá" label="Banauá"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="62" end="72" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q40040" start="116" end="138" title="Amazonas State, Brazil" label="Amazonas State, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q117526" start="171" end="176" title="Juruá River" label="Juruá"/>
<link wikidata="Q26271" start="181" end="192" title="Purus River" label="Purus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875" start="355" end="361" title="Banawá" label="Kitiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053275" start="369" end="375" title="Banawá language" label="Banawá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053275" start="394" end="407" title="Jamamadi language" label="Madi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737205" start="493" end="504" title="rubber boom" label="rubber boom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54398" wikidata="Q651082" url="?curid=54398" title="Balanjar">
<text>Balanjar (&quot;Baranjar&quot;, &quot;Belenjer&quot;, &quot;Belendzher&quot;, &quot;Bülünjar&quot;) was a medieval city located in the North Caucasus region, between the cities of Derbent and Samandar, probably on the lower Sulak River. It flourished between the seventh and tenth centuries. The legendary founder of Balanjar, according to the Persian and Kurdish chroniclers Ibn al-Faqih and Abu al-Fida, was named Balanjar ibn Yafith.

==History==
In the 630s Balanjar was a capital of the Baranjar state. Some scholars speculate that the name derives from the Turkic root &quot;Bala&quot; or &quot;Great&quot;, and the clan-name &quot;Endzhar&quot;. With the rest of the Baranjar domains the city became part of the Khazar Khaganate around 650; until the early 720s, Balanjar served as the capital of Khazaria. During the First Arab-Khazar War in the 650s, a Muslim army under Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rabiah was defeated outside the town (see Battle of Balanjar).

Around 722 or 723, Umayyad soldiers under Al-Jarrah ibn Abdallah crossed the Caucasus Mountains and attacked Balanjar. The inhabitants of Balanjar tried to defend their town by fastening 3,000 wagons together and circling them around the key fortress on high terrain, but were defeated in the attack. The Arabs massacred much of the town&#x27;s population; survivors fled to other towns, including Samandar. The victorious Arab army stole much booty and the soldiers received large sums of money.

The city was rebuilt after the war, but the capital of Khazaria was thereafter moved to Samandar and later to Atil. Nevertheless, Balanjar continued to be a city of great importance within the Khaganate. After the fall of Khazaria, Balanjar lost much of its importance and declined steadily until it vanished from the record around 1100.

The exact location of Balanjar has not yet been established precisely. Soviet archeologist Mikhail Artamonov initially placed Balanjar on the site of the modern Daghestani city of Buynaksk, but when later the ruins of a town to the south of Makhachkala were found, he identified them as being those of Balanjar.

==References==
* Dunlop, Douglas Morton (1997). &quot;Balanjar&quot;. &quot;Encyclopaedia Judaica&quot; (CD-ROM Edition Version 1.0). Ed. Cecil Roth. Keter Publishing House. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q651082" start="0" end="8" title="Balanjar" label="Balanjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="135" end="149" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131416" start="180" end="187" title="Derbent" label="Derbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622424" start="192" end="200" title="Samandar (city)" label="Samandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q770781" start="224" end="235" title="Sulak River" label="Sulak River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372133" start="376" end="388" title="Ibn al-Faqih" label="Ibn al-Faqih"/>
<link wikidata="Q311462" start="393" end="404" title="Abu al-Fida" label="Abu al-Fida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426981" start="492" end="506" title="Baranjars" label="Baranjar state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="719" end="725" title="Khazar" label="Khazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q331644" start="726" end="735" title="Khaganate" label="Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621718" start="825" end="846" title="First Arab-Khazar War" label="First Arab-Khazar War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="862" end="868" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664604" start="880" end="904" title="Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rabiah" label="Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rabiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870393" start="940" end="958" title="Battle of Balanjar (650s)" label="Battle of Balanjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="981" end="988" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q502357" start="1004" end="1026" title="Al-Jarrah ibn Abdallah" label="Al-Jarrah ibn Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="1155" end="1160" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="1204" end="1212" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622424" start="1360" end="1368" title="Samandar (city)" label="Samandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="1406" end="1411" title="Looting" label="booty"/>
<link wikidata="Q913429" start="1570" end="1574" title="Atil" label="Atil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1870" end="1876" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961977" start="1890" end="1907" title="Mikhail Illarionovich Artamonov" label="Mikhail Artamonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="1960" end="1969" title="Republic of Dagestan" label="Daghestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132931" start="1979" end="1987" title="Buynaksk" label="Buynaksk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168" start="2040" end="2051" title="Makhachkala" label="Makhachkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781660" start="2129" end="2151" title="Douglas Morton Dunlop" label="Dunlop, Douglas Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q846103" start="2188" end="2209" title="Encyclopaedia Judaica" label="Encyclopaedia Judaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052358" start="2250" end="2260" title="Cecil Roth" label="Cecil Roth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54399" wikidata="Q2295981" url="?curid=54399" title="TI-89 series">
<text>The TI-89 and the TI-89 Titanium are graphing calculators developed by Texas Instruments (TI). They are differentiated from most other TI graphing calculators by their computer algebra system, which allows symbolic manipulation of algebraic expressions—equations can be solved in terms of variables— whereas the TI-83/84 series can only give a numeric result.

== TI-89 ==
The TI-89 is a graphing calculator developed by Texas Instruments in 1998. The unit features a 160×100 pixel resolution LCD and a large amount of flash memory, and includes TI&#x27;s &quot;Advanced Mathematics Software&quot;. The TI-89 is one of the highest model lines in TI&#x27;s calculator products, along with the TI-Nspire. In the summer of 2004, the standard TI-89 was replaced by the TI-89 Titanium.

The TI-89 runs on a 32-bit microprocessor, the Motorola 68000, which nominally runs at 10 or 12 MHz, depending on the calculator&#x27;s hardware version. The calculator has 256 kB of RAM, (190 kB of which are available to the user) and 2 MB of flash memory (700 kB of which is available to the user). The RAM and Flash ROM are used to store expressions, variables, programs, text files, and lists.

The TI-89 is essentially a TI-92 Plus with a limited keyboard and smaller screen. It was created partially in response to the fact that while calculators are allowed on many standardized tests, the TI-92 was not due to the QWERTY layout of its keyboard. Additionally, some people found the TI-92 unwieldy and overly large. The TI-89 is significantly smaller—about the same size as most other graphing calculators. It has a flash ROM, a feature present on the TI-92 Plus but not on the original TI-92.

=== User features ===
The major advantage of the TI-89 over other TI calculators is its built-in computer algebra system, or CAS. The calculator can evaluate and simplify algebraic expressions symbolically. For example, entering codice_1 returns formula_1. The answer is &quot;prettyprinted&quot; by default; that is, displayed as it would be written by hand (e.g. the aforementioned formula_1 rather than codice_1). The TI-89&#x27;s abilities include:
* Algebraic factoring of expressions, including partial fraction decomposition.
* Algebraic simplification; for example, the CAS can combine multiple terms into one fraction by finding a common denominator.
* Evaluation of trigonometric expressions to exact values. For example, sin(60°) returns formula_3 instead of 0.86603.
* Solving equations for a certain variable. The CAS can solve for one variable in terms of others; it can also solve systems of equations. For equations such as quadratics where there are multiple solutions, it returns all of them. Equations with infinitely many solutions are solved by introducing arbitrary constants: codice_3 returns codice_4, with the codice_5 representing any integer.
* Symbolic and numeric differentiation and integration. Derivatives and definite integrals are evaluated exactly when possible, and approximately otherwise.
* Calculate greatest common divisor (gcd) and least common multiple (lcm)
*Probability theory: factorial, combination, permutation, binomial distribution, normal distribution
*PrettyPrint (like equation editor and LaTeX)
*These mathematical constants are shown as symbols formula_4, formula_5, formula_6 and formula_7
*Draw 2D and 3D graph
* Calculate taylorpolynomial
*Calculate limit of a function, including infinite limits and limits from one direction
*Vector calculation
*Matrix calculation
*Calculate series (summation or infinite product)
*Calculate chi squared test
*Calculate complex numbers
*Factoring polynomial: factor(polynomial) or cfactor(polynomial)
*Solve equation: solve(equation,formula_8) or csolve(equation,formula_8)
* Solve first or second order differential equation: deSolve(differential equation,formula_8,formula_11)
*Multiply and divide SI Units: underscore _ &quot;diamond&quot; &quot;MODE&quot;
*A number of regressions:
** LinReg
** QuadReg
** CubicReg
** QuartReg
** ExpReg
** LnReg
** PowerReg
** Logistic
** SinReg

In addition to the standard two-dimensional function plots, it can also produce graphs of parametric equations, polar equations, sequence plots, differential equation fields, and three-dimensional (two independent variable) functions.

=== Programming ===
The TI-89 is directly programmable in a language called TI-BASIC 89, TI&#x27;s derivative of BASIC for calculators. With the use of a PC, it is also possible to develop more complex programs in Motorola 68000 assembly language or C, translate them to machine language, and copy them to the calculator. Two software development kits for C programming are available; one is TI Flash Studio, the official TI SDK, and the other is TIGCC, a third-party SDK based on GCC.

In addition, there is a third party flash application called GTC that allows the writing and compilation of C programs directly on the calculator. It is built on TIGCC, with some modifications. Numerous BASIC extensions are also present, the most notable of which is NewProg.

Since the TI-89&#x27;s release in 1998, thousands of programs for math, science, or entertainment have been developed. Many video games have also been developed. Many are generic clones of &quot;Tetris&quot;, &quot;Minesweeper&quot;, and other classic games, but some programs are more advanced: for example, a ZX Spectrum emulator, a chess-playing program, a symbolic circuit simulator, and a clone of &quot;Link&#x27;s Awakening&quot;. Some of the most popular and well-known games are Phoenix, Drugwars, and Snake. Many calculator games and other useful programs can be found on TI-program sharing sites. Ticalc.org is a major one that offers thousands of calculator programs.

=== Hardware versions ===
There are four hardware versions of the TI-89. These versions are normally referred to as HW1, HW2, HW3, and HW4 (released in May 2006). Entering the key sequence [F1] [A] displays the hardware version. Older versions (before HW2) don&#x27;t display anything about the hardware version in the about menu. The differences in the hardware versions are not well documented by Texas Instruments. HW1 and HW2 correspond to the original TI-89; HW3 and HW4 are only present in the TI-89 Titanium.

The most significant difference between HW1 and HW2 is in the way the calculator handles the display. In HW1 calculators there is a video buffer that stores all of the information that should be displayed on the screen, and every time the screen is refreshed the calculator accesses this buffer and flushes it to the display (direct memory access). In HW2 and later calculators, a region of memory is directly aliased to the display controller (memory-mapped I/O). This allows for slightly faster memory access, as the HW1&#x27;s DMA controller used about 10% of the bus bandwidth. However, it interferes with a trick some programs use to implement grayscale graphics by rapidly switching between two or more displays (page-flipping). On the HW1, the DMA controller&#x27;s base address can be changed (a single write into a memory-mapped hardware register) and the screen will automatically use a new section of memory at the beginning of the next frame. In HW2, the new page must be written to the screen by software. The effect of this is to cause increased flickering in grayscale mode, enough to make the 7-level grayscale supported on the HW1 unusable (although 4-level grayscale works on both calculators).

HW2 calculators are slightly faster because TI increased the nominal speed of the processor from 10 MHz to 12 MHz. It is believed that TI increased the speed of HW4 calculators to 16 MHz, though many users disagree about this finding. The measured statistics are closer to 14 MHz.

Another difference between HW1 and HW2 calculators is assembly program size limitations. The size limitation on HW2 calculators has varied with the AMS version of the calculator. As of AMS 2.09 the limit is 24k. Some earlier versions limited assembly programs to 8k, and the earliest AMS versions had no limit. The latest AMS version has a 64kb limit. HW1 calculators have no hardware to enforce the limits, so it is easy to bypass them in software. There are unofficial patches and kernels that can be installed on HW2 calculators to remove the limitations.

== TI-89 Titanium ==
The TI-89 Titanium was released in the June 1st, 2004, and has largely replaced the popular classic TI-89. The TI-89 Titanium is referred to as HW3 and uses the corresponding AMS 3.x. In 2006, new calculators were upgraded to HW4 which was supposed to offer increases in RAM and speeds up to , but some benchmarks made by users reported speeds between 12.85 and .

The touted advantages of the TI-89 Titanium over the original TI-89 include two times the flash memory (with over four times as much available to the user). The TI-89 Titanium is essentially a Voyage 200, without an integrated keyboard. The TI-89 Titanium also has a USB On-The-Go port, for connectivity to other TI-89 Titanium calculators, or to a computer (to store programs or update the operating system). The TI-89 Titanium also features some pre-loaded applications, such as &quot;CellSheet&quot;, a spreadsheet program also offered with other TI calculators. The Titanium has a slightly updated CAS, which adds a few more mathematical functions, most notably implicit differentiation. The Titanium also has a slightly differing case design from that of the TI-89 (the Titanium&#x27;s case design is similar to that of the TI-84 Plus).

There are some minor compatibility issues with C and assembly programs developed for the original TI-89. Some have to be recompiled to work on the Titanium due to various small hardware changes, though in most cases the problems can be fixed by using a utility such as GhostBuster, by Olivier Armand and Kevin Kofler. This option is generally preferred as it requires no knowledge of the program, works without the need of the program&#x27;s source code, is automated, and doesn&#x27;t require additional computer software. In some cases, only one character needs to be changed (the ROM base on TI-89 is at , whereas the TI-89 Titanium is at ) by hand or by patcher. Most, if not all, of these problems are caused by the mirror memory (ghost space) or lack thereof.

== Use in schools ==

=== United Kingdom ===
The Joint Council for Qualifications publish examination instructions on behalf of the main examination boards in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. These instructions state that a calculator used in an examination must not be designed to offer symbolic algebra manipulation, symbolic differentiation or integration. This precludes use of the TI-89 or TI-89 Titanium in examinations, but it may be used as part of classroom study. The SQA give the same instructions for examinations in Scotland.

=== United States ===
In the United States, the TI-89 is allowed by the College Board on all calculator-permitted tests, including the SAT, some SAT Subject Tests, and the AP Calculus, Physics, Chemistry, and Statistics exams. However, the calculator is banned from use on the ACT, the PLAN, and in some classrooms. The TI-92 series, with otherwise comparable features, has a QWERTY keyboard that results in it being classified as a computer device rather than as a calculator.

== See also ==
* Comparison of Texas Instruments graphing calculators
* TI-Nspire

== References ==
== External links ==
* Instruction Manual
* Using the TI-89 Graphing Calculator</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2295981" start="4" end="9" title="TI-89 series" label="TI-89"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295981" start="18" end="32" title="TI-89 series" label="TI-89 Titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541580" start="37" end="56" title="graphing calculator" label="graphing calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="71" end="88" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="168" end="191" title="computer algebra system" label="computer algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646829" start="312" end="317" title="TI-83" label="TI-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q393223" start="318" end="320" title="TI-84" label="84"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="476" end="481" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="493" end="496" title="Liquid crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="519" end="531" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297397" start="692" end="701" title="TI-Nspire" label="TI-Nspire"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="829" end="843" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="878" end="881" title="megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="959" end="961" title="Kilobyte" label="kB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="965" end="968" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="1026" end="1038" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="1136" end="1145" title="Variable (programming)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="1147" end="1155" title="computer program" label="programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q86920" start="1157" end="1166" title="text file" label="text file"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524568" start="1208" end="1218" title="TI-92 series" label="TI-92 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="1234" end="1242" title="computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="1323" end="1334" title="calculators" label="calculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="1404" end="1410" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="1780" end="1803" title="computer algebra system" label="computer algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q383704" start="1960" end="1971" title="prettyprint" label="prettyprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q431617" start="2184" end="2214" title="partial fraction decomposition" label="partial fraction decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="2330" end="2341" title="denominator" label="denominator"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="2876" end="2891" title="derivative" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114326" start="2896" end="2907" title="antiderivative" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="2909" end="2919" title="Derivative" label="Derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="2925" end="2942" title="definite integral" label="definite integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="3022" end="3045" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q102761" start="3056" end="3077" title="least common multiple" label="least common multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="3085" end="3103" title="Probability theory" label="Probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="3105" end="3114" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="3116" end="3127" title="Combination (mathematics)" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="3129" end="3140" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="3142" end="3163" title="binomial distribution" label="binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="3165" end="3184" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="3224" end="3229" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q186509" start="3238" end="3259" title="mathematical constant" label="mathematical constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="3344" end="3349" title="graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="3362" end="3378" title="Taylor polynomial" label="taylorpolynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="3390" end="3409" title="limit of a function" label="limit of a function"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471665" start="3468" end="3474" title="Vector (mathematics and physics)" label="Vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="3488" end="3494" title="Matrix (mathematics)" label="Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="3518" end="3524" title="Series (mathematics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071004" start="3568" end="3584" title="Chi-squared test" label="chi squared test"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="3596" end="3610" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="3623" end="3633" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="3684" end="3692" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="3780" end="3801" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="3876" end="3884" title="International System of Units" label="SI Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="3949" end="3960" title="Regression analysis" label="regressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="4105" end="4113" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="4151" end="4171" title="parametric equations" label="parametric equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="4173" end="4188" title="polar coordinate systems" label="polar equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="4206" end="4227" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759833" start="4373" end="4381" title="TI-BASIC" label="TI-BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="4410" end="4415" title="BASIC programming language" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="4451" end="4453" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="4526" end="4543" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="4547" end="4548" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="4550" end="4559" title="compiler" label="translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q467707" start="4722" end="4725" title="Software Development Kit" label="SDK"/>
<link wikidata="Q178940" start="4778" end="4781" title="GNU Compiler Collection" label="GCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="5127" end="5131" title="mathematics" label="math"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="5133" end="5140" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="5256" end="5262" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q126194" start="5276" end="5287" title="Minesweeper (game)" label="Minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="5372" end="5383" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="5396" end="5401" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5421" end="5447" title="Symbulator" label="symbolic circuit simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060323" start="5470" end="5491" title="Link&amp;#x27;s Awakening" label="Link&amp;#x27;s Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q517640" start="5549" end="5556" title="Phoenix (arcade game)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652409" start="5558" end="5566" title="Drug Wars (video game)" label="Drugwars"/>
<link wikidata="Q125177944" start="5572" end="5577" title="Snake (video game genre)" label="Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="6585" end="6605" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="6704" end="6721" title="memory-mapped I/O" label="memory-mapped I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q685727" start="6908" end="6917" title="grayscale" label="grayscale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6978" end="6991" title="page-flipping" label="page-flipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="7083" end="7096" title="Memory-mapped I/O" label="memory-mapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351510" start="7097" end="7114" title="hardware register" label="hardware register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645952" start="8215" end="8231" title="unofficial patch" label="unofficial patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524568" start="8894" end="8904" title="Voyage 200" label="Voyage 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150103" start="8968" end="8981" title="USB On-The-Go" label="USB On-The-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="9092" end="9108" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="9207" end="9218" title="spreadsheet" label="spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q393223" start="9530" end="9540" title="TI-84 Plus" label="TI-84 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257704" start="10360" end="10392" title="Joint Council for Qualifications" label="Joint Council for Qualifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="10470" end="10477" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="10479" end="10484" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="10489" end="10505" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919096" start="10793" end="10796" title="Scottish Qualifications Authority" label="SQA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="10844" end="10852" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109023" start="10927" end="10940" title="College Board" label="College Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="10990" end="10993" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388865" start="11000" end="11017" title="SAT Subject Tests" label="SAT Subject Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410440" start="11027" end="11038" title="AP Calculus" label="AP Calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653483" start="11040" end="11047" title="AP Physics" label="Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13412119" start="11049" end="11058" title="AP Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415707" start="11064" end="11074" title="AP Statistics" label="Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="11132" end="11135" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119585" start="11141" end="11145" title="PLAN (test)" label="PLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524568" start="11175" end="11187" title="TI-92 series" label="TI-92 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="11231" end="11237" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="11288" end="11296" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155795" start="11351" end="11403" title="Comparison of Texas Instruments graphing calculators" label="Comparison of Texas Instruments graphing calculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297397" start="11406" end="11415" title="TI-Nspire" label="TI-Nspire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54403" wikidata="Q49575" url="?curid=54403" title="Dizzy Gillespie">
<text>John Birks &quot;Dizzy&quot; Gillespie ( ; October 21, 1917 – January 6, 1993) was an American jazz trumpeter, bandleader, composer, educator and singer. He was a trumpet virtuoso and improviser, building on the virtuosic style of Roy Eldridge but adding layers of harmonic and rhythmic complexity previously unheard in jazz. His combination of musicianship, showmanship, and wit made him a leading popularizer of the new music called bebop. His beret and horn-rimmed spectacles, scat singing, bent horn, pouched cheeks, and light-hearted personality have made him an enduring icon.

In the 1940s, Gillespie, with Charlie Parker, became a major figure in the development of bebop and modern jazz. He taught and influenced many other musicians, including trumpeters Miles Davis, Jon Faddis, Fats Navarro, Clifford Brown, Arturo Sandoval, Lee Morgan, Chuck Mangione, and balladeer Johnny Hartman.

He pioneered Afro-Cuban jazz and won several Grammy Awards. Scott Yanow wrote: &quot;Dizzy Gillespie&#x27;s contributions to jazz were huge. One of the greatest jazz trumpeters of all time, Gillespie was such a complex player that his contemporaries ended up being similar to those of Miles Davis and Fats Navarro instead, and it was not until Jon Faddis&#x27;s emergence in the 1970s that Dizzy&#x27;s style was successfully recreated [...] Gillespie is remembered, by both critics and fans alike, as one of the greatest jazz trumpeters of all time&quot;.

==Biography==
===Early life and career===
The youngest of nine children of Lottie and James Gillespie, Dizzy Gillespie was born in Cheraw, South Carolina. His father was a local bandleader, so instruments were made available to the children. Gillespie started to play the piano at the age of four. Gillespie&#x27;s father died when he was only ten years old. He taught himself how to play the trombone as well as the trumpet by the age of twelve. From the night he heard his idol, Roy Eldridge, on the radio, he dreamed of becoming a jazz musician.

He won a music scholarship to the Laurinburg Institute in North Carolina which he attended for two years before accompanying his family when they moved to Philadelphia in 1935.

Gillespie&#x27;s first professional job was with the Frank Fairfax Orchestra in 1935, after which he joined the respective orchestras of Edgar Hayes and later Teddy Hill, replacing Frankie Newton as second trumpet in May 1937. Teddy Hill&#x27;s band was where Gillespie made his first recording, &quot;King Porter Stomp&quot;. In August 1937 while gigging with Hayes in Washington D.C., Gillespie met a young dancer named Lorraine Willis who worked a Baltimore–Philadelphia–New York City circuit which included the Apollo Theater. Willis was not immediately friendly but Gillespie was attracted anyway. The two married on May 9, 1940.

Gillespie stayed with Teddy Hill&#x27;s band for a year, then left and freelanced with other bands. In 1939, with the help of Willis, Gillespie joined Cab Calloway&#x27;s orchestra. He recorded one of his earliest compositions, &quot;Pickin&#x27; the Cabbage&quot;, with Calloway in 1940. After an altercation between the two, Calloway fired Gillespie in late 1941. The incident is recounted by Gillespie and Calloway&#x27;s band members Milt Hinton and Jonah Jones in Jean Bach&#x27;s 1997 film, &quot;The Spitball Story&quot;. Calloway disapproved of Gillespie&#x27;s mischievous humor and his adventuresome approach to soloing. According to Jones, Calloway referred to it as &quot;Chinese music&quot;. During rehearsal, someone in the band threw a spitball. Already in a foul mood, Calloway blamed Gillespie, who refused to take the blame. Gillespie stabbed Calloway in the leg with a knife. Calloway had minor cuts on the thigh and wrist. After the two were separated, Calloway fired Gillespie. A few days later, Gillespie tried to apologize to Calloway, but he was dismissed.

During his time in Calloway&#x27;s band, Gillespie started writing big band arrangements for Woody Herman, Jimmy Dorsey, and others. He then freelanced with a few bands, most notably Ella Fitzgerald&#x27;s orchestra, composed of members of the Chick Webb&#x27;s band.

Gillespie did not serve in World War II. At his Selective Service interview, he told the local board, &quot;in this stage of my life here in the United States whose foot has been in my ass?&quot; and &quot;So if you put me out there with a gun in my hand and tell me to shoot at the enemy, I&#x27;m liable to create a case of &#x27;mistaken identity&#x27; of who I might shoot.&quot; He was classified 4-F. In 1943, he joined the Earl Hines band. Composer Gunther Schuller said,

 ... In 1943 I heard the great Earl Hines band which had Bird in it and all those other great musicians. They were playing all the flatted fifth chords and all the modern harmonies and substitutions and Gillespie runs in the trumpet section work. Two years later I read that that was &#x27;bop&#x27; and the beginning of modern jazz ... but the band never made recordings.

Gillespie said of the Hines band, &quot;[p]eople talk about the Hines band being &#x27;the incubator of bop&#x27; and the leading exponents of that music ended up in the Hines band. But people also have the erroneous impression that the music was new. It was not. The music evolved from what went before. It was the same basic music. The difference was in how you got from here to here to here ... naturally each age has got its own shit.&quot;

Gillespie joined the big band of Hines&#x27;s long-time collaborator Billy Eckstine, and it was as a member of Eckstine&#x27;s band that he was reunited with Charlie Parker, a fellow member. In 1944, Gillespie left Eckstine&#x27;s band because he wanted to play with a small combo. A &quot;small combo&quot; typically comprised no more than five musicians, playing the trumpet, saxophone, piano, bass and drums. Dizzy recommended Fats Navarro for the job with Eckstine, who proved to be an ample replacement. 

===Rise of Bebop===
Bebop was known as the first modern jazz style, but was unpopular following its onset and was not viewed as positively as swing music was. Bebop was seen as an outgrowth of swing, not a revolution. Swing introduced a diversity of new musicians in the bebop era like Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk, Bud Powell, Kenny Clarke, Oscar Pettiford, and Gillespie. Through these musicians, a new vocabulary of musical phrases was created. With Parker, Gillespie performed at famous jazz clubs like Minton&#x27;s Playhouse and Monroe&#x27;s Uptown House. Parker&#x27;s system also held methods of adding chords to existing chord progressions and implying additional chords within the improvised lines.

Gillespie compositions like &quot;Groovin&#x27; High&quot;, &quot;Woody &#x27;n&#x27; You&quot;, and &quot;Salt Peanuts&quot; sounded radically different, harmonically and rhythmically, from the swing music popular at the time. &quot;A Night in Tunisia&quot;, written in 1942, while he was playing with Earl Hines&#x27;s band, is noted for having a feature that is common in today&#x27;s music: a syncopated bass line. &quot;Woody &#x27;n&#x27; You&quot; was recorded in a session led by Coleman Hawkins with Gillespie as a featured sideman on February 16, 1944 (Apollo), the first formal recording of bebop. He appeared in recordings by the Billy Eckstine band and started recording prolifically as a leader and sideman in early 1945. He was not content to let Bebop sit in a niche of small groups in small clubs. A concert by one of his small groups in New York&#x27;s Town Hall on June 22, 1945, presented bebop to a broad audience; recordings of it were released in 2005. He started to organize big bands in late 1945. Dizzy Gillespie and his Bebop Six, which included Parker, started an extended gig at Billy Berg&#x27;s club in Los Angeles in December 1945. Reception was mixed and the band broke up. In February 1946 he signed a contract with Bluebird, gaining the distribution power of RCA for his music. He and his big band headlined the 1946 film &quot;Jivin&#x27; in Be-Bop&quot;.

After his work with Parker, Gillespie led other small combos (including ones with Milt Jackson, John Coltrane, Lalo Schifrin, Ray Brown, Kenny Clarke, James Moody, J. J. Johnson, and Yusef Lateef) and put together his successful big bands starting in 1947. He and his big bands, with arrangements provided by Tadd Dameron, Gil Fuller, and George Russell, popularized bebop and made him a symbol of the new music.

His big bands of the late 1940s also featured Cuban &quot;rumberos&quot; Chano Pozo and Sabu Martinez, sparking interest in Afro-Cuban jazz. He appeared frequently as a soloist with Norman Granz&#x27;s Jazz at the Philharmonic.

Gillespie and his Bebop Orchestra was the featured star of the 4th Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles which was produced by Leon Hefflin Sr. On September 12, 1948. The young Gillespie had recently returned from Europe where his music was widely popular. The program description noted &quot;the musicianship, inventive technique, and daring of this young man has created a new style, which can be defined as off the chord solo gymnastics.&quot; Also performing that day were Frankie Laine, Little Miss Cornshucks, The Sweethearts of Rhythm, The Honeydrippers, Big Joe Turner, Jimmy Witherspoon, The Blenders, and The Sensations.

In 1948, Gillespie was involved in a traffic accident when the bicycle he was riding was bumped by an automobile. He was slightly injured and found that he could no longer hit the B-flat above high C. He won the case, but the jury awarded him only $1000 in view of his high earnings up to that point.

In 1951, Gillespie founded his record label, Dee Gee Records; it closed in 1953.

On January 6, 1953, he threw a party for his wife Lorraine at Snookie&#x27;s, a club in Manhattan, where his trumpet&#x27;s bell got bent upward in an accident, but he liked the sound so much he had a special trumpet made with a 45-degree raised bell, a customization that would become his trademark.

In 1956 Gillespie organized a band to go on a State Department tour of the Middle East which was well-received internationally and earned him the nickname &quot;the Ambassador of Jazz&quot;. During this time, he also continued to lead a big band that performed throughout the United States and featured musicians including Pee Wee Moore and others. This band recorded a live album at the 1957 Newport jazz festival that featured Mary Lou Williams as a guest artist on piano.

===Afro-Cuban jazz===

In the late 1940s, Gillespie was involved in the movement called Afro-Cuban music, bringing Afro-Latin American music and elements to greater prominence in jazz and even pop music, particularly salsa. Afro-Cuban jazz is based on traditional Afro-Cuban rhythms. Gillespie was introduced to Chano Pozo in 1947 by Mario Bauza, a Latin jazz trumpet player. Chano Pozo became Gillespie&#x27;s conga drummer for his band. Gillespie also worked with Mario Bauza in New York jazz clubs on 52nd Street and several famous dance clubs such as the Palladium and the Apollo Theater in Harlem. They played together in the Chick Webb band and Cab Calloway&#x27;s band, where Gillespie and Bauza became lifelong friends. Gillespie helped develop and mature the Afro-Cuban jazz style. Afro-Cuban jazz was considered bebop-oriented, and some musicians classified it as a modern style. Afro-Cuban jazz was successful because it never decreased in popularity and it always attracted people to dance.

Gillespie&#x27;s most famous contributions to Afro-Cuban music are &quot;Manteca&quot; and &quot;Tin Tin Deo&quot; (both co-written with Chano Pozo); he was responsible for commissioning George Russell&#x27;s &quot;Cubano Be, Cubano Bop&quot;, which featured Pozo. In 1977, Gillespie met Arturo Sandoval during a jazz cruise to Havana. Sandoval toured with Gillespie and defected in Rome in 1990 while touring with Gillespie and the United Nations Orchestra.

===Final years===

In the 1980s, Gillespie led the United Nations Orchestra. For three years Flora Purim toured with the Orchestra. She credits Gillespie with improving her understanding of jazz.

In 1982, he was sought out by Motown musician Stevie Wonder to play his solo in Wonder&#x27;s 1982 hit single, &quot;Do I Do&quot;.

He starred in the film &quot;The Winter in Lisbon&quot; that was released as &quot;El invierno en Lisboa&quot; in 1992 and re-released in 2004. The soundtrack album, featuring him, was recorded in 1990 and released in 1991. The film is a crime drama about a jazz pianist who falls for a dangerous woman while in Portugal with an American expatriate&#x27;s jazz band.

In December 1991, during an engagement at Kimball&#x27;s East in Emeryville, California, he suffered a crisis from what turned out to be pancreatic cancer. He performed one more night but cancelled the rest of the tour for medical reasons, ending his 56-year touring career. He led his last recording session on January 25, 1992.

On November 26, 1992, Carnegie Hall, following the Second Baháʼí World Congress, celebrated Gillespie&#x27;s 75th birthday concert and his offering to the celebration of the centenary of the passing of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh. Gillespie was to appear at Carnegie Hall for the 33rd time. The line-up included Jon Faddis, James Moody, Paquito D&#x27;Rivera, and the Mike Longo Trio with Ben Brown on bass and Mickey Roker on drums. Gillespie was too unwell to attend. &quot;But the musicians played their real hearts out for him, no doubt suspecting that he would not play again. Each musician gave tribute to their friend, this great soul and innovator in the world of jazz.&quot;

=== Death and postmortem ===
A longtime resident of Englewood, New Jersey, Gillespie died of pancreatic cancer on January 6, 1993, at the age of 75 and was buried in Flushing Cemetery, Queens, New York City. His grave is unmarked. Mike Longo (who was present the night of Gillespie&#x27;s death) delivered a eulogy at his funeral.

==Politics and religion==

In 1962, Gillespie and actor George Mathews starred in &quot;The Hole&quot;, an animated short film by John and Faith Hubley. Released the same year as the Cuban Missile Crisis, it uses audio from an improvised conversation between the two debating the causes of accidents and the possibility of accidentally launching nuclear weapons. The short went on to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film the following year.

During the 1964 United States presidential campaign, Gillespie put himself forward as an independent write-in candidate. He promised that if he were elected, the White House would be renamed the Blues House, and he would have a cabinet composed of Duke Ellington (Secretary of State), Miles Davis (Director of the CIA), Max Roach (Secretary of Defense), Charles Mingus (Secretary of Peace), Ray Charles (Librarian of Congress), Louis Armstrong (Secretary of Agriculture), Mary Lou Williams (Ambassador to the Vatican), Thelonious Monk (Travelling Ambassador) and Malcolm X (Attorney General). He said his running mate would be Phyllis Diller. Campaign buttons had been manufactured years before by Gillespie&#x27;s booking agency as a joke but proceeds went to Congress of Racial Equality, Southern Christian Leadership Conference and Martin Luther King Jr.; in later years they became a collector&#x27;s item. In 1971, he announced he would run again but withdrew before the election.

Shortly after the death of Charlie Parker, Gillespie encountered an audience member after a show. They had a conversation about the oneness of humanity and the elimination of racism from the perspective of the Baháʼí Faith. Impacted by the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968, he became a Baháʼí that same year. The universalist emphasis of his religion prodded him to see himself more as a global citizen and humanitarian, expanding on his interest in his African heritage. His spirituality brought out generosity and what author Nat Hentoff called an inner strength, discipline, and &quot;soul force&quot;.

Gillespie&#x27;s conversion was most affected by Bill Sears&#x27; book &quot;Thief in the Night&quot;. Gillespie spoke about the Baháʼí Faith frequently on his trips abroad. He is honored with weekly jazz sessions at the New York Baháʼí Center in the memorial auditorium. A concert in honor of his 75th birthday was held in New York City&#x27;s Carnegie Hall, 26 November 1992, in conjunction with the second Baha&#x27;i world congress, however, he was too ill to personally attend.

== Personal life ==
Gillespie married dancer Lorraine Willis in Boston on May 9, 1940. They remained together until his death in 1993; Lorraine converted to Catholicism with Mary Lou Williams in 1957. Lorraine managed his business and personal affairs. The couple had no children, but Gillespie fathered a daughter, jazz singer Jeanie Bryson, born in 1958 from an affair with songwriter Connie Bryson. Gillespie met Bryson, a Juilliard-trained pianist, at the jazz club Birdland in New York City. In the mid-1960s, Gillespie settled down in Englewood, New Jersey, with his wife. The local Englewood public high school, Dwight Morrow High School, named its auditorium after him: the &#x27;Dizzy Gillespie Auditorium&#x27;.

== Artistry ==
===Style===
Gillespie has been described as the &quot;sound of surprise&quot;. &quot;The Rough Guide to Jazz&quot; describes his musical style:

In Gillespie&#x27;s obituary, Peter Watrous describes his performance style:

Wynton Marsalis summarized Gillespie as a player and teacher:

===Bent trumpet===

Gillespie&#x27;s trademark trumpet featured a bell which bent upward at a 45-degree angle rather than pointing straight ahead as in the conventional design. According to Gillespie&#x27;s autobiography, this was originally the result of accidental damage caused by the dancers Stump and Stumpy falling onto the instrument while it was on a trumpet stand on stage at Snookie&#x27;s in Manhattan on January 6, 1953, during a birthday party for Gillespie&#x27;s wife Lorraine. The constriction caused by the bending altered the tone of the instrument, and Gillespie liked the effect. He had the trumpet straightened out the next day, but he could not forget the tone. Gillespie sent a request to Martin to make him a &quot;bent&quot; trumpet from a sketch produced by Lorraine, and from that time forward played a trumpet with an upturned bell.

By June 1954 he was using a professionally manufactured horn of this design, and it was to become a trademark for the rest of his life. Such trumpets were made for him by Martin (from 1954), King Musical Instruments (from 1972) and Renold Schilke (from 1982, a gift from Jon Faddis). Gillespie favored mouthpieces made by Al Cass. In December 1986 Gillespie gave the National Museum of American History his 1972 King &quot;Silver Flair&quot; trumpet with a Cass mouthpiece.

In April 1995, Gillespie&#x27;s Martin trumpet was auctioned at Christie&#x27;s in New York City with instruments used by Coleman Hawkins, Jimi Hendrix, and Elvis Presley. An image of Gillespie&#x27;s trumpet was selected for the cover of the auction program. The battered instrument was sold to Manhattan builder Jeffery Brown for $63,000, the proceeds benefiting jazz musicians with cancer.

==Awards and honors==
In 1989, Gillespie was given the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. The next year, at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts ceremonies celebrating the centennial of American jazz, Gillespie received the Kennedy Center Honors Award and the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers &quot;Duke Ellington Award&quot; for 50 years of achievement as a composer, performer, and bandleader.

In 1989, Gillespie was awarded with an honorary doctorate of music from Berklee College of Music.

In 1991, Gillespie received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Wynton Marsalis.

In 1993 he received the Polar Music Prize in Sweden. In 2002, he was posthumously inducted into the International Latin Music Hall of Fame for his contributions to Afro-Cuban music. He was honored on December 31, 2006 in A Jazz New Year&#x27;s Eve: Freddy Cole &amp; the Dizzy Gillespie All-Star Big Band at The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. In 2014, Gillespie was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame.

==In popular culture==
Samuel E. Wright played Dizzy Gillespie in the film &quot;Bird&quot; (1988), about Charlie Parker. Kevin Hanchard portrayed Gillespie in the Chet Baker biopic &quot;Born to Be Blue&quot; (2015). Charles S. Dutton played him in &quot;For Love or Country: The Arturo Sandoval Story&quot; (2000).

==List of works==
==References==
==External links==
* The Dizzy Gillespie Bands
* Interview with Les Tomkins in 1973
* Articles at NPR Music
* Short biography by C.J. Shearn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="0" end="10" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="John Birks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="17" end="22" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="29" end="38" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="95" end="99" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="100" end="107" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="171" end="179" title="virtuoso" label="virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="184" end="194" title="improvisation" label="improviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q376146" start="231" end="243" title="Roy Eldridge" label="Roy Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="265" end="273" title="Harmony" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="435" end="440" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q623202" start="480" end="492" title="scat singing" label="scat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="614" end="628" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="765" end="776" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350269" start="778" end="788" title="Jon Faddis" label="Jon Faddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q711198" start="790" end="802" title="Fats Navarro" label="Fats Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q354490" start="804" end="818" title="Clifford Brown" label="Clifford Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q345501" start="820" end="835" title="Arturo Sandoval" label="Arturo Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q362564" start="837" end="847" title="Lee Morgan" label="Lee Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q945778" start="849" end="863" title="Chuck Mangione" label="Chuck Mangione"/>
<link wikidata="Q500905" start="879" end="893" title="Johnny Hartman" label="Johnny Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163340" start="909" end="924" title="Afro-Cuban jazz" label="Afro-Cuban jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="941" end="947" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q743133" start="956" end="967" title="Scott Yanow" label="Scott Yanow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070214" start="1585" end="1607" title="Cheraw, South Carolina" label="Cheraw, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q376146" start="1935" end="1947" title="Roy Eldridge" label="Roy Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501831" start="2038" end="2058" title="Laurinburg Institute" label="Laurinburg Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q22018396" start="2235" end="2248" title="Frank Fairfax" label="Frank Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283920" start="2319" end="2330" title="Edgar Hayes" label="Edgar Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530476" start="2341" end="2351" title="Teddy Hill" label="Teddy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q619124" start="2697" end="2711" title="Apollo Theater" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="2969" end="2981" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q491411" start="3256" end="3267" title="Milt Hinton" label="Milt Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q350938" start="3272" end="3283" title="Jonah Jones" label="Jonah Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989551" start="3287" end="3296" title="Jean Bach" label="Jean Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q349357" start="3993" end="4005" title="Woody Herman" label="Woody Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q560716" start="4007" end="4019" title="Jimmy Dorsey" label="Jimmy Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="4083" end="4098" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q505749" start="4144" end="4154" title="Chick Webb" label="Chick Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4196" end="4208" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="4217" end="4234" title="Selective Service" label="Selective Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750391" start="4571" end="4574" title="4-F (Selective Service System)" label="4-F"/>
<link wikidata="Q354883" start="4599" end="4609" title="Earl Hines" label="Earl Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q704154" start="4625" end="4641" title="Gunther Schuller" label="Gunther Schuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="5490" end="5498" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q545464" start="5538" end="5552" title="Billy Eckstine" label="Billy Eckstine"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="5627" end="5641" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q711198" start="5899" end="5911" title="Fats Navarro" label="Fats Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="6266" end="6280" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="6282" end="6297" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q312692" start="6299" end="6309" title="Bud Powell" label="Bud Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q346779" start="6311" end="6323" title="Kenny Clarke" label="Kenny Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q497183" start="6325" end="6340" title="Oscar Pettiford" label="Oscar Pettiford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814151" start="6490" end="6513" title="Minton&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Minton&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095734" start="6518" end="6544" title="Monroe&amp;#x27;s Uptown House" label="Monroe&amp;#x27;s Uptown House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309545" start="6728" end="6746" title="Groovin&amp;#x27; High" label="Groovin&amp;#x27; High"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033687" start="6760" end="6783" title="Woody &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; You" label="Woody &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; You"/>
<link wikidata="Q753543" start="6801" end="6813" title="Salt Peanuts" label="Salt Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="6889" end="6894" title="swing (genre)" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q300503" start="6928" end="6946" title="A Night in Tunisia" label="A Night in Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217812" start="7182" end="7197" title="Coleman Hawkins" label="Coleman Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q177718" start="7227" end="7234" title="sideman" label="sideman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858450" start="7257" end="7263" title="Apollo Records (1944)" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912195" start="7802" end="7819" title="Billy Berg&amp;#x27;s" label="Billy Berg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q885977" start="7944" end="7952" title="Bluebird Records" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158363" start="8057" end="8078" title="Jivin&amp;#x27; in Be-Bop" label="Jivin&amp;#x27; in Be-Bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q435665" start="8169" end="8181" title="Milt Jackson" label="Milt Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="8183" end="8196" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q247293" start="8198" end="8211" title="Lalo Schifrin" label="Lalo Schifrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="8213" end="8222" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q346779" start="8224" end="8236" title="Kenny Clarke" label="Kenny Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q962310" start="8238" end="8249" title="James Moody (saxophonist)" label="James Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q504915" start="8251" end="8264" title="J. J. Johnson" label="J. J. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q539832" start="8270" end="8282" title="Yusef Lateef" label="Yusef Lateef"/>
<link wikidata="Q498736" start="8396" end="8408" title="Tadd Dameron" label="Tadd Dameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523819" start="8410" end="8420" title="Gil Fuller" label="Gil Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q535308" start="8426" end="8440" title="George Russell (composer)" label="George Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q388475" start="8559" end="8566" title="rumbero" label="rumbero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062320" start="8574" end="8584" title="Chano Pozo" label="Chano Pozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269675" start="8589" end="8602" title="Sabu Martinez" label="Sabu Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382555" start="8683" end="8695" title="Norman Granz" label="Norman Granz"/>
<link wikidata="Q613153" start="8703" end="8727" title="Jazz at the Philharmonic" label="Jazz at the Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297716" start="8831" end="8844" title="Wrigley Field (Los Angeles)" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q62709531" start="8882" end="8898" title="Leon Hefflin Sr." label="Leon Hefflin Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q342774" start="9232" end="9245" title="Frankie Laine" label="Frankie Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515699" start="9247" end="9269" title="Little Miss Cornshucks" label="Little Miss Cornshucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q368798" start="9271" end="9296" title="International Sweethearts of Rhythm" label="The Sweethearts of Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q974670" start="9298" end="9315" title="Joe Liggins and the Honeydrippers" label="The Honeydrippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q358350" start="9317" end="9331" title="Big Joe Turner" label="Big Joe Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689472" start="9333" end="9350" title="Jimmy Witherspoon" label="Jimmy Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24898654" start="9734" end="9749" title="Dee Gee Records" label="Dee Gee Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066951" start="10396" end="10409" title="Pee Wee Moore" label="Pee Wee Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285122" start="10441" end="10453" title="Dizzy Gillespie at Newport" label="a live album"/>
<link wikidata="Q126677" start="10502" end="10519" title="Mary Lou Williams" label="Mary Lou Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715191" start="10637" end="10653" title="Afro-Cuban music" label="Afro-Cuban music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036435" start="10664" end="10683" title="Afro-Latin American" label="Afro-Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="10766" end="10771" title="salsa music" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163340" start="10773" end="10788" title="Afro-Cuban jazz" label="Afro-Cuban jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062320" start="10861" end="10871" title="Chano Pozo" label="Chano Pozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q722618" start="10883" end="10894" title="Mario Bauza" label="Mario Bauza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127710" start="11108" end="11117" title="Palladium (New York City)" label="Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q619124" start="11126" end="11140" title="Apollo Theater" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="11144" end="11150" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752003" start="11620" end="11639" title="Manteca (song)" label="&amp;quot;Manteca&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q535308" start="11740" end="11754" title="George Russell (composer)" label="George Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q345501" start="11841" end="11856" title="Arturo Sandoval" label="Arturo Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11986" end="12010" title="United Nations Orchestra" label="United Nations Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q455229" start="12106" end="12117" title="Flora Purim" label="Flora Purim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="12240" end="12246" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="12256" end="12269" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712353" start="12327" end="12334" title="Do I Do" label="Do I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775206" start="12372" end="12392" title="The Winter in Lisbon" label="The Winter in Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="12848" end="12865" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="13064" end="13077" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843065" start="13100" end="13121" title="Baháʼí World Congress" label="Baháʼí World Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="13244" end="13260" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350269" start="13343" end="13353" title="Jon Faddis" label="Jon Faddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q962310" start="13355" end="13366" title="James Moody (saxophonist)" label="James Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q527853" start="13368" end="13389" title="Paquito D&amp;#x27;Rivera" label="Paquito D&amp;#x27;Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933279" start="13395" end="13414" title="Mike Longo" label="the Mike Longo Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q741767" start="13442" end="13454" title="Mickey Roker" label="Mickey Roker"/>
<link wikidata="Q986210" start="13768" end="13777" title="Englewood, New Jersey" label="Englewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="13809" end="13826" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972524" start="13882" end="13899" title="Flushing Cemetery" label="Flushing Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933279" start="13947" end="13957" title="Mike Longo" label="Mike Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542237" start="14104" end="14118" title="George Mathews (actor)" label="George Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251241" start="14136" end="14144" title="The Hole (1962 film)" label="The Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q329972" start="14178" end="14182" title="John Hubley" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q516683" start="14187" end="14199" title="Faith Hubley" label="Faith Hubley"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="14231" end="14251" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="14394" end="14408" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="14440" end="14453" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q917808" start="14458" end="14482" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film" label="Best Animated Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="14515" end="14555" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 United States presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479497" start="14605" end="14623" title="write-in candidate" label="write-in candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="14752" end="14766" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="14789" end="14800" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175899" start="14824" end="14833" title="Max Roach" label="Max Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="14858" end="14872" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="14895" end="14906" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="14932" end="14947" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q126677" start="14976" end="14993" title="Mary Lou Williams" label="Mary Lou Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="15023" end="15038" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="15067" end="15076" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q230512" start="15131" end="15145" title="Phyllis Diller" label="Phyllis Diller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125901" start="15265" end="15292" title="Congress of Racial Equality" label="Congress of Racial Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="15294" end="15334" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="Southern Christian Leadership Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="15339" end="15361" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="15480" end="15488" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="15701" end="15713" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q757963" start="15731" end="15770" title="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr." label="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1371409" start="16034" end="16045" title="Nat Hentoff" label="Nat Hentoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580527" start="16162" end="16172" title="William Sears (Baháʼí)" label="Bill Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="16661" end="16667" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q126677" start="16771" end="16788" title="Mary Lou Williams" label="Mary Lou Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q541073" start="16925" end="16938" title="Jeanie Bryson" label="Jeanie Bryson"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="17023" end="17032" title="Juilliard" label="Juilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q256347" start="17067" end="17075" title="Birdland (New York jazz club)" label="Birdland"/>
<link wikidata="Q986210" start="17138" end="17159" title="Englewood, New Jersey" label="Englewood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q986210" start="17186" end="17195" title="Englewood, New Jersey" label="Englewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318218" start="17216" end="17241" title="Dwight Morrow High School" label="Dwight Morrow High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q273076" start="17558" end="17573" title="Wynton Marsalis" label="Wynton Marsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628673" start="17917" end="17933" title="Stump and Stumpy" label="Stump and Stumpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903372" start="18333" end="18339" title="Martin Band Instrument Company" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742043" start="18674" end="18698" title="King Musical Instruments" label="King Musical Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313426" start="18715" end="18729" title="Renold Schilke" label="Renold Schilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350269" start="18754" end="18764" title="Jon Faddis" label="Jon Faddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703659" start="18805" end="18812" title="Al Cass" label="Al Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="18850" end="18885" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="19022" end="19037" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q217812" start="19080" end="19095" title="Coleman Hawkins" label="Coleman Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="19097" end="19109" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="19115" end="19128" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="19407" end="19440" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="19464" end="19502" title="Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="19582" end="19603" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="19618" end="19672" title="American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers" label="American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="19849" end="19873" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="19934" end="19965" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q273076" start="20001" end="20016" title="Wynton Marsalis" label="Wynton Marsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q754841" start="20043" end="20060" title="Polar Music Prize" label="Polar Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051714" start="20119" end="20157" title="International Latin Music Hall of Fame" label="International Latin Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705795" start="20420" end="20443" title="New Jersey Hall of Fame" label="New Jersey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q926362" start="20469" end="20485" title="Samuel E. Wright" label="Samuel E. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q865056" start="20527" end="20531" title="Bird (1988 film)" label="Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="20552" end="20566" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209291" start="20568" end="20582" title="Kevin Hanchard" label="Kevin Hanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274" start="20610" end="20620" title="Chet Baker" label="Chet Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20755772" start="20634" end="20649" title="Born to Be Blue (film)" label="Born to Be Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q706513" start="20664" end="20681" title="Charles S. Dutton" label="Charles S. Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20702" end="20748" title="For Love or Country: The Arturo Sandoval Story" label="For Love or Country: The Arturo Sandoval Story"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54404" wikidata="Q158271" url="?curid=54404" title="Tropaeolum">
<text>Tropaeolum , commonly known as nasturtium (; literally &quot;nose-twister&quot; or &quot;nose-tweaker&quot;), is a genus of roughly 80 species of annual and perennial herbaceous flowering plants. It was named by Carl Linnaeus in his book &quot;Species Plantarum&quot;, and is the only genus in the family Tropaeolaceae. The nasturtiums received their common name because they produce an oil similar to that of watercress (&quot;Nasturtium officinale&quot;).

The genus &quot;Tropaeolum&quot;, native to South and Central America, includes several very popular garden plants, the most common being &quot;T. majus&quot;, &quot;T. peregrinum&quot; and &quot;T. speciosum&quot;. One of the hardiest species is &quot;T. polyphyllum&quot; from Chile, the perennial roots of which can survive the winter underground at elevations of .

Plants in this genus have showy, often intensely bright flowers and rounded, peltate (shield-shaped) leaves with the petiole in the centre. The flowers are bisexual and zygomorphic, with five petals, a superior three-carpelled ovary, and a funnel-shaped nectar spur at the back, formed by modification of one of the five sepals.

== History ==
&quot;Tropaeolum&quot; was introduced into Spain by the Spanish botanist Nicolás Monardes, who described it in his &quot;Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales&quot; of 1569, translated into English as &quot;Ioyfull newes out of the newe founde worlde&quot; by John Frampton. The English herbalist John Gerard reports having received seeds of the plant from Europe in his 1597 book &quot;Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes&quot;. &quot;Tropaeolum majus&quot; was named by the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus, who chose the genus name because the plant reminded him of an ancient custom: After victory in battle, the Romans erected a trophy pole (or &quot;tropaeum&quot;, from the Greek tropaion, source of English &quot;trophy&quot;) on which the vanquished foe&#x27;s armour and weapons were hung. The plant&#x27;s round leaves reminded Linnaeus of shields and its flowers of blood-stained helmets.

Nasturtiums were once commonly called &quot;Indian cresses&quot; because they were introduced from the Americas, known popularly then as the Indies, and used like cress as salad ingredients. In his herbal, John Gerard compared the flowers of the &quot;Indian Cress&quot; to those of the forking larkspur (&quot;Consolida regalis&quot;) of the buttercup family. He wrote: &quot;Unto the backe part (of the flower) doth hange a taile or spurre, such as hath the Larkes heele, called in Latine &quot;Consolida regalis&quot;.&quot;

J. R. R. Tolkien commented that an alternative anglicization of &quot;nasturtium&quot; was &quot;nasturtian&quot;.

== Description ==

&quot;Tropaeolum&quot; is a genus of dicotyledonous annual or perennial plants, often with somewhat succulent stems and sometimes tuberous roots. The alternate leaves are hairless, peltate, and entirely or palmately lobed. The petioles or leaf stalks are long and, in many species, can twine around other stems to provide support. The flowers are bisexual and showy, set singly on long stalks in the axils of the leaves. They have five sepals, the uppermost of which is elongated into a nectar spur. The five petals are clawed, with the lower three unlike the upper two. The eight stamens are in two whorls of unequal length, and the superior ovary has three segments and three stigmas on a single style. The fruit is naked and nut-like, with three single seed segments.
== Species in cultivation ==

The most common flower in cultivation is a hybrid of &quot;T. majus&quot;, &quot;T. minus,&quot; and &quot;T. peltophorum&quot;. It is commonly known as the nasturtium (and occasionally anglicized as nasturtian). It is mostly grown from seed as a half-hardy annual, and both single and double varieties are available. It comes in various forms and colours, including cream, yellow, orange and red, solid in colour or striped and often with a dark blotch at the base of the petals. It is vigorous and easily grown and does well in sun. It thrives in poor soil and dry conditions, whereas rich soil produces much leafy growth and few flowers. Some varieties adopt a bush form while others scramble over and through other plants and are useful for planting in awkward spots or for covering fences and trellises.

The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit:
* &#x27;Alaska Series&#x27;
* &#x27;Hermine Grashoff&#x27;
* &#x27;Whirlybird Series&#x27;

The blue nasturtium (&quot;Tropaeolum azureum&quot;) is a tender species from Chile which has violet-blue flowers with white eyes that can be as much as across.

&quot;Tropaeolum brachyceras&quot; has yellow flowers with purplish markings on wiry, climbing stems. It is a half-hardy perennial from Chile and may remain dormant for several years before being sparked into growth by some unknown trigger factor.

&quot;Tropaeolum hookerianum&quot; is a tuberous-rooted species from Chile. There are two subspecies, &quot;T. h. austropurpureum&quot; which has violet-purple flowers and &quot;T. h. pilosum&quot; with yellow flowers.

The Canary creeper (&quot;Tropaeolum peregrinum&quot;) is a trailing and climbing half-hardy annual species with wiry stalks and palmately lobed leaves. The pale yellow, fringed flowers are borne on long stalks. It originated from Peru but may first have been cultivated in the Canary Islands before being introduced into Western Europe.

Wreath nasturtium (&quot;Tropaeolum polyphyllum&quot;) is a prostrate plant originating from Argentina and Chile. It has silvery, deeply lobed leaves and a profusion of small, bright yellow flowers on long trailing stalks. After flowering, the plant dies back. It is a perennial with underground rhizomes which send up new shoots at intervals. It will survive for several years in a suitable sunny location with well-drained soil. It is a very hardy species; the tubers can grow at depths of enabling the plant to survive at altitudes of as much as 3,300 metres (10,000 ft) in the Andes.

The flame flower (&quot;Tropaeolum speciosum&quot;) is well adapted to cool, moist climates and famously does well in Scotland. It sends up shoots that thread their way through hedges and shrubs and, when they emerge into the light, bear brilliant red flowers among small, five or six-lobed leaves. It is difficult to establish but is an attractive garden plant when it thrives. This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

Three-coloured Indian cress (&quot;Tropaeolum tricolor&quot;) is another tuberous, climbing species grown for its attractive red, purple and yellow tubular flowers. It comes from Chile and Bolivia and is a reliable winter-growing species.

Mashua (&quot;Tropaeolum tuberosum&quot;) is a perennial climbing plant from the Andes grown for its tuberous roots. It has been cultivated since ancient times, and depictions of it are found at archaeological sites pre-dating the Incas. It has leaves with five to seven lobes and small, long-spurred, red and yellow flowers. The tubers have an unpleasant smell when raw, which disappears on cooking. It is frost-hardy and produces crops of 30 tonnes per hectare at an elevation of above sea level. The cultivar &quot;T. tuberosum lineamaculatum&quot; &#x27;Ken Aslet&#x27; has gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.
Species originating from the coastal areas and lower foothills make most of their growth in winter, whereas the true alpine species are summer growers. Tuberous &quot;Tropaeolum&quot; species are well known for occasionally remaining dormant for one or more years. The species with underground rhizomes and tubers can be propagated from these, while other species are best raised from seed. Many growers favour fresh seed, but dried seed is also often successful. Seed from the winter growing species should be sown in the autumn, while the summer growing species are best sown in the spring in well-drained compost and covered with of grit or sand. The containers should be kept at below until the seedlings appear in about a month, as too high a temperature inhibits germination.

== Uses ==

=== Culinary ===

All parts of &quot;Tropaeolum majus&quot; are edible. The flower has most often been consumed, making for an especially ornamental salad ingredient; it has a slightly peppery taste reminiscent of watercress and is also used in stir fry. The flowers contain about 130 mg vitamin C per , about the same amount as is contained in parsley. Moreover, they contain up to 45 mg of lutein per 100 g, which is the highest amount found in any edible plant. The unripe seed pods can be harvested and dropped into spiced vinegar to produce a condiment and garnish, sometimes used in place of capers.

Mashua (&quot;T. tuberosum&quot;) produces an edible underground tuber that is a major food source in parts of the Andes.

=== Herbal medicine ===
&quot;T. majus&quot; has been used in herbal medicine for respiratory and urinary tract infections.

In Germany, licensed physicians can prescribe the herbal antibiotic Angocin Anti-Infekt N, made from only nasturtium and horseradish root.

=== Companion planting and biological pest control ===
Nasturtiums are used as companion plants for biological pest control, repelling some pests, acting as a trap crop for others and attracting predatory insects. While companion planting is a widespread notion and often adopted by home gardeners, there is little but anecdotal evidence to support these claims.

== Taxonomy ==
&quot;Tropaeolum&quot; was previously placed in the family Tropaeolaceae along with two other genera, &quot;Magallana&quot; and &quot;Trophaeastrum&quot;. The monotypic genus &quot;Magallana&quot; was characterised by having winged fruit, and the two species of &quot;Trophaeastrum&quot; lacked spurs. The genus &quot;Tropaeolum&quot; was diagnosed only by the absence of the characteristics of the other two genera. A molecular study undertaken in 2000 found &quot;Tropaeolum&quot; to be paraphyletic when the other two genera are segregated, so &quot;Magallana&quot; and &quot;Trophaeastrum&quot; were reduced to synonyms of &quot;Tropaeolum&quot;. Tropaeolaceae was thus rendered monogeneric, a family of only one genus.

== Species ==
&quot;The Plant List&quot;, a collaboration between the Missouri Botanical Garden and the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, includes the following accepted names of &quot;Tropaeolum&quot; species names. Some that are under review are here marked &quot;U&quot;. 
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158271" start="31" end="41" title="Tropaeolum" label="nasturtium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="146" end="152" title="Annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="157" end="166" title="perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="167" end="177" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="178" end="193" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="203" end="208" title="Botanical name" label="named"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="212" end="225" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="244" end="261" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="298" end="304" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q158271" start="305" end="318" title="Tropaeolum" label="Tropaeolaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q150452" start="410" end="420" title="watercress" label="watercress"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="493" end="499" title="native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q156288" start="603" end="611" title="Tropaeolum majus" label="T. majus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477895" start="625" end="638" title="Tropaeolum peregrinum" label="T. peregrinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845601" start="655" end="667" title="Tropaeolum speciosum" label="T. speciosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852702" start="686" end="694" title="hardiness (plants)" label="hardiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845600" start="712" end="726" title="Tropaeolum polyphyllum" label="T. polyphyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="738" end="743" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="906" end="913" title="peltate" label="peltate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="915" end="921" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="946" end="953" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q556965" start="998" end="1009" title="zygomorphic" label="zygomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1031" end="1061" title="Ovary (botany)#Superior ovary" label="superior three-carpelled ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q950531" start="1246" end="1262" title="Nicolás Monardes" label="Nicolás Monardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9004310" start="1294" end="1370" title="Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales" label="Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233850" start="1472" end="1485" title="John Frampton" label="John Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333338" start="1509" end="1520" title="John Gerard" label="John Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1710" end="1723" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753584" start="1902" end="1910" title="tropaion" label="tropaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q381165" start="1936" end="1942" title="trophy" label="trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162815" start="2404" end="2420" title="Consolida regalis" label="forking larkspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q145869" start="2460" end="2476" title="Ranunculaceae" label="buttercup family"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="2646" end="2662" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="2818" end="2829" title="dicotyledon" label="dicotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="2962" end="2969" title="Leaf shape" label="peltate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="3217" end="3223" title="sepals" label="sepals"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="3290" end="3296" title="petals" label="petals"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="3362" end="3369" title="stamens" label="stamens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="3459" end="3466" title="Stigma (botany)" label="stigmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3479" end="3484" title="gynoecium" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="3625" end="3631" title="hybrid (botany)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q277151" start="4380" end="4387" title="trellis (architecture)" label="trellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="4406" end="4414" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="4432" end="4459" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="4467" end="4488" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15601236" start="4586" end="4601" title="Tropaeolum azureum" label="blue nasturtium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15601821" start="4750" end="4772" title="Tropaeolum brachyceras" label="Tropaeolum brachyceras"/>
<link wikidata="Q162267" start="4901" end="4908" title="Dormancy" label="dormant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17248196" start="4999" end="5021" title="Tropaeolum hookerianum" label="Tropaeolum hookerianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477895" start="5217" end="5231" title="Tropaeolum peregrinum" label="Canary creeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="5444" end="5448" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="5491" end="5505" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845600" start="5552" end="5569" title="Tropaeolum polyphyllum" label="Wreath nasturtium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="5848" end="5855" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845601" start="6145" end="6157" title="Tropaeolum speciosum" label="flame flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845602" start="6605" end="6632" title="Tropaeolum tricolor" label="Three-coloured Indian cress"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="6794" end="6801" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q766182" start="6845" end="6851" title="Mashua" label="Mashua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="6926" end="6931" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="7076" end="7080" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q162267" start="7726" end="7733" title="Dormancy" label="dormant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="8261" end="8272" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q156288" start="8324" end="8340" title="Tropaeolum majus" label="Tropaeolum majus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150452" start="8501" end="8511" title="watercress" label="watercress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="8532" end="8540" title="stir fry" label="stir fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="8575" end="8584" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="8632" end="8639" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q422067" start="8679" end="8685" title="lutein" label="lutein"/>
<link wikidata="Q156251" start="8885" end="8890" title="caper" label="caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q766182" start="8894" end="8900" title="Mashua" label="Mashua"/>
<link wikidata="Q183319" start="8959" end="8964" title="tuber" label="tuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="9009" end="9014" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="9115" end="9138" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="9263" end="9274" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935508" start="9361" end="9376" title="companion planting" label="companion plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="9382" end="9405" title="biological pest control" label="biological pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919070" start="9441" end="9450" title="trap crop" label="trap crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="9820" end="9835" title="monotypic genus" label="monotypic genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="10150" end="10162" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852803" start="10456" end="10481" title="Missouri Botanical Garden" label="Missouri Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748726" start="10490" end="10516" title="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew" label="Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54406" wikidata="Q105" url="?curid=54406" title="Monday">
<text>Monday is the day of the week that takes place between Sunday and Tuesday. According to the International Organization for Standardization&#x27;s ISO 8601 standard, it is the first day of the week.

==Names==
The names of the day of the week were coined in the Roman era, in Greek and Latin, in the case of Monday as
ἡμέρᾱ Σελήνης, &quot;diēs Lūnae&quot; &quot;day of the Moon&quot;.

Many languages use either terms directly derived from these names or loan translations based on them.
The English noun &quot;Monday&quot; derived sometime before 1200 from &quot;monedæi&quot;, which itself developed from Old English (around 1000) &quot;mōnandæg&quot; and &quot;mōndæg&quot; (literally meaning &quot;moon&#x27;s day&quot;), which has cognates in other Germanic languages, including Old Frisian &quot;mōnadeig&quot;, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch &quot;mānendag, mānendach&quot; (modern Dutch &quot;Maandag&quot;), Old High German &quot;mānetag&quot; (modern German &quot;Montag&quot;), and Old Norse &quot;mánadagr&quot; (Swedish and Norwegian nynorsk &quot;måndag&quot;, Icelandic &quot;mánudagur&quot;. Danish and Norwegian bokmål &quot;mandag&quot;). The Germanic term is a Germanic interpretation of Latin &quot;lunae dies&quot; (&quot;day of the moon&quot;).
Japanese and Korean share the same ancient Chinese words &#x27;月曜日&#x27; (Hiragana:げつようび, translit. &quot;getsuyо̄bi&quot;, Hangeul:월요일) for Monday which means &quot;day of the moon&quot;.
In many Indo-Aryan languages, the word for Monday is &quot;Somavāra&quot; or &quot;Chandravāra&quot;, Sanskrit loan-translations of &quot;Monday&quot;.

In some cases, the &quot;ecclesiastical&quot; names are used, a tradition of numbering the days of the week to avoid the pagan connotation of the planetary or deities’ names, and to keep with the biblical name, in which Monday is the &quot;second day&quot; (Hebrew יום שני, Greek Δευτέρα ἡμέρα (&quot;Deutéra hēméra&quot;), Latin &quot;feria secunda, Arabic الأثنين&quot;).
In many Slavic languages the name of the day translates to &quot;after Sunday/holiday&quot;. Russian &quot;понедельник&quot; (&quot;ponyedyelnik&quot;) literally translated, Monday means &quot;next to the week&quot;, по &quot;next to&quot; or &quot;on&quot; недельник &quot;(the) week&quot; Croatian and Bosnian &quot;ponedjeljak&quot;, Serbian &quot;понедељак&quot; (&quot;ponedeljak&quot;), Ukrainian &quot;понеділок&quot; (&quot;ponedilok&quot;), Bulgarian &quot;понеделник&quot; (&quot;ponedelnik&quot;), Polish &quot;poniedziałek&quot;, Czech &quot;pondělí&quot;, Slovak &quot;pondelok&quot;, Slovenian &quot;ponedeljek&quot;. In Turkish it is called &quot;pazartesi&quot;, which also means &quot;after Sunday&quot;.

==Arrangement in the week==
Historically, the Greco-Roman week began with Sunday (&quot;dies solis&quot;), and Monday (&quot;dies lunae&quot;) was the second day of the week. It is still the custom to refer to Monday as &quot;feria secunda&quot; in the liturgical calendar of the Catholic Church. Quakers also traditionally referred to Monday as &quot;Second Day&quot;.

The Portuguese and the Greek (Eastern Orthodox Church) also retain the ecclesiastical tradition (Portuguese &quot;segunda-feira&quot;, Greek &quot;Δευτέρα&quot; &quot;deutéra&quot; &quot;second&quot;). Vietnamese, whose Latin-based alphabet was originally romanized by Portuguese Jesuit missionaries, adopted this convention and thus also refers to Monday as Second Day (&quot;thứ Hai&quot;). Likewise, the Modern Hebrew name for Monday is &quot;yom-sheni&quot; (יום שני).

While in North America, Sunday is the first day of the week, the Geneva-based International Organization for Standardization places Monday as the first day of the week in its ISO 8601 standard. Monday is &quot;xīngqīyī (星期一)&quot; in Chinese, meaning &quot;day one of the week&quot;.

==Religious observances==

=== Christianity ===
The early Christian Didache warned believers not to fast on Mondays to avoid Judaizing (see below), and suggested fasting on Wednesdays instead.

In the Eastern Orthodox Church, Mondays are days on which the Angels are commemorated. The Octoechos contains hymns on this theme, arranged in an eight-week cycle, which are chanted on Mondays throughout the year. At the end of Divine Services on Mondays, the dismissal begins with the words: &quot;May Christ our True God, through the intercessions, of his most-pure Mother, of the honorable, Bodiless Powers (i.e., the angels) of Heaven…&quot;. In many Eastern monasteries Mondays are observed as fast days; because Mondays are dedicated to the angels, and monks strive to live an angelic life. In these monasteries, the monks abstain from meat, fowl, dairy products, fish, wine and oil (if a feast day occurs on a Monday, fish, wine and oil may be allowed, depending upon the particular feast).

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints spend one evening per week, called Family Home Evening (FHE) or Family Night. This is usually a Monday, when families are encouraged to spend time together in study, prayer and other family activities.

===Hinduism===
In Hinduism, Mondays are associated with the Hindu god of the moon Chandra or Soma. In several South Asian languages, Monday is knowns as &quot;Somavara&quot; or &quot;Somavaram&quot;. Hindus who fast on Mondays do so in dedication to the deity Shiva. Some observe the &quot;Solah Somvar Vrat&quot;, which is a fast of sixteen Mondays dedicated to Shiva in hopes of getting married and finding a suitable partner. Fasting on Mondays in the Hindu month of Shravana is also considered auspicious as it is one of the holiest months to Hindus and dedicated to Shiva and his consort Parvati.

=== Islam ===
In Islam, Mondays are one of the days in a week in which Muslims are encouraged to do voluntary fasting, the other being Thursdays. 

There are a number of Hadith which narrated of Muhammad fasting on these days. According to the same Hadith, Muhammad was born on a Monday. It is also narrated that he received his first revelation (which would later become the Quran) on Monday.

=== Judaism ===
In Judaism, Mondays are considered auspicious days for fasting. 

In Judaism, a small portion of the weekly Parashah in Torah is read in public on Monday and Thursday mornings, as a supplement for the Saturday reading). Special penitential prayers are recited on Monday unless there is a special occasion for happiness which cancels them. According to the Mishna and Talmud, these traditions are due to Monday and Thursday being &quot;the market days&quot; when people gathered from the towns to the city.

A tradition of Ashkenazi Jews to voluntarily fast on the first consecutive Monday, Thursday and Monday of the Hebrew month is prevalent among the ultra-orthodox.

In Hebrew, Monday is called &quot;Yom Shení&quot;, literally meaning &quot;Second Day&quot;, following the biblical reference to the sabbath day as the &quot;Seventh-day&quot; and the tradition of that day being on Saturday. It has been established that the phonetic and cultural link between the planet Saturn, Saturday and the Sabbath day is of ancient Mesopotamian origin.

==Cultural references==
A number of popular songs in Western culture portray Mondays often as days of depression, anxiety, avolition, hysteria, or melancholy (mostly because of its association with the first day of the workweek). Mondays are also portrayed as days of boredom and bad luck, especially for many people in their school years, who have to go back to school every Monday after having no school on Saturday and Sunday, which can make them grow a hatred for Mondays. For example, &quot;Monday, Monday&quot; (1966) from the Mamas &amp; the Papas; &quot;Rainy Days and Mondays&quot; (1971) from the Carpenters; Monday, Monday, Monday (2002) from Tegan and Sara; and &quot;Manic Monday&quot; (1986) from the Bangles (written by Prince).

There is a band named the Happy Mondays and an American pop-punk band Hey Monday.

The popular comic strip character Garfield by Jim Davis is well known for his hatred for Mondays, mostly accompanied by the catchphrase “I hate Mondays.”

In the United Kingdom, more people commit suicide in England and Wales on Mondays than other days of the week; more people in the country in general call in sick; and more people worldwide surf the web.

In July 2002, the consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers announced that it would rename its consultancy practice &quot;Monday&quot;, and would spend $110 million over the next year to establish the brand. When IBM acquired the consultancy three months later it chose not to retain the new name.

On October 17, 2022, Guinness World Records announced on Twitter that Monday is the &#x27;&quot;Worst Day of the Week&quot;&#x27;, to the dismay of some people.

==Named days==
* Big Monday
* Black Monday
* Blue Monday
* Clean Monday (Ash Monday)
* Cyber Monday
* Easter Monday, also Bright Monday or Wet Monday
* Handsel Monday
* Lundi Gras
* Mad Monday
* Miracle Monday
* Plough Monday
* Shrove Monday
* Wet Monday
* Whit Monday

==See also==

* Monday Club
* Monday demonstrations
* &quot;Monday Night Football&quot;
* &quot;Monday Night Raw&quot;
* &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot;
* Monday Night War
* Saint Monday
* Cleveland Elementary School shooting (San Diego), purportedly carried out due to dislike for Mondays

==Notes==
==External links==

* Barnhart, Robert K. (1995). &quot;The Barnhart Concise Dictionary of Etymology&quot;. HarperCollins. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105" start="0" end="6" title="Monday" label="Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962347" start="14" end="29" title="day of the week" label="day of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="55" end="61" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q127" start="66" end="73" title="Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="92" end="138" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="146" end="154" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="181" end="184" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23387" start="192" end="196" title="week" label="week"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="261" end="270" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="275" end="280" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q131585" start="323" end="330" title="Selene" label="Σελήνης"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="606" end="617" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="701" end="705" title="moon" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="753" end="771" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="783" end="794" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="817" end="834" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="839" end="851" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="892" end="897" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="920" end="935" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="964" end="970" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="996" end="1005" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1028" end="1035" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="1040" end="1057" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="1078" end="1087" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="1111" end="1117" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="1122" end="1138" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="1183" end="1206" title="Interpretatio graeca" label="Germanic interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1210" end="1215" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="1270" end="1278" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="1283" end="1289" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="1313" end="1326" title="Written Chinese" label="Chinese words"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="1344" end="1352" title="Hiragana" label="Hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="1360" end="1369" title="Transliteration" label="translit."/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="1394" end="1401" title="Hangeul" label="Hangeul"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="1467" end="1487" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1561" end="1569" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="1994" end="2010" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2079" end="2086" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="2277" end="2285" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="2290" end="2297" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="2323" end="2330" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="2379" end="2388" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="2436" end="2445" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2495" end="2501" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="2528" end="2533" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="2555" end="2561" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="2584" end="2593" title="Slovenian language" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="2962" end="2981" title="Liturgical year" label="liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2989" end="3004" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3006" end="3013" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3084" end="3094" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3103" end="3108" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="3282" end="3292" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3300" end="3320" title="Vietnamese alphabet#Creation of chữ Quốc ngữ" label="Latin-based alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="3336" end="3345" title="romanization" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="3360" end="3366" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="3367" end="3379" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141" start="3487" end="3500" title="Modern Hebrew" label="Modern Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="3632" end="3678" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="3729" end="3737" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="3788" end="3795" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="3891" end="3906" title="early Christianity" label="early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210752" start="3907" end="3914" title="Didache" label="Didache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710868" start="3964" end="3973" title="Judaizers" label="Judaizing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3979" end="3984" title="#Judaism" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4040" end="4063" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="4095" end="4100" title="Angel" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289924" start="4124" end="4133" title="Octoechos (liturgy)" label="Octoechos"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="4143" end="4147" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q946731" start="4261" end="4276" title="Divine Services" label="Divine Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557385" start="4293" end="4302" title="dismissal (liturgy)" label="dismissal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266263" start="4369" end="4381" title="intercession" label="intercession"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="4401" end="4407" title="Theotokos" label="Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="4465" end="4471" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="4496" end="4507" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4532" end="4541" title="Fasting#Eastern Orthodoxy" label="fast days"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="4592" end="4596" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="4728" end="4737" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="4847" end="4890" title="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488977" start="4926" end="4945" title="Family Home Evening" label="Family Home Evening"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="5112" end="5120" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q979507" start="5154" end="5163" title="Hindu god" label="Hindu god"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061795" start="5176" end="5183" title="Chandra" label="Chandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609389" start="5204" end="5225" title="Languages of South Asia" label="South Asian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="5354" end="5359" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257780" start="5564" end="5572" title="Shravana (month)" label="Shravana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="5687" end="5694" title="Parvati" label="Parvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="5714" end="5719" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5797" end="5814" title="Fasting in Islam#Days of voluntary fasting" label="voluntary fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="5867" end="5873" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="5892" end="5900" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115424" start="6026" end="6042" title="Muhammad&amp;#x27;s first revelation" label="first revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="6069" end="6078" title="Quran" label="the Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="6111" end="6118" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q654188" start="6216" end="6224" title="Parashah" label="Parashah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="6228" end="6233" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131" start="6309" end="6317" title="Saturday" label="Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="6630" end="6644" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q131" start="6993" end="7001" title="Saturday" label="Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639216" start="7651" end="7665" title="Monday, Monday" label="Monday, Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q211277" start="7688" end="7709" title="The Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas" label="Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285002" start="7717" end="7739" title="Rainy Days and Mondays" label="Rainy Days and Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q223495" start="7762" end="7772" title="The Carpenters" label="Carpenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q734756" start="7809" end="7823" title="Tegan and Sara" label="Tegan and Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759710" start="7835" end="7847" title="Manic Monday" label="Manic Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="7870" end="7877" title="The Bangles" label="Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="7890" end="7896" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141495" start="7926" end="7939" title="Happy Mondays" label="Happy Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q610377" start="7970" end="7980" title="Hey Monday" label="Hey Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q767120" start="8017" end="8025" title="Garfield (character)" label="Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8145" end="8159" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="8191" end="8198" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="8203" end="8208" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="8376" end="8398" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="8552" end="8555" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="8659" end="8681" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="8695" end="8702" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146336" start="8817" end="8827" title="Big Monday" label="Big Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q26124530" start="8830" end="8842" title="Black Monday" label="Black Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191221" start="8845" end="8856" title="Blue Monday (date)" label="Blue Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814340" start="8859" end="8871" title="Clean Monday" label="Clean Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q112055" start="8887" end="8899" title="Cyber Monday" label="Cyber Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q209663" start="8902" end="8915" title="Easter Monday" label="Easter Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647635" start="8952" end="8966" title="Handsel Monday" label="Handsel Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704140" start="8969" end="8979" title="Lundi Gras" label="Lundi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970750" start="8982" end="8992" title="Mad Monday" label="Mad Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872429" start="8995" end="9009" title="Miracle Monday" label="Miracle Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205145" start="9012" end="9025" title="Plough Monday" label="Plough Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369030" start="9028" end="9041" title="Shrove Monday" label="Shrove Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637323" start="9044" end="9054" title="Wet Monday" label="Wet Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512993" start="9057" end="9068" title="Whit Monday" label="Whit Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163053" start="9086" end="9097" title="Monday Club" label="Monday Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898668" start="9100" end="9120" title="Monday demonstration (disambiguation)" label="Monday demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="9130" end="9151" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="9160" end="9188" title="WWE Raw" label="&amp;quot;Monday Night Raw&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="9197" end="9213" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="WCW Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q35530" start="9222" end="9238" title="Monday Night Wars" label="Monday Night War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119267" start="9241" end="9253" title="Saint Monday" label="Saint Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q56412931" start="9256" end="9304" title="Cleveland Elementary School shooting (San Diego)" label="Cleveland Elementary School shooting (San Diego)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341884" start="9390" end="9409" title="Robert Barnhart" label="Barnhart, Robert K."/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="9476" end="9489" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54407" wikidata="Q132" url="?curid=54407" title="Sunday">
<text>Sunday (Latin: &quot;dies solis&quot; meaning &quot;day of the sun&quot;) is the day of the week between Saturday and Monday. Sunday is a day of rest in most Western countries and a part of the weekend. In some Middle Eastern countries, Sunday is a weekday.

For most Christians, Sunday is observed as a day of worship and rest, holding it as the Lord&#x27;s Day and the day of Christ&#x27;s resurrection; in the United States, Canada, Japan, as well as in parts of South America, Sunday is the first day of the week. According to the Islamic calendar, Hebrew calendar and traditional calendars (including Christian calendars) Sunday is the first day of the week; Quaker Christians call Sunday the &quot;first day&quot; in accordance with their testimony of simplicity. The International Organization for Standardization ISO 8601, which is based in Switzerland, calls Sunday the seventh day of the week.

==Etymology==

The name &quot;Sunday&quot;, the day of the Sun, is derived from Hellenistic astrology, where the seven planets – known in English as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon – each had an hour of the day assigned to them, and the planet which was regent during the first hour of any day of the week gave its name to that day. During the 1st and 2nd centuries, the week of seven days was introduced into Rome from Egypt, and the Roman names of the planets were given to each successive day.

Germanic peoples seem to have adopted the week as a division of time from the Romans, but they changed the Roman names into those of corresponding Teutonic deities. Hence, the &quot;dies Solis&quot; became Sunday (German, &quot;Sonntag&quot;).

The English noun &quot;Sunday&quot; derived sometime before 1250 from &quot;sunedai&quot;, which itself developed from Old English (before 700) &quot;Sunnandæg&quot; (literally meaning &quot;sun&#x27;s day&quot;), which is cognate to other Germanic languages, including Old Frisian &quot;sunnandei&quot;, Old Saxon &quot;sunnundag&quot;, Middle Dutch &quot;sonnendach&quot; (modern Dutch &quot;zondag&quot;), Old High German &quot;sunnun tag&quot; (modern German &quot;Sonntag&quot;), and Old Norse &quot;sunnudagr&quot; (Danish and Norwegian &quot;søndag&quot;, Icelandic &quot;sunnudagur&quot; and Swedish &quot;söndag&quot;). The Germanic term is a Germanic interpretation of Latin &quot;dies solis&quot; (&quot;day of the sun&quot;), which is a translation of the ancient Greek Ἥλίου ημέρα&quot; (&quot;Hēlíou hēméra&quot;).

In most Indian languages, the word for Sunday is derived from Sanskrit &quot;Ravivāra&quot; or &quot;Adityavāra&quot; — &quot;vāra&quot; meaning day and &quot;Aditya&quot; and &quot;Ravi&quot; both being names for Surya, the Sun and the solar deity. Ravivāra is the first day cited in Jyotisha, which provides logical reason for giving the name of each weekday. In the Thai solar calendar, the name (&quot;Waan Arthit&quot;) is derived from Aditya, and the associated colour is red.

In most Slavic languages other than Russian, the words for Sunday reflect the Christian commandment to abstain from work. Belarusian (), Bulgarian (), Croatian and Serbian &quot;nedjelja&quot; / , Czech &quot;neděle&quot;, Macedonian (), Polish &quot;niedziela&quot;, Slovak &quot;nedeľa&quot;, Slovenian &quot;nedelja&quot; and Ukrainian () are all cognates literally meaning &quot;no work&quot; or &quot;day with no work&quot;.

In Russian, the word for Sunday is () meaning &quot;resurrection&quot; (that is, the day of a week which commemorates the resurrection of Jesus Christ). In Old Russian, Sunday was also called (), &quot;free day&quot;, or &quot;day with no work&quot;, but in the contemporary language this word means &quot;week&quot;.

The Modern Greek word for Sunday, , is derived from (Kyrios, Lord) also, due to its liturgical significance as the day commemorating the resurrection of Jesus Christ, i.e. The Lord&#x27;s Day.

The name is similar in the Romance languages. In Italian, Sunday is called , which also means &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day&quot; (from Latin ). One finds similar cognates in French, where the name is , as well as Romanian , and in Spanish and Portuguese, .

In Chinese, Korean, and Japanese, Sunday is called (), (), and () respectively, which all mean &quot;sun day of the week&quot;.

The Arabic word for Sunday is (), meaning &quot;the first&quot;. It is usually combined with the word () meaning &quot;day&quot;.

Latvian word for Sunday is &quot;svētdiena&quot;, literally &quot;holy day&quot;. Lithuanian word is &quot;sekmadienis&quot;, literally &quot;seventh day&quot; (archaic; in contemporary Lithuanian, &quot;seventh day&quot; translates to &quot;septinta diena&quot;).

==Position in the week==

===ISO 8601===
The international standard ISO 8601 for representation of dates and times states that Sunday is the seventh and last day of the week. This method of representing dates and times unambiguously was first published in 1988.

===Culture and languages===
In the Judaic, Christian, and some Islamic traditions, Sunday has been considered the first day of the week. A number of languages express this position either by the name of the day or by the naming of the other days. In Hebrew it is called יום ראשון &quot;yom rishon&quot;, in Arabic الأحد &quot;al-ahad&quot;, in Persian and related languages یکشنبه &quot;yek-shanbe&quot;, all meaning &quot;first&quot;.

In Greek, the names of the days Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday (, , , and ) mean &quot;second&quot;, &quot;third&quot;, &quot;fourth&quot;, and &quot;fifth&quot;, respectively. This leaves Sunday in the first position of the week count. Similarly in Portuguese, where the days from Monday to Friday are counted as &quot;segunda-feira&quot;, &quot;terça-feira&quot;, &quot;quarta-feira&quot;, &quot;quinta-feira&quot; and &quot;sexta-feira&quot;. In Vietnamese, the working days in the week are named as: &quot;Thứ Hai&quot; (Second), &quot;Thứ Ba&quot; (Third), &quot;Thứ Tư&quot; (Fourth), &quot;Thứ Năm&quot; (Fifth), &quot;Thứ Sáu&quot; (Sixth), and &quot;Thứ Bảy&quot; (Seventh). Sunday is called &quot;Chủ Nhật&quot;(chữ Hán: 主日) meaning &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day&quot;. Some colloquial text in the south of Vietnam and from the church may use a different reading of &quot;Chúa Nhật&quot;(in contemporary Vietnamese, &quot;Chúa&quot; means God or Lord and &quot;Chủ&quot; means own). In German, Wednesday is called &quot;Mittwoch&quot;, literally &quot;mid-week&quot;, implying the week runs from Sunday to Saturday.

In the Yoruba culture of West Africa, Sunday is called &quot;Oj̣ó ̣Aikú. Ojó Aiku is the day that begins a new week known as &quot;Day of Rest&quot;. It is the day Orunmila, the convener of Ifá to earth, buried the mother of Esu Odara and his wife, Imi. Since that occurrence, Yoruba people decided to refer to the day as Ojó Aiku.&quot;

Slavic languages implicitly number Monday as day number one. 

Russian &quot;воскресение&quot; (Sunday) means &quot;resurrection&quot;.
Hungarian &quot;szerda&quot; (Wednesday), &quot;csütörtök&quot; (Thursday), and &quot;péntek&quot; (Friday) are Slavic loanwords, so the correlation with &quot;middle&quot;, &quot;four&quot;, and &quot;five&quot; are not evident to Hungarian speakers. Hungarians use &quot;Vasárnap&quot; for Sunday, which means &quot;market day&quot;.

In the Maltese language, due to its Siculo-Arabic origin, Sunday is called &quot;Il-Ħadd&quot;, a corruption of &quot;wieħed&quot;, meaning &quot;one&quot;. Monday is &quot;It-Tnejn&quot;, meaning &quot;two&quot;. Similarly, Tuesday is &quot;It-Tlieta&quot; (three), Wednesday is &quot;L-Erbgħa&quot; (four), and Thursday is &quot;Il-Ħamis&quot; (five).

In Armenian, Monday is &quot;Yerkoushabti&quot;, literally meaning &quot;second day of the week&quot;, Tuesday &quot;Yerekshabti&quot; &quot;third day&quot;, Wednesday &quot;Chorekshabti&quot; &quot;fourth day&quot;, Thursday &quot;Hingshabti&quot; &quot;fifth day&quot;. Saturday is &quot;Shabat&quot; coming from the word &quot;Sabbath&quot; or &quot;Shabbath&quot; in Hebrew, and &quot;Kiraki&quot;, coming from the word &quot;Krak&quot;, meaning &quot;fire&quot;, is Sunday, referring to the sun as a fire. Apostle John, in Revelations 1:10, refers to the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Day&quot;, (&quot;kyriakḗ hēmera&quot;), that is, &quot;the day of the Lord&quot;, possibly influencing the Armenian word for Sunday.

In many European countries, calendars show Monday as the first day of the week, which follows the ISO 8601 standard.

In the Persian calendar, used in Iran and Afghanistan, Sunday is the second day of the week. However, it is called &quot;number one&quot; as counting starts from zero; the first day - Saturday - is denoted as day zero.

==Sunday in Christianity==

===Christian usage===
The ancient Romans traditionally used the eight-day nundinal cycle, a market week, but in the time of Augustus in the 1st century AD, a seven-day week also came into use.

In the gospels, the women are described as coming to the empty tomb &quot;&quot;, which literally means &quot;toward the first of the sabbath&quot; and is often translated &quot;on the first day of the week&quot;.

Justin Martyr, in the mid-2nd century, mentions &quot;memoirs of the apostles&quot; as being read on &quot;the day called that of the sun&quot; (Sunday) alongside the &quot;writings of the prophets.&quot;

On 7 March 321, Constantine I, Rome&#x27;s first Christian emperor, decreed that Sunday would be observed as the Roman day of rest:

Despite the official adoption of Sunday as a day of rest by Constantine, the seven-day week and the nundinal cycle continued to be used side by side until at least the Calendar of 354 and probably later.

In 363, Canon 29 of the Council of Laodicea prohibited observance of the Jewish Sabbath (Saturday), and encouraged Christians to work on Saturday and rest on the Lord&#x27;s Day (Sunday). The fact that the canon had to be issued at all is an indication that adoption of Constantine&#x27;s decree of 321 was still not universal, not even among Christians. It also indicates that Jews were observing the Sabbath on Saturday.

===Modern practices===
First-day Sabbatarians, including Christians of the Methodist, Baptist and Reformed (Presbyterian and Congregationalist) traditions, observe Sunday as the sabbath, a day devoted to the worship of God at church (the attendance of Sunday School, a service of worship in the morning and evening), as well as a day of rest (meaning that people are free from servile labour and should refrain from trading, buying and selling except when necessary).

For most Christians the custom and obligation of Sunday rest is not as strict. A minority of Christians do not regard the day they attend church as important, so long as they attend. There is considerable variation in the observance of Sabbath rituals and restrictions, but some cessation of normal weekday activities is customary. Many Christians today observe Sunday as a day of church attendance.

In Roman Catholic liturgy, Sunday begins on Saturday evening. The evening Mass on Saturday is liturgically a full Sunday Mass and fulfills the obligation of Sunday Mass attendance, and Vespers (evening prayer) on Saturday night is liturgically &quot;first Vespers&quot; of the Sunday. The same evening anticipation applies to other major solemnities and feasts, and is an echo of the Jewish practice of starting the new day at sunset. Those who work in the medical field, in law enforcement, and soldiers in a war zone are dispensed from the usual obligation to attend church on Sunday. They are encouraged to combine their work with attending religious services if possible.

In the Eastern Orthodox Church, Sunday begins at the Little Entrance of Vespers (or All-Night Vigil) on Saturday evening and runs until &quot;Vouchsafe, O Lord&quot; (after the &quot;prokeimenon&quot;) of Vespers on Sunday night. During this time, the dismissal at all services begin with the words, &quot;May Christ our True God, who rose from the dead ...&quot; Anyone who wishes to receive Holy Communion at Divine Liturgy on Sunday morning is required to attend Vespers the night before (see Eucharistic discipline). Among Orthodox Christians, Sunday is considered to be a &quot;Little Pascha&quot; (Easter), and because of the Paschal joy, the making of prostrations is forbidden, except in certain circumstances.

Some languages lack separate words for &quot;Saturday&quot; and &quot;Sabbath&quot; (e.g. Italian, Portuguese). Outside the English-speaking world, &quot;Sabbath&quot; as a word, if it is used, refers to the Saturday (or the specific Jewish practices on it); Sunday is called the Lord&#x27;s Day e.g. in Romance languages and Modern Greek. On the other hand, English-speaking Christians often refer to the Sunday as the Sabbath (other than Seventh-day Sabbatarians); a practice which, probably due to the international connections and the Latin tradition of the Roman Catholic Church, is more widespread among (but not limited to) Protestants. Quakers traditionally referred to Sunday as &quot;First Day&quot; eschewing the pagan origin of the English name, while referring to Saturday as the &quot;Seventh day&quot;.

Some Christian denominations, called &quot;Seventh-day Sabbatarians&quot;, observe a Saturday Sabbath. Christians in the Seventh-day Adventist, Seventh Day Baptist, and Church of God (Seventh-Day) denominations, as well as many Messianic Jews, have maintained the practice of abstaining from work and gathering for worship on Saturdays (sunset to sunset) as did all of the followers of God in the Old Testament.

==Sunday in Mandaeism==

Sunday in Mandaeism is called &quot;Habshaba&quot; (&quot;Habšaba&quot;). Mandaeans perform communal masbuta (baptism) every Sunday.

==Common occurrences on Sunday==

===In government and business===

In the United States and Canada, most government offices are closed on both Saturday and Sunday. The practice of offices closing on Sunday in government and in some rural areas of the United States stem from a system of blue laws. Blue laws were established in the early puritan days, which forbade secular activities on Sunday and were rigidly enforced. Some public activities are still regulated by these blue laws in the 21st century. In 1985, twenty-two states in which religious fundamentalism remained strong maintained general restrictions on Sunday behavior. In Oklahoma, for example, it is stated: &quot;Oklahoma&#x27;s statutes state that &quot;acts deemed useless and serious interruptions of the repose and religious liberty of the community,&quot; such as trades, manufacturing, mechanical employment, horse racing, and gaming are forbidden. Public selling of commodities other than necessary foods and drinks, medicine, ice, and surgical and burial equipment, and other necessities can legally be prohibited on Sunday. In Oklahoma, a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars may be imposed on individuals for each offense.&quot; Because of these blue laws, many private sector retail businesses open later and close earlier on Sunday or do not open at all.

Many countries, particularly in Europe such as Sweden, France, Germany and Belgium, but also in other countries such as Peru, hold their national and local elections on a Sunday, either by law or by tradition.

===In media===
Many American and British daily newspapers publish a larger edition on Sundays, which often includes color comic strips, a magazine, and a coupon section. Others only publish on a Sunday, or have a &quot;sister paper&quot; with a different masthead that only publishes on a Sunday.

North American radio stations often play specialty radio shows such as Casey Kasem&#x27;s countdown or other nationally syndicated radio shows that may differ from their regular weekly music patterns on Sunday morning or Sunday evening. In the United Kingdom, there is a Sunday tradition of chart shows on BBC Radio 1 and commercial radio; this originates in the broadcast of chart shows and other populist material on Sundays by Radio Luxembourg when the Reithian BBC&#x27;s Sunday output consisted largely of solemn and religious programmes. The first Sunday chart show was broadcast on the Light Programme on 7 January 1962, which was considered a radical step at the time. BBC Radio 1&#x27;s chart show moved to Fridays in July 2015 but a chart update on Sundays was launched in July 2019.

Period or older-skewing television dramas, such as &quot;Downton Abbey&quot;, &quot;Call the Midwife&quot;, &quot;Lark Rise to Candleford&quot; and &quot;Heartbeat&quot; are commonly shown on Sunday evenings in the UK; the first of these was &quot;Dr Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot; in the 1960s. Similarly, &quot;Antiques Roadshow&quot; has been shown on Sundays on BBC1 since 1979 and &quot;Last of the Summer Wine&quot; was shown on Sundays for many years until it ended in 2010. On Sundays, BBC Radio 2 plays music in styles which it once regularly played but which are now rarely heard on the station, with programmes such as &quot;Elaine Paige on Sunday&quot; and &quot;Sunday Night is Music Night&quot; although more contemporary styles now make up a higher percentage of the station&#x27;s Sunday output than previously; for example, Kendrick Lamar received a Sunday-night play on the station in March 2022. Even younger-skewing media outlets sometimes skew older on Sundays within the terms of their own audience; for example, BBC Radio 1Xtra introduced an &quot;Old Skool Sunday&quot; schedule in the autumn of 2019.

Many American, Australian and British television networks and stations also broadcast their political interview shows on Sunday mornings.

===In sports===
Major League Baseball usually schedules all Sunday games in the daytime except for the nationally televised &quot;Sunday Night Baseball&quot; matchup. Certain historically religious cities such as Boston and Baltimore among others will schedule games no earlier than 1:35 PM to ensure time for people who go to religious service in the morning can get to the game in time.

In the United States, professional American football in the National Football League is usually played on Sunday, although Saturday (via &quot;Saturday Night Football&quot;), Monday (via &quot;Monday Night Football&quot;), and Thursday (via &quot;Thursday Night Football&quot; or Thanksgiving) see some professional games. College football usually occurs on Saturday, and high-school football tends to take place on Friday night or Saturday afternoon.

In the UK, some club and Premier League football matches and tournaments usually take place on Sundays. Rugby matches and tournaments usually take place in club grounds or parks on Sunday mornings. It is not uncommon for church attendance to shift on days when a late morning or early afternoon game is anticipated by a local community.

The Indian Premier League schedules two games on Saturdays and Sundays instead of one, also called Double-headers.

One of the remains of religious segregation in the Netherlands is seen in amateur football: The Saturday-clubs are by and large Protestant Christian clubs, who were not allowed to play on Sunday. The Sunday-clubs were in general Catholic and working class clubs, whose players had to work on Saturday and therefore could only play on Sunday.

In Ireland, Gaelic football and hurling matches are predominantly played on Sundays, with the first (previously second) and fourth (previously third) Sundays in September always playing host to the All-Ireland hurling and football championship finals, respectively.

Professional golf tournaments traditionally end on Sunday. Traditionally, those in the United Kingdom ended on Saturday, but this changed some time ago; for example, the Open ran from Wednesday to Saturday up to 1979 but has run from Thursday to Sunday since 1980.

In the United States and Canada, National Basketball Association and National Hockey League games, which are usually played at night during the week, are frequently played during daytime hours - often broadcast on national television.

Most NASCAR Cup Series and IndyCar events are held on Sundays. Most Formula One World Championship races are likewise held on Sundays regardless of time zone/country, while MotoGP holds most races on Sundays, with Middle Eastern races being the exception on Saturday. All Formula One events and MotoGP events with Sunday races involve qualifying taking place on Saturday.

==Astrology==
Sunday is associated with the Sun and is symbolized by the symbol ☉.

==Named days==
* Advent Sunday
* Black Sunday
* Bloody Sunday
* Cold Sunday
* Easter Sunday represents the resurrection of Christ
* Gaudete Sunday is the third Sunday of Advent.
* Gloomy Sunday
* Good Shepherd Sunday is the fourth Sunday of Easter.
* Laetare Sunday is the fourth Sunday of Lent.
* Low Sunday, first Sunday after Easter, is also known as the Octave of Easter, White Sunday, Quasimodo Sunday, Alb Sunday, Antipascha Sunday, and Divine Mercy Sunday.
* Passion Sunday, the fifth Sunday of Lent as the beginning of Passiontide (since 1970 for Roman Catholics in the ordinary form of the rite, the term remains only official among the greater title of the Palm Sunday, which used to be also the &quot;2nd Sunday of Passiontide&quot;)
* Palm Sunday is the Sunday before Easter.
* Selection Sunday
* Septuagesima, Sexagesima and Quinquagesima Sunday are the last three Sundays before Lent. &quot;Quinquagesima&quot; (&quot;fiftieth&quot;), is the fiftieth day before Easter, reckoning inclusively; but &quot;Sexagesima&quot; is not the sixtieth day and &quot;Septuagesima&quot; is not the seventieth but is the sixty-fourth day prior. The use of these terms was abandoned by the Catholic Church in the 1970 calendar reforms (the Sundays before Lent are now simply &quot;Sundays in ordinary time&quot; with no special status). However, their use is still continued in Lutheran tradition: for example, &quot;Septuagesimae&quot;.
* Shavuot is the Jewish Pentecost, or &#x27;Festival of Weeks&#x27;. For Karaite Jews it always falls on a Sunday.
* Stir-up Sunday is the last Sunday before Advent.
* Super Bowl Sunday
* Trinity Sunday is the first Sunday after Pentecost.
* Whitsunday &quot;White Sunday&quot; is the day of Pentecost.

== In pop culture ==

=== Music ===

* A Sunday Kind of Love is a 1946 jazz standard first recorded by Claude Thornhill.
* Sunday Morning is a 1966 song by American rock band The Velvet Underground.
* Sunday Morning is a 2004 song by American pop rock band Maroon 5.
* Sunday Best is a 2019 song by American electro-pop duo Surfaces

==See also==
* After Saturday Comes Sunday 
* Saint Kyriakē
* Sol Invictus
* Sunday Christian
* Sunday (computer virus)
* Sunday league football
* Sunday roast
* Sunday scaries
* Sunday shopping

==Notes==
==Sources==
* Barnhart, Robert K. (1995). &quot;The Barnhart Concise Dictionary of Etymology&quot;. HarperCollins. 

==Further reading==
* Bacchiocchi, Samuele. &quot;From Sabbath to Sunday: a historical investigation of the rise of Sunday observance in early Christianity&quot; (Pontifical Gregorian University, 1977)
* Cotton, John Paul. &quot;From Sabbath to Sunday: a study in early Christianity&quot; (1933)
* Kraft, Robert A. &quot;Some Notes on Sabbath Observance in Early Christianity.&quot; &quot;Andrews University Seminary Studies&quot; (1965) 3: 18–33. online
* Land, Gary. &quot;Historical Dictionary of the Seventh-day Adventists&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2014)
* González, Justo. &quot;A Brief History of Sunday: From the New Testament to the New Creation&quot; (Eerdmans, 2017)

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="0" end="6" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="81" end="84" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23387" start="92" end="96" title="week" label="week"/>
<link wikidata="Q131" start="105" end="113" title="Saturday" label="Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q105" start="118" end="124" title="Monday" label="Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116511" start="138" end="149" title="Christian sabbath" label="day of rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="158" end="175" title="Western countries" label="Western countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="194" end="201" title="Workweek and weekend" label="weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="211" end="225" title="Middle East" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="347" end="362" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="413" end="426" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="428" end="434" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="436" end="441" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="466" end="479" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="535" end="551" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islamic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="553" end="568" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="664" end="680" title="Quaker Christian" label="Quaker Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705896" start="745" end="768" title="testimony of simplicity" label="testimony of simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="774" end="820" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="821" end="829" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="849" end="860" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068914" start="985" end="1006" title="Hellenistic astrology" label="Hellenistic astrology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1018" end="1031" title="Planet#Greco-Roman astronomy" label="seven planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1353" end="1358" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="1431" end="1447" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q179674" start="1578" end="1586" title="Teutons" label="Teutonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="1587" end="1594" title="deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1795" end="1806" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="1916" end="1934" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="1946" end="1957" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="1981" end="1990" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="2014" end="2026" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2085" end="2100" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2165" end="2174" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="2328" end="2351" title="Interpretatio graeca" label="Germanic interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2444" end="2457" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="2514" end="2530" title="Languages of India" label="Indian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="2720" end="2725" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q740253" start="2791" end="2799" title="Jyotisha" label="Jyotisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130398" start="2875" end="2894" title="Thai solar calendar" label="Thai solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="2998" end="3014" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3559" end="3571" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452524" start="3793" end="3799" title="Kyrios" label="Kyrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="3873" end="3905" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="the resurrection of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="3912" end="3931" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day" label="The Lord&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3961" end="3978" title="Romance Languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="4779" end="4787" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5671" end="5681" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378119" start="6143" end="6150" title="chữ Hán" label="chữ Hán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="6170" end="6185" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="6230" end="6237" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q656388" start="6247" end="6257" title="Catholic Church in Vietnam" label="the church"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="6362" end="6365" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q12552047" start="6369" end="6373" title="Lord" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="6879" end="6895" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="7015" end="7024" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="7134" end="7142" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="7359" end="7375" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069489" start="7388" end="7401" title="Siculo-Arabic" label="Siculo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="7710" end="7718" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="8218" end="8230" title="Apostle John" label="Apostle John"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="8518" end="8526" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q180311" start="8545" end="8561" title="Persian calendar" label="Persian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066849" start="8860" end="8874" title="Nundinae" label="nundinal cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="8910" end="8918" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="8983" end="8994" title="the gospels" label="the gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254109" start="9000" end="9047" title="Women at the tomb" label="women are described as coming to the empty tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="9195" end="9208" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="9417" end="9430" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q774892" start="9702" end="9717" title="Chronography of 354" label="Calendar of 354"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264941" start="9763" end="9782" title="Council of Laodicea" label="Council of Laodicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="9812" end="9818" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="9819" end="9826" title="Sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431688" start="10186" end="10207" title="First-day Sabbatarian" label="First-day Sabbatarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="10238" end="10247" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="10249" end="10256" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="10261" end="10269" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="10271" end="10283" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="10288" end="10305" title="Congregationalism" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="10341" end="10348" title="sabbath" label="sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="10415" end="10428" title="Sunday School" label="Sunday School"/>
<link wikidata="Q906066" start="10432" end="10450" title="Church service" label="service of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11036" end="11050" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q827135" start="11218" end="11225" title="Vespers" label="Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="11717" end="11740" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380663" start="11763" end="11778" title="Little Entrance" label="Little Entrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14796683" start="11794" end="11809" title="All-Night Vigil" label="All-Night Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963986" start="11852" end="11869" title="Vouchsafe, O Lord" label="Vouchsafe, O Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478421" start="11893" end="11904" title="prokeimenon" label="prokeimenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557385" start="11962" end="11971" title="dismissal (liturgy)" label="dismissal"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="12103" end="12117" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="12121" end="12135" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Divine Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405832" start="12206" end="12228" title="Eucharistic discipline" label="Eucharistic discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="12300" end="12306" title="Easter" label="Pascha"/>
<link wikidata="Q993881" start="12369" end="12381" title="poklon" label="prostrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="13074" end="13081" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="13154" end="13159" title="paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395993" start="13292" end="13316" title="Sabbath in seventh-day churches" label="Seventh-day Sabbatarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395993" start="13334" end="13350" title="Saturday Sabbath" label="Saturday Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="13370" end="13391" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142143" start="13393" end="13412" title="Seventh Day Baptist" label="Seventh Day Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13418" end="13431" title="Church of God (disambiguation)#Sabbatarian Churches of God" label="Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q216952" start="13477" end="13491" title="Messianic Jews" label="Messianic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="13646" end="13659" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="13697" end="13706" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108581862" start="13788" end="13795" title="masbuta" label="masbuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="14109" end="14117" title="blue law" label="blue law"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="15279" end="15283" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047230" start="15739" end="15750" title="Casey Kasem" label="Casey Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="15974" end="15985" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016767" start="15990" end="16006" title="Independent Local Radio" label="commercial radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196539" start="16098" end="16114" title="Radio Luxembourg (English)" label="Radio Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q320851" start="16124" end="16132" title="John Reith, 1st Baron Reith" label="Reithian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="16133" end="16136" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347264" start="16261" end="16276" title="BBC Light Programme" label="Light Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="16520" end="16533" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172230" start="16547" end="16563" title="Call the Midwife" label="Call the Midwife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587491" start="16577" end="16600" title="Lark Rise to Candleford (TV series)" label="Lark Rise to Candleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810368" start="16617" end="16626" title="Heartbeat (UK TV series)" label="Heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="16711" end="16736" title="Dr Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook" label="Dr Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052933" start="16774" end="16791" title="Antiques Roadshow" label="Antiques Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="16827" end="16831" title="BBC One" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247701" start="16853" end="16876" title="Last of the Summer Wine" label="Last of the Summer Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="16955" end="16966" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q233962" start="17097" end="17109" title="Elaine Paige" label="Elaine Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503544" start="17136" end="17163" title="Sunday Night is Music Night" label="Sunday Night is Music Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="17302" end="17316" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q795563" start="17496" end="17511" title="BBC Radio 1Xtra" label="BBC Radio 1Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645282" start="17680" end="17705" title="Sunday morning talk shows" label="political interview shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="17743" end="17764" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839707" start="17857" end="17878" title="Sunday Night Baseball" label="Sunday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="17940" end="17946" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="17951" end="17960" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="18152" end="18169" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="18177" end="18201" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799408" start="18260" end="18283" title="Run to the Playoffs" label="Saturday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="18310" end="18331" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799408" start="18364" end="18387" title="Run to the Playoffs" label="Thursday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="18397" end="18409" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="18440" end="18456" title="College football" label="College football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="18489" end="18509" title="high school football" label="high-school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q988108" start="18586" end="18590" title="Club (organization)" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="18595" end="18609" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="18674" end="18679" title="Rugby football" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q396412" start="18912" end="18933" title="Indian Premier League" label="Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165966" start="19046" end="19086" title="pillarisation" label="religious segregation in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877646" start="19098" end="19114" title="Hoofdklasse" label="amateur football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474955" start="19152" end="19172" title="Protestantism in the Netherlands" label="Protestant Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316656" start="19253" end="19261" title="Catholicism in the Netherlands" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="19379" end="19394" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="19399" end="19406" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="19647" end="19651" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="19804" end="19808" title="Open Championship" label="Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="19933" end="19964" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="19969" end="19991" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="20141" end="20158" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="20163" end="20170" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="20204" end="20234" title="Formula One World Championship" label="Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="20309" end="20315" title="MotoGP" label="MotoGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q379881" start="20610" end="20623" title="Advent Sunday" label="Advent Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q410411" start="20626" end="20638" title="Black Sunday (disambiguation)" label="Black Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q207362" start="20641" end="20654" title="Bloody Sunday (disambiguation)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142395" start="20657" end="20668" title="Cold Sunday" label="Cold Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="20671" end="20684" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336094" start="20725" end="20739" title="Gaudete Sunday" label="Gaudete Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="20763" end="20769" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q747869" start="20773" end="20786" title="Gloomy Sunday" label="Gloomy Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256289" start="20789" end="20809" title="Fourth Sunday of Easter" label="Good Shepherd Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q153308" start="20844" end="20858" title="Laetare Sunday" label="Laetare Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="20883" end="20887" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438705" start="20891" end="20901" title="Octave of Easter" label="Low Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703716" start="21036" end="21055" title="Divine Mercy Sunday" label="Divine Mercy Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033651" start="21059" end="21073" title="Passion Sunday" label="Passion Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="21095" end="21099" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402875" start="21120" end="21131" title="Passiontide" label="Passiontide"/>
<link wikidata="Q42236" start="21340" end="21351" title="Palm Sunday" label="Palm Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980761" start="21383" end="21399" title="Selection Sunday" label="Selection Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415772" start="21402" end="21414" title="Septuagesima" label="Septuagesima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485636" start="21416" end="21426" title="Sexagesima" label="Sexagesima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085192" start="21431" end="21444" title="Quinquagesima" label="Quinquagesima"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="21486" end="21490" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="21969" end="21977" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="22031" end="22038" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="22102" end="22114" title="Karaite Jews" label="Karaite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617525" start="22146" end="22160" title="Stir-up Sunday" label="Stir-up Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="22187" end="22193" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="22197" end="22214" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q541946" start="22217" end="22231" title="Trinity Sunday" label="Trinity Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="22258" end="22267" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="22271" end="22278" title="Whitsun" label="Whitsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="22321" end="22330" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659905" start="22372" end="22393" title="A Sunday Kind of Love" label="A Sunday Kind of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097191" start="22436" end="22452" title="Claude Thornhill" label="Claude Thornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q62024001" start="22456" end="22470" title="Sunday Morning (The Velvet Underground song)" label="Sunday Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="22508" end="22530" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609082" start="22534" end="22548" title="Sunday Morning (Maroon 5 song)" label="Sunday Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q182223" start="22590" end="22598" title="Maroon 5" label="Maroon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q87819915" start="22602" end="22613" title="Sunday Best (Surfaces song)" label="Sunday Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="22641" end="22652" title="Electropop" label="electro-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q76330429" start="22657" end="22665" title="Surfaces (band)" label="Surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690560" start="22682" end="22709" title="After Saturday Comes Sunday" label="After Saturday Comes Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q451143" start="22713" end="22726" title="Kyriaki (martyr)" label="Saint Kyriakē"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="22729" end="22741" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209509" start="22744" end="22760" title="Sunday Christian" label="Sunday Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687955" start="22763" end="22786" title="Sunday (computer virus)" label="Sunday (computer virus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639616" start="22789" end="22811" title="Sunday league football" label="Sunday league football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850311" start="22814" end="22826" title="Sunday roast" label="Sunday roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q126923334" start="22829" end="22843" title="Sunday scaries" label="Sunday scaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253380" start="22846" end="22861" title="Sunday shopping" label="Sunday shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341884" start="22887" end="22906" title="Robert Barnhart" label="Barnhart, Robert K."/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="22973" end="22986" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54408" wikidata="Q103767" url="?curid=54408" title="Charlie Parker">
<text>Charles Parker Jr. (August 29, 1920 – March 12, 1955), nicknamed &quot;Bird&quot; or &quot;Yardbird&quot;, was an American jazz saxophonist, bandleader, and composer. Parker was a highly influential soloist and leading figure in the development of bebop, a form of jazz characterized by fast tempos, virtuosic technique, and advanced harmonies. He was a virtuoso and introduced revolutionary rhythmic and harmonic ideas into jazz, including rapid passing chords, new variants of altered chords, and chord substitutions. Parker was primarily a player of the alto saxophone.

Parker was an icon for the hipster subculture and later the Beat Generation, personifying the jazz musician as an uncompromising artist and intellectual rather than just an entertainer.

==Early life==
Charles Parker Jr. was born in Kansas City, Kansas, to Charles Parker Sr. and Adelaide &quot;Addie&quot; Bailey, who was of mixed Choctaw and African-American background. He was raised in Kansas City, Missouri, near Westport Road. His father, a Pullman waiter and chef on the railways, was often required to travel for work, but provided some musical influence because he was a pianist, dancer, and singer on the Theatre Owners Booking Association circuit. Parker&#x27;s mother worked nights at the local Western Union office during the 1920s.

Parker first went to a Catholic school and sang in its choir, but his parents separated in 1930 due to his father&#x27;s alcoholism and the effects of the Great Depression. By the time he was in high school, Parker, his older half-brother John, and his mother Addie were living near 15th Street and Olive Street and she was working as a cleaner in order to afford housing. 

Parker began playing the saxophone at age 11, and at age 14 he joined the Lincoln High School band where he studied under bandmaster Alonzo Lewis. His mother purchased a new alto saxophone around the same time. Parker&#x27;s biggest influence in his early teens was a young trombone player named Robert Simpson, who taught him the basics of improvisation.

Parker withdrew from high school in December 1935, joined the local musicians&#x27; union, and decided to pursue his musical career full-time.

== Career ==

=== 1936–1938: Jam sessions and woodshedding ===
Upon leaving high school, Parker began to play with local bands in jazz clubs around Kansas City and often ambitiously took part in jam sessions with more experienced musicians. In early 1936, at one such jam session with the Count Basie Orchestra, he lost track of the chord changes while improvising. This prompted Jo Jones to contemptuously remove a cymbal from his drum kit and throw it at his feet as a signal to leave the stage.
Rather than becoming discouraged, Parker vowed to practice harder. He mastered improvisation and, according to his comments in an interview with Paul Desmond, spent the next three to four years practicing up to 15 hours a day. Parker proposed to Rebecca Ruffin, his girlfriend four years his senior, and the two were married on July 25, 1936. They had two children together before divorcing in 1939, in large part due to his growing drug addiction.

In late 1936, Parker and a Kansas City band traveled to the Ozarks for the opening of Musser&#x27;s Resort south of Eldon, Missouri. Along the way, the caravan of musicians had a car accident and Parker broke three ribs and fractured his spine. Despite his near-death experience on the way to the Ozarks in 1936, Parker returned to the area in the summer of 1937, where he spent a great deal of time woodshedding and developing his sound. Working with two musicians on chordal instruments, a pianist and guitarist respectively, he was able to practice improvising over chord changes and began to develop the ability to solo fluently across chords and scales.

In 1938, Parker joined pianist Jay McShann&#x27;s territory band. His first gig with the band was during the summer or early fall at the Continental Club in Kansas City, where Parker worked as a substitute alto saxophonist for Edward &quot;Popeye&quot; Hale. In December, he joined Harlan Leonard&#x27;s Rockets; the band played at dances including a Christmas dance for which Parker was listed in a local newspaper as one of the Rockets&#x27; personnel.

=== 1939–1944: Development of bebop ===
In 1939, Parker moved to New York City to pursue his musical career but worked part-time jobs to make a living. Among the more musically significant of these jobs was as a dishwasher for nine dollars a week at Jimmie&#x27;s Chicken Shack, where pianist Art Tatum performed. Struggling with poverty, Parker went to the home of fellow alto saxophone player, Buster Smith, to ask for help. Smith allowed Parker to live in his apartment for six months and gave him gigs in his band. Parker&#x27;s playing at these gigs impressed several New York musicians including pianist and bandleader Earl Hines.

While living in New York, Parker achieved his musical breakthrough, developing a new improvisational vocabulary which later came to be known as &quot;bebop&quot;. Playing &quot;Cherokee&quot; in a practice session with guitarist William &quot;Biddy&quot; Fleet, he realized that the 12 semitones of the chromatic scale can lead melodically to any key, breaking some of the confines of simpler jazz soloing. Parker recalled: &quot;I&#x27;d been getting bored with the stereotyped changes that were being used all the time at the time, and I kept thinking there&#x27;s bound to be something else. I could hear it sometimes but I couldn&#x27;t play it ... Well, that night I was working over &#x27;Cherokee&#x27; and, as I did, I found that by using the higher intervals of a chord as a melody line and backing them with appropriately related changes, I could play the thing I&#x27;d been hearing. I came alive.&quot;

In 1940, he returned to Kansas City to perform with Jay McShann and to attend the funeral of his father, Charles Sr. The younger Parker then spent the summer in McShann&#x27;s band playing at Fairyland Park for all-white audiences; trumpet player Bernard Anderson introduced him to Dizzy Gillespie. The band also toured nightclubs and other venues of the southwest, as well as Chicago and New York City, and Parker made his professional recording debut with McShann&#x27;s band that year. When in New York, to experiment with his new musical ideas that went beyond the bounds of McShann&#x27;s group, Parker joined a group of young musicians who played in after-hours clubs in Harlem venues including Clark Monroe&#x27;s Uptown House. Fellow musicians at the venues included developing beboppers Gillespie, pianist Thelonious Monk, guitarist Charlie Christian, and drummer Kenny Clarke. A pianist and one of the pioneers of bebop, Mary Lou Williams, offered a further explanation that the after-hours sessions were an opportunity &quot;to challenge the practice of downtown musicians coming uptown and &#x27;stealing&#x27; the music.&quot; 

Parker left McShann&#x27;s band in 1942 and played for one year with Hines, whose band also included Gillespie. However, this band&#x27;s performances and therefore Parker&#x27;s role in them are virtually undocumented due to the strike of 1942–1944 by the American Federation of Musicians, during which time few professional recordings were made. In fact, much of bebop&#x27;s critical early development was not captured for posterity due to the ban and the new genre gained limited radio exposure as a result. The few recordings in which Parker participated in 1943 took place in Chicago and included a jam session recording with Gillespie and bassist Oscar Pettiford, another session with Billy Eckstine playing trumpet, some informally recorded practice sessions, and a duo with pianist Hazel Scott. Parker&#x27;s time with Hines&#x27; band and his traveling between New York and Chicago enabled him to model his style on, according to his own words, a &quot;combination of the Midwestern beat and the fast New York tempos.&quot; Parker began writing compositions thanks to his growing friendship with Gillespie, who began notating Parker&#x27;s solos as melodies. Among these early Parker compositions were &quot;Koko&quot;, &quot;Anthropology&quot;, and &quot;Confirmation&quot;. 

Parker left Hines&#x27; band and formed a small group with Gillespie, pianist Al Haig, bassist Curley Russell, and drummer Stan Levey. The group stood out from its contemporaries, as it was racially integrated and it lacked a guitarist for rhythmic support. This new format enabled soloists to be freed from harmonic and rhythmic restrictions, and in late 1944 the group secured a gig at the Three Deuces club in New York. The group&#x27;s name recognition spread along 52nd Street and its style was dubbed &quot;bebop&quot; for the first time. Musicians at other clubs came to hear bebop and reacted negatively to it because, according to bassist Charles Mingus, they saw it as a threat to their existing style of jazz.

=== 1945–1953: Solo career ===
It was not until 1945, after the AFM&#x27;s recording ban was lifted, that Parker&#x27;s collaborations with Dizzy Gillespie, Max Roach and others had a substantial effect on the jazz world. One of their first small-group performances together was rediscovered in 2004 and released in 2005: a concert in New York&#x27;s Town Hall on June 22, 1945. Bebop soon gained wider appeal among musicians and fans.

On November 26, 1945, Parker led a record date for Savoy Records, marketed as the &quot;greatest Jazz session ever&quot;. Recording as Charlie Parker&#x27;s Reboppers, Parker enlisted sidemen Gillespie and Miles Davis on trumpet, Curley Russell on bass and Max Roach on drums. The tracks recorded during this session include &quot;Ko-Ko&quot;, &quot;Billie&#x27;s Bounce&quot;, and &quot;Now&#x27;s the Time&quot;.

In December 1945, the Parker band traveled to an unsuccessful engagement at Billy Berg&#x27;s club in Los Angeles. Most of the group returned to New York, but Parker remained in California, cashing in his return ticket to buy heroin. However, after Parker dedicated one of his compositions to local drug dealer &quot;Moose the Mooche&quot; at a studio session in the spring, the dealer was arrested, and without access to heroin, Parker turned to alcohol addiction. He suffered a physical and mental breakdown after a studio session in July 1946 for Dial Records, and was briefly jailed after setting the bed sheets of his Los Angeles hotel room on fire and then running naked through the lobby while intoxicated, after which he was committed to the Camarillo State Mental Hospital for six months.

When Parker received his discharge from the hospital, he was healthy and free from his drug habit. Before leaving California, he recorded &quot;Relaxin&#x27; at Camarillo,&quot; in reference to his stay in the mental hospital, at one of two successful recording sessions. The first of these sessions took place with a septet while the second paired Parker with pianist Erroll Garner&#x27;s trio and vocalist Earl Coleman. Upon returning to New York in 1947, however, Parker resumed his heroin usage. He recorded dozens of sides for the Savoy and Dial labels, which remain some of the high points of his recorded output. Many of these were with his new quintet, including Davis and Roach. Parker and Davis disagreed on who should be the quintet&#x27;s pianist, with Parker originally hiring Bud Powell for a May 1947 recording session but later favoring Gillespie&#x27;s arranger, John Lewis; Davis preferred Duke Jordan. Ultimately the quintet used both pianists as Parker wanted to balance leadership of the group with mentoring younger musicians such as Davis.

Following the establishment of a regular quintet, Parker signed for Mercury Records with Jazz at the Philharmonic promoter Norman Granz as his producer. The partnership enabled Parker to work with musicians from other genres, such as Latin jazz percussionist and bandleader Machito, and to appear in concerts at Carnegie Hall as part of the Jazz at the Philharmonic series. Further, Granz was able to fulfil a longstanding desire of Parker&#x27;s to perform with a string section. He was a keen student of classical music, and contemporaries reported he was most interested in the music and formal innovations of Igor Stravinsky and longed to engage in a project akin to what later became known as Third Stream, a new kind of music, incorporating both jazz and classical elements as opposed to merely incorporating a string section into performance of jazz standards. On November 30, 1949, Norman Granz arranged for Parker to record an album of ballads with a mixed group of jazz and chamber orchestra musicians. Six master takes from this session became the album &quot;Charlie Parker with Strings&quot;: &quot;Just Friends&quot;, &quot;Everything Happens to Me&quot;, &quot;April in Paris&quot;, &quot;Summertime&quot;, &quot;I Didn&#x27;t Know What Time It Was&quot;, and &quot;If I Should Lose You&quot;.
In 1950, Parker and Gillespie recorded &quot;Bird and Diz&quot;, an album that proved to be among the few times Parker worked with bebop pianist Thelonious Monk; the music was released in 1952. Meanwhile, Parker&#x27;s regular group maintained popular success with a European tour in 1950 and live gigs at New York nightclubs continued, leading to live albums &quot;One Night in Birdland&quot; (with Fats Navarro and Powell) and &quot;Summit Meeting at Birdland&quot; (with Gillespie and Powell). However, Parker became frustrated and disillusioned that, due to racial discrimination, he was reaching the limits of what he would be able to achieve in his career.

In 1953, Parker performed at Massey Hall in Toronto, joined by Gillespie, Mingus, Powell, and Roach. The concert happened at the same time as a televised heavyweight boxing match between Rocky Marciano and Jersey Joe Walcott, so the musical event was poorly attended. Mingus recorded the concert, which resulted in the album &quot;Jazz at Massey Hall&quot;. At this concert, Parker played a plastic Grafton saxophone.

Other live, and often bootleg, recordings of Parker were made in the early 1950s, frequently with groups other than his usual quintet. Among the most notable of these recordings, particularly from the perspective of critics, were &quot;Charlie Parker in Sweden&quot; (recorded during his 1950 Sweden tour), &quot;Bird at St. Nick&#x27;s&quot; (with Red Rodney), &quot;Inglewood Jam&quot; (recorded in 1952 with Chet Baker), &quot;Live at Rockland Palace&quot; (recorded live with his quintet and string accompaniment), &quot;Charlie Parker at Storyville&quot; (with Herb Pomeroy and Red Garland), and &quot;The Washington Concerts&quot; (recorded unrehearsed in 1953 with a big band).

=== 1954–1955: Illness and death ===

Since 1950, Parker had been living in New York City with his common-law wife, Chan Berg, the mother of his son, Baird (1952–2014), and his daughter, Pree (who died at age 3). He considered Chan his wife, although he never married her; nor did he divorce his previous wife, Doris, whom he had married in 1948.

The death of Parker&#x27;s daughter Pree from pneumonia in 1954 devastated him and, after being fired from Birdland in September of that year, he attempted to commit suicide. He was hospitalized and made a partial recovery by early 1955 before his health declined again in March. Parker&#x27;s last gig on March 4 at Birdland ended when Powell refused to play in his group and the performance spiraled into an argument among the musicians. Parker became drunk and a few days later visited the suite of Baroness Pannonica at the Stanhope Hotel in New York City in ill health. He refused to go to hospital and died on March 12, 1955 while watching The Dorsey Brothers&#x27; &quot;Stage Show&quot; on television. The official causes of death were lobar pneumonia and a bleeding ulcer, but Parker also had advanced cirrhosis and had suffered a heart attack and a seizure. The coroner who performed his autopsy mistakenly estimated Parker&#x27;s 34-year-old body to be between 50 and 60 years of age.

The details surrounding Parker&#x27;s death were controversial. Doris Parker claimed that she, Parker&#x27;s mother, and Art Blakey were aware of Parker&#x27;s death before March 14, when Pannonica claimed she first revealed the news on a phone call to Chan. Pannonica, however, visited a nightclub on March 13, the day after Parker died at her apartment but before she informed Chan of Parker&#x27;s death. Further, newspapers incorrectly reported Parker&#x27;s age as 53 when he died, and Parker&#x27;s tombstone incorrectly claimed that he died on March 23.

Parker&#x27;s marital status complicated the settling of Parker&#x27;s estate and ultimately frustrated his wish to be interred in New York City. Dizzy Gillespie paid for the funeral arrangements, which included a Harlem procession officiated by Congressman and Reverend Adam Clayton Powell Jr. at the Abyssinian Baptist Church and a memorial concert. Parker&#x27;s body was flown back to Missouri, in accordance with his mother&#x27;s wishes. Chan criticized Doris and Parker&#x27;s family for giving him a Christian funeral even though they knew he was an atheist. Parker was buried at Lincoln Cemetery in Missouri, in a hamlet known as Blue Summit, located close to I-435 and East Truman Road.

Some amount of controversy continued after Parker&#x27;s burial in the Kansas City area. His tomb was engraved with the image of a tenor saxophone, though Parker is primarily associated with the alto saxophone. Later, some people wanted to move Parker&#x27;s remains to reinforce redevelopment of the historic 18th and Vine area.

==Personal life==
Parker acquired the nickname &quot;Yardbird&quot; early in his career while on the road with Jay McShann. This, and the shortened form &quot;Bird&quot;, were used as nicknames for Parker for the rest of his life and inspired the titles of a number of Parker&#x27;s compositions, such as &quot;Yardbird Suite&quot;, &quot;Ornithology&quot;, &quot;Bird Gets the Worm&quot;, and &quot;Bird of Paradise&quot;.

Parker&#x27;s life was riddled with mental health problems and an addiction to heroin. Although it is unclear which came first, his addiction to opiates began at the age of 16, when he was injured in a car crash and a doctor prescribed morphine for the pain. The addiction that stemmed from this incident led him to miss performances, and to be considered unreliable. In the jazz scene, heroin use was prevalent and the substance could be acquired with little difficulty.

Although he produced many brilliant recordings during this period, Parker&#x27;s behavior became increasingly erratic. Heroin was difficult to obtain once he moved to California, where the drug was less abundant, so he used alcohol as a substitute. A recording for the Dial label from July 29, 1946, provides evidence of his condition. Before this session, Parker drank a quart of whiskey. According to the liner notes of &quot;Charlie Parker on Dial Volume 1&quot;, Parker missed most of the first two bars of his first chorus on the track &quot;Max Making Wax&quot;. When he finally did come in, he swayed wildly and once spun all the way around, away from his microphone. On the next tune, &quot;Lover Man&quot;, producer Ross Russell physically supported Parker. On &quot;Bebop&quot; (the final track Parker recorded that evening), he begins a solo with a solid first eight bars; on his second eight bars, however, he begins to struggle, and a desperate Howard McGhee, the trumpeter on this session, shouts, &quot;Blow!&quot; at him. Charles Mingus considered this version of &quot;Lover Man&quot; to be among Parker&#x27;s greatest recordings, despite its flaws. Nevertheless, Parker hated the recording and never forgave Ross Russell for releasing it. He re-recorded the tune in 1951 for Verve. Parker&#x27;s life took a turn for the worse in March 1954 when his three-year-old daughter Pree died of cystic fibrosis and pneumonia. He attempted suicide twice in 1954, which once again landed him in a mental hospital.

==Artistry==
Parker&#x27;s style of composition involved interpolation of original melodies over existing jazz forms and standards, a practice known as contrafact and still common in jazz today. Examples include &quot;Ornithology&quot; (which borrows the chord progression of jazz standard &quot;How High the Moon&quot; and is said to be co-written with trumpet player Little Benny Harris), and &quot;Moose The Mooche&quot; (one of many Parker compositions based on the chord progression of &quot;I Got Rhythm&quot;). The practice was not uncommon prior to bebop, but it became a signature of the movement as artists began to move away from arranging popular standards and toward composing their own material. Perhaps Parker&#x27;s most well-known contrafact is &quot;Koko&quot;, which is based on the chord changes of the popular bebop tune &quot;Cherokee&quot;, written by Ray Noble.

While tunes such as &quot;Now&#x27;s The Time&quot;, &quot;Billie&#x27;s Bounce&quot;, &quot;Au Privave&quot;, &quot;Barbados&quot;, &quot;Relaxin&#x27; at Camarillo&quot;, &quot;Bloomdido&quot;, and &quot;Cool Blues&quot; were based on conventional 12-bar blues changes, Parker also created a unique version of the 12-bar blues for tunes such as &quot;Blues for Alice&quot;, &quot;Laird Baird&quot;, and &quot;Si Si.&quot; These unique chords are known popularly as &quot;Bird Changes&quot;. Like his solos, some of his compositions are characterized by long, complex melodic lines and a minimum of repetition, although he did employ the use of repetition in some tunes, most notably &quot;Now&#x27;s The Time&quot;.

Parker contributed greatly to the modern jazz solo, one in which triplets and pick-up notes were used in unorthodox ways to lead into chord tones, affording the soloist more freedom to use passing tones, which soloists previously avoided. His recordings were used for a book of solo transcriptions, the posthumously published &quot;Charlie Parker Omnibook&quot;.

Other well-known Parker compositions include &quot;Ah-Leu-Cha&quot;, &quot;Anthropology&quot; (co-written with Gillespie), &quot;Confirmation&quot;, &quot;Constellation&quot;, &quot;Moose the Mooche&quot;, &quot;Scrapple from the Apple&quot; and &quot;Yardbird Suite&quot;, the vocal version of which is called &quot;What Price Love&quot;, with lyrics by Parker.

Miles Davis once said, &quot;You can tell the history of jazz in four words: Louis Armstrong. Charlie Parker&quot;.

==Discography==
==Recognition==

===Awards===
Grammy Award
Grammy Hall of Fame

Recordings of Charlie Parker were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least twenty-five years old, and that have &quot;qualitative or historical significance&quot;.

Inductions
===Government honors===
In 1995, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 32-cent commemorative postage stamp in Parker&#x27;s honor.

In 2002, the Library of Congress honored his recording &quot;Ko-Ko&quot; (1945) by adding it to the National Recording Registry.

===Charlie Parker residence===

From 1950 to 1954, Parker lived with Chan Berg on the ground floor of the townhouse at 151 Avenue B, across from Tompkins Square Park in Manhattan&#x27;s East Village. The Gothic Revival building, which was built about 1849, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1994 and was designated a New York City landmark in 1999. Avenue B between East 9th and East 10th Streets was given the honorary designation &quot;Charlie Parker Place&quot; in 1992.

===Musical tributes===
* Jack Kerouac&#x27;s spoken poem &quot;Charlie Parker&quot; to backing piano by Steve Allen on &quot;Poetry for the Beat Generation&quot; (1959)
* In 2014, saxophonist and bandleader Aaron Johnson produced historically accurate recreations of the &quot;Charlie Parker with Strings&quot; albums.
* Lennie Tristano&#x27;s overdubbed solo piano piece &quot;Requiem&quot; was recorded in tribute to Parker shortly after his death.
* American composer Moondog wrote his famous &quot;Bird&#x27;s Lament&quot; in his memory; published on the 1969 album &quot;Moondog&quot;.
* Since 1972, the Californian ensemble Supersax harmonized many of Parker&#x27;s improvisations for a five-piece saxophone section.
* In 1973, guitarist Joe Pass released his album &quot;I Remember Charlie Parker&quot; in Parker&#x27;s honor.
* Weather Report&#x27;s jazz fusion track and highly acclaimed big band standard &quot;Birdland&quot;, from the &quot;Heavy Weather&quot; album (1977), was a dedication by bandleader Joe Zawinul to both Charlie Parker and the New York 52nd Street club itself.
* The biographical song &quot;Parker&#x27;s Band&quot; was recorded by Steely Dan on its 1974 album &quot;Pretzel Logic&quot;.
* Avant-garde jazz trombonist George E. Lewis recorded &quot;Homage to Charles Parker&quot; (1979).
* The opera &quot;Charlie Parker&#x27;s Yardbird&quot; by Daniel Schnyder, libretto by Bridgette A. Wimberly, was premiered by Opera Philadelphia on June 5, 2015, with Lawrence Brownlee in the title role.
* The name of British 1960s blues-rock band The Yardbirds was at least partially inspired by Parker&#x27;s nickname.
* Charles Mingus&#x27; song &quot;Reincarnation of a Lovebird&quot;
* In 1993, Anthony Braxton recorded a 2-CD album titled &quot;Charlie Parker Project&quot;, released in 1995. This material was re-released in 2018 as part of an 11-CD set titled &quot;Sextet (Parker) 1993&quot;.

===Other tributes===
* In 1949, the New York night club Birdland was named in his honor. Three years later, George Shearing wrote &quot;Lullaby of Birdland&quot;, named for both Parker and the nightclub.
* The 1957 short story &quot;Sonny&#x27;s Blues&quot; by James Baldwin features a jazz/blues playing virtuoso who names Bird as the &quot;greatest&quot; jazz musician, whose style he hopes to emulate.
* In 1959, Jack Kerouac completed his only full-length poetry work, &quot;Mexico City Blues&quot;, with two poems about Parker&#x27;s importance, writing in those works that Parker&#x27;s contribution to music was comparable to Ludwig van Beethoven&#x27;s.
* The 1959 Beat comedy album &quot;How to Speak Hip&quot;, by comedians Del Close and John Brent, lists the three top most &quot;uncool&quot; actions (both in the audio and in the liner notes) as follows: &quot;It is uncool to claim that you used to room with Bird. It is uncool to claim that you have Bird&#x27;s . It is even less cool to ask &#x27;Who is Bird?&#x27;&quot;
* A memorial to Parker was dedicated in 1999 in Kansas City at 17th Terrace and The Paseo, near the American Jazz Museum located at 18th and Vine, featuring a tall bronze head sculpted by Robert Graham.
* The Charlie Parker Jazz Festival is a free two-day music festival that takes place every summer on the last weekend of August in Manhattan, New York City, at Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem and Tompkins Square Park in the Lower East Side, sponsored by the non-profit organization City Parks Foundation.
* The Annual Charlie Parker Celebration is an annual festival held in Kansas City, Kansas since 2014. It is held for 10 days and celebrates all aspects of Parker, from live jazz music and bootcamps, to tours of his haunts in the city, to exhibits at the American Jazz Museum.
* In the short-story collection &quot;Las armas secretas&quot; (&quot;The Secret Weapons&quot;), Julio Cortázar dedicated &quot;El perseguidor&quot; (&quot;The Pursuer&quot;) to Charlie Parker. This story examines the last days of a drug-addicted saxophonist through the eyes of his biographer.
* In 1981, jazz historian Phil Schaap began to host &quot;Bird Flight&quot;, a radio show on WKCR New York dedicated entirely to Parker&#x27;s music. The program continues to be broadcast on WKCR in 2022.
* In 1984, modern dance choreographer Alvin Ailey created the piece &quot;For Bird – With Love&quot; in honor of Parker. The piece chronicles his life from his early career to his failing health.
* A biographical film called &quot;Bird&quot;, starring Forest Whitaker as Parker and directed by Clint Eastwood, was released in 1988.
* In 1999 the Spanish metal band Saratoga created the song &quot;Charlie se Fue&quot; in honor of Charlie Parker, for the album &quot;Vientos de Guerra&quot;.
* In 2005, the Selmer Paris saxophone manufacturer commissioned a special &quot;Tribute to Bird&quot; alto saxophone, commemorating the 50th anniversary of Parker&#x27;s death (1955–2005).
* Parker&#x27;s performances of &quot;I Remember You&quot; (recorded for Clef Records in 1953, with the Charlie Parker Quartet, comprising Parker on alto sax, Al Haig on piano, Percy Heath on bass, and Max Roach on drums) and &quot;Parker&#x27;s Mood&quot; (recorded for the Savoy label in 1948, with Parker on alto sax, John Lewis on piano, Curley Russell on bass, and Max Roach on drums) were selected by literary critic Harold Bloom for inclusion on his shortlist of the &quot;twentieth-century American Sublime&quot;, the greatest works of American art produced in the 20th century. A vocalese version of &quot;Parker&#x27;s Mood&quot; was a popular success for King Pleasure.
* Jean-Michel Basquiat created many paintings to honor Charlie Parker, including &quot;Charles the First&quot;, &quot;CPRKR&quot;, &quot;Bird on Money&quot;, &quot;Bird of Paradise &quot;, and &quot;Discography I&quot;.
* Charlie Watts, drummer for the Rolling Stones, wrote a children&#x27;s book entitled &quot;Ode to a High Flying Bird&quot; as a tribute to Parker. Watts has cited Parker as a large influence on his life when he was a boy learning jazz.
* The 2014 film &quot;Whiplash&quot; repeatedly refers to the 1937 incident at the Reno Club, changing the aim point of the cymbals to his head and pointing to it as evidence that genius is not born but made by relentless practice and pitiless peers.
* Parker is referenced in the 2023 video game &quot;Marvel&#x27;s Spider-Man 2&quot;. In the game, there is a side mission in which Parker&#x27;s Saxophone is stolen and must be recovered by Miles Morales / Spider-Man. Once recovered, a character discusses Parker&#x27;s music, making reference to his song, &quot;Ornithology&quot;, and discussing his impact on jazz and hip hop.
* Parker is mentioned in the comic strip The Far Side and Gary Larson invites his audience to find amusement in what he perceives as Parker&#x27;s disdain for introspective or slow-moving New Age music; implying that the legendary saxophonist would find it &quot;hellishly&quot; insipid.

==Citations==

===References===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Aebersold, Jamey, editor (1978). &quot;Charlie Parker Omnibook&quot;. New York: Michael H. Goldsen.
* Koch, Lawrence (1999). &quot;Yardbird Suite: A Compendium of the Music and Life of Charlie Parker&quot;. Boston, Northeastern University Press. 
* Parker, Chan (1999). &quot;My Life In E-Flat&quot;. University Of South Carolina Press. 
* Woideck, Carl, editor (1998). &quot;The Charlie Parker Companion: Six Decades of Commentary&quot;. New York: Schirmer Books. 
* Yamaguchi, Masaya, editor (1955). &quot;Yardbird Originals&quot;. New York: Charles Colin, reprinted 2005.

==External links==

* The Official Site of Charlie &quot;Yardbird&quot; Parker
* Charlie Parker discography at Discogs
* Charlie Parker discography
* Charlie Parker Sessionography
* Clips and notes about Parker
* Bird Lives – Thinking About Charlie Parker
* Great Lives – Charlie Parker nominated by Ken Clarke</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="0" end="18" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charles Parker Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="71" end="75" title="Charlie Parker" label="Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="91" end="99" title="Charlie Parker" label="Yardbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="123" end="127" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="128" end="139" title="Saxophone" label="saxophonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="248" end="253" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="300" end="309" title="Virtuoso" label="virtuosic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142665" start="447" end="461" title="Passing chord" label="passing chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q207116" start="479" end="493" title="Altered chord" label="altered chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104976" start="499" end="518" title="Chord substitution" label="chord substitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q445275" start="557" end="571" title="alto saxophone" label="alto saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866582" start="601" end="608" title="hipster (1940s subculture)" label="hipster"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="634" end="649" title="Beat Generation" label="Beat Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="807" end="826" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="906" end="913" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="964" end="985" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="1021" end="1028" title="Pullman Company" label="Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q742667" start="1189" end="1223" title="Theatre Owners Booking Association" label="Theatre Owners Booking Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="1281" end="1294" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1476" end="1492" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550559" start="1770" end="1789" title="Lincoln College Preparatory Academy" label="Lincoln High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="1970" end="1978" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="2392" end="2404" title="Jam session" label="jam sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137041" start="2486" end="2507" title="Count Basie Orchestra" label="Count Basie Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q125686" start="2577" end="2585" title="Jo Jones" label="Jo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q332471" start="2840" end="2852" title="Paul Desmond" label="Paul Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="3205" end="3211" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q540257" start="3261" end="3276" title="Eldon, Missouri" label="Eldon, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081235" start="3545" end="3557" title="woodshedding" label="woodshedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684347" start="3836" end="3847" title="Jay McShann" label="Jay McShann"/>
<link wikidata="Q838439" start="3855" end="3869" title="territory band" label="territory band"/>
<link wikidata="Q362528" start="4087" end="4101" title="Harlan Leonard" label="Harlan Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="4156" end="4165" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109053" start="4554" end="4563" title="Art Tatum" label="Art Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017770" start="4657" end="4669" title="Buster Smith" label="Buster Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q354883" start="4886" end="4896" title="Earl Hines" label="Earl Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="5049" end="5054" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070310" start="5076" end="5084" title="Cherokee (Ray Noble song)" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="5202" end="5217" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431013" start="6007" end="6021" title="Fairyland Park" label="Fairyland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897436" start="6062" end="6078" title="Bernard Anderson (trumpeter)" label="Bernard Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="6097" end="6112" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="6192" end="6199" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6204" end="6217" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="6492" end="6498" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095734" start="6516" end="6548" title="Clark Monroe&amp;#x27;s Uptown House" label="Clark Monroe&amp;#x27;s Uptown House"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="6630" end="6645" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q356490" start="6657" end="6674" title="Charlie Christian" label="Charlie Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q346779" start="6688" end="6700" title="Kenny Clarke" label="Kenny Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q126677" start="6746" end="6763" title="Mary Lou Williams" label="Mary Lou Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="6880" end="6888" title="Lower Manhattan" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q310631" start="7183" end="7206" title="1942–1944 musicians&amp;#x27; strike" label="the strike of 1942–1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q975007" start="7214" end="7246" title="American Federation of Musicians" label="American Federation of Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q497183" start="7611" end="7626" title="Oscar Pettiford" label="Oscar Pettiford"/>
<link wikidata="Q545464" start="7649" end="7663" title="Billy Eckstine" label="Billy Eckstine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431656" start="7748" end="7759" title="Hazel Scott" label="Hazel Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q574394" start="8193" end="8205" title="Anthropology (composition)" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160128" start="8223" end="8235" title="Confirmation (composition)" label="Confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174161" start="8323" end="8330" title="Al Haig" label="Al Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q956634" start="8340" end="8354" title="Curley Russell" label="Curley Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q323544" start="8368" end="8378" title="Stan Levey" label="Stan Levey"/>
<link wikidata="Q769100" start="8715" end="8726" title="52nd Street (Manhattan)" label="52nd Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="8893" end="8907" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="9107" end="9122" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q175899" start="9124" end="9133" title="Max Roach" label="Max Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634948" start="9318" end="9327" title="The Town Hall (New York City)" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341612" start="9455" end="9468" title="Savoy Records" label="Savoy Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="9610" end="9621" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956634" start="9634" end="9648" title="Curley Russell" label="Curley Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q175899" start="9661" end="9670" title="Max Roach" label="Max Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816043" start="9735" end="9740" title="Ko-Ko" label="Ko-Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q862860" start="9754" end="9774" title="Billie&amp;#x27;s Bounce" label="Billie&amp;#x27;s Bounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073226" start="9792" end="9811" title="Now&amp;#x27;s the Time (composition)" label="Now&amp;#x27;s the Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912195" start="9896" end="9913" title="Billy Berg&amp;#x27;s" label="Billy Berg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="9922" end="9933" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q922560" start="10137" end="10153" title="Moose the Mooche" label="Moose the Mooche"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="10267" end="10284" title="alcoholism" label="alcohol addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q283077" start="10370" end="10382" title="Dial Records (1946)" label="Dial Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024961" start="10570" end="10601" title="Camarillo State Mental Hospital" label="Camarillo State Mental Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484022" start="10763" end="10789" title="Relaxin&amp;#x27; at Camarillo" label="Relaxin&amp;#x27; at Camarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q433912" start="10988" end="11001" title="Erroll Garner" label="Erroll Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277034" start="11027" end="11039" title="Earl Coleman (singer)" label="Earl Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q283077" start="11165" end="11169" title="Dial Records (1946)" label="Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q312692" start="11409" end="11419" title="Bud Powell" label="Bud Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q353943" start="11499" end="11509" title="John Lewis (pianist)" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264406" start="11527" end="11538" title="Duke Jordan" label="Duke Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="11751" end="11766" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q613153" start="11772" end="11796" title="Jazz at the Philharmonic" label="Jazz at the Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382555" start="11806" end="11818" title="Norman Granz" label="Norman Granz"/>
<link wikidata="Q837389" start="11917" end="11927" title="Latin jazz" label="Latin jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q462983" start="11957" end="11964" title="Machito" label="Machito"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="11995" end="12008" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="12148" end="12162" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="12296" end="12311" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q539089" start="12381" end="12393" title="Third Stream" label="Third Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382555" start="12573" end="12585" title="Norman Granz" label="Norman Granz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="12667" end="12684" title="Orchestra" label="chamber orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066974" start="12754" end="12781" title="Charlie Parker with Strings" label="Charlie Parker with Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316000" start="12795" end="12807" title="Just Friends (1931 song)" label="Just Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418002" start="12821" end="12845" title="Everything Happens to Me (song)" label="Everything Happens to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355132" start="12859" end="12873" title="April in Paris (song)" label="April in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q844046" start="12887" end="12897" title="Summertime (George Gershwin song)" label="Summertime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606678" start="12911" end="12946" title="I Didn&amp;#x27;t Know What Time It Was" label="I Didn&amp;#x27;t Know What Time It Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990520" start="12964" end="12984" title="If I Should Lose You" label="If I Should Lose You"/>
<link wikidata="Q865074" start="13037" end="13049" title="Bird and Diz" label="Bird and Diz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="13137" end="13152" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q124217202" start="13358" end="13379" title="One Night in Birdland" label="One Night in Birdland"/>
<link wikidata="Q711198" start="13392" end="13404" title="Fats Navarro" label="Fats Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q125243459" start="13427" end="13453" title="Summit Meeting at Birdland" label="Summit Meeting at Birdland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122776" start="13685" end="13696" title="Massey Hall" label="Massey Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188362" start="13843" end="13857" title="Rocky Marciano" label="Rocky Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q560461" start="13862" end="13880" title="Jersey Joe Walcott" label="Jersey Joe Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q824981" start="13987" end="14006" title="Jazz at Massey Hall" label="Jazz at Massey Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091071" start="14055" end="14072" title="Grafton saxophone" label="Grafton saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="14097" end="14104" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q576683" start="14388" end="14411" title="Bird at St. Nick&amp;#x27;s" label="Bird at St. Nick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11712507" start="14443" end="14456" title="Inglewood Jam" label="Inglewood Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274" start="14486" end="14496" title="Chet Baker" label="Chet Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q125216992" start="14505" end="14528" title="Live at Rockland Palace" label="Live at Rockland Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412239" start="14641" end="14653" title="Herb Pomeroy" label="Herb Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q706697" start="14658" end="14669" title="Red Garland" label="Red Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q124328556" start="14682" end="14705" title="The Washington Concerts" label="The Washington Concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="14860" end="14875" title="Common-law marriage" label="common-law wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q543776" start="14877" end="14886" title="Chan Parker" label="Chan Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q448459" start="15611" end="15629" title="Pannonica de Koenigswarter" label="Baroness Pannonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q290724" start="15637" end="15651" title="Stanhope Hotel" label="Stanhope Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661714" start="15755" end="15774" title="The Dorsey Brothers" label="The Dorsey Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596813" start="15787" end="15797" title="Stage Show (TV series)" label="Stage Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663548" start="15853" end="15868" title="lobar pneumonia" label="lobar pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956352" start="15875" end="15889" title="perforated ulcer" label="bleeding ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="15920" end="15929" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311715" start="16227" end="16237" title="Art Blakey" label="Art Blakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="16814" end="16829" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050018" start="16939" end="16962" title="Adam Clayton Powell Jr." label="Adam Clayton Powell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="17226" end="17233" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471750" start="17307" end="17318" title="Blue Summit, Missouri" label="Blue Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684347" start="17808" end="17819" title="Jay McShann" label="Jay McShann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353511" start="18008" end="18022" title="Yardbird Suite" label="Yardbird Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031297" start="18036" end="18047" title="Ornithology (composition)" label="Ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="18201" end="18207" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q283077" start="18864" end="18868" title="Dial Records (1946)" label="Dial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19023" end="19054" title="Charlie Parker on Dial#Volume 1" label="Charlie Parker on Dial Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q387590" start="19294" end="19303" title="Lover Man (Oh, Where Can You Be?)" label="Lover Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167623" start="19320" end="19332" title="Ross Russell (jazz)" label="Ross Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q326659" start="19553" end="19566" title="Howard McGhee" label="Howard McGhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="19633" end="19647" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="19889" end="19894" title="Verve Records" label="Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="20001" end="20016" title="cystic fibrosis" label="cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="20021" end="20030" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668127" start="20176" end="20189" title="Interpolation (popular music)" label="interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23817390" start="20271" end="20281" title="contrafact" label="contrafact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031297" start="20337" end="20348" title="Ornithology (composition)" label="Ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631676" start="20415" end="20432" title="How High the Moon" label="How High the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q922560" start="20520" end="20536" title="Moose the Mooche" label="Moose The Mooche"/>
<link wikidata="Q60926" start="20616" end="20628" title="I Got Rhythm" label="I Got Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q862860" start="21065" end="21085" title="Billie&amp;#x27;s Bounce" label="Billie&amp;#x27;s Bounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818960" start="21099" end="21109" title="Au Privave" label="Au Privave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858586" start="21117" end="21137" title="Barbados (composition)" label="&amp;quot;Barbados&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928193" start="21185" end="21194" title="Bloomdido" label="Bloomdido"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089987" start="21256" end="21268" title="12-bar blues" label="12-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930502" start="21359" end="21374" title="Blues for Alice" label="Blues for Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915925" start="21479" end="21491" title="Bird Changes" label="Bird Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073226" start="21691" end="21723" title="Now&amp;#x27;s the Time (composition)" label="&amp;quot;Now&amp;#x27;s The Time&amp;quot;."/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="21759" end="21770" title="Bebop" label="modern jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092296" start="21790" end="21798" title="Tuplet" label="triplets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21803" end="21816" title="Anacrusis#Music" label="pick-up notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344470" start="21914" end="21926" title="passing tone" label="passing tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085353" start="22057" end="22080" title="Charlie Parker Omnibook" label="Charlie Parker Omnibook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694845" start="22140" end="22150" title="Ah-Leu-Cha" label="Ah-Leu-Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q574394" start="22158" end="22182" title="Anthropology (composition)" label="&amp;quot;Anthropology&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160128" start="22212" end="22236" title="Confirmation (composition)" label="&amp;quot;Confirmation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163915" start="22238" end="22263" title="Constellation (composition)" label="&amp;quot;Constellation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q922560" start="22271" end="22287" title="Moose the Mooche" label="Moose the Mooche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953033" start="22301" end="22324" title="Scrapple from the Apple" label="Scrapple from the Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353511" start="22341" end="22355" title="Yardbird Suite" label="Yardbird Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="22453" end="22464" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="22530" end="22545" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="22702" end="22721" title="Grammy Hall of Fame Award" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="22951" end="22970" title="U.S. Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="23054" end="23073" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816043" start="23102" end="23107" title="Ko-Ko" label="Ko-Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="23141" end="23168" title="List of recordings preserved in the United States National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310674" start="23316" end="23336" title="Tompkins Square Park" label="Tompkins Square Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="23357" end="23369" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="23375" end="23389" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="23445" end="23481" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591917" start="23511" end="23533" title="List of New York City Landmarks" label="New York City landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="23694" end="23706" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="23773" end="23784" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207523" start="23794" end="23824" title="Poetry for the Beat Generation" label="Poetry for the Beat Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106844175" start="23876" end="23889" title="Aaron M. Johnson" label="Aaron Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q586994" start="23990" end="24005" title="Lennie Tristano" label="Lennie Tristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q134864" start="24140" end="24147" title="Moondog" label="Moondog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907703" start="24245" end="24252" title="Moondog (1969 album)" label="Moondog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368031" start="24299" end="24307" title="Supersax" label="Supersax"/>
<link wikidata="Q320883" start="24413" end="24421" title="Joe Pass" label="Joe Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978785" start="24447" end="24472" title="I Remember Charlie Parker" label="I Remember Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120697" start="24505" end="24519" title="Weather Report" label="Weather Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q784489" start="24590" end="24598" title="Birdland (Weather Report song)" label="Birdland"/>
<link wikidata="Q786023" start="24621" end="24634" title="Heavy Weather (album)" label="Heavy Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q44767" start="24686" end="24697" title="Joe Zawinul" label="Joe Zawinul"/>
<link wikidata="Q852435" start="24834" end="24844" title="Steely Dan" label="Steely Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065716" start="24869" end="24882" title="Pretzel Logic" label="Pretzel Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507760" start="24920" end="24935" title="George E. Lewis" label="George E. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82791826" start="25008" end="25038" title="Charlie Parker&amp;#x27;s Yardbird" label="Charlie Parker&amp;#x27;s Yardbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162582" start="25048" end="25063" title="Daniel Schnyder" label="Daniel Schnyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="25065" end="25073" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378854" start="25117" end="25135" title="Opera Philadelphia" label="Opera Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915352" start="25158" end="25175" title="Lawrence Brownlee" label="Lawrence Brownlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="25239" end="25252" title="The Yardbirds" label="The Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="25314" end="25328" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572924" start="25391" end="25406" title="Anthony Braxton" label="Anthony Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643685" start="25442" end="25464" title="Anthony Braxton&amp;#x27;s Charlie Parker Project 1993" label="Charlie Parker Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q256347" start="25650" end="25658" title="Birdland (jazz club)" label="Birdland"/>
<link wikidata="Q349346" start="25702" end="25717" title="George Shearing" label="George Shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434051" start="25730" end="25749" title="Lullaby of Birdland" label="Lullaby of Birdland"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="25855" end="25868" title="James Baldwin" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978135" start="26073" end="26090" title="Mexico City Blues" label="Mexico City Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="26227" end="26247" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918742" start="26291" end="26307" title="How to Speak Hip" label="How to Speak Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883424" start="26328" end="26337" title="Del Close" label="Del Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011161" start="26342" end="26352" title="John Brent (comedian)" label="John Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686162" start="26731" end="26751" title="American Jazz Museum" label="American Jazz Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q726136" start="26819" end="26832" title="Robert Graham (sculptor)" label="Robert Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123358" start="26840" end="26868" title="Charlie Parker Jazz Festival" label="Charlie Parker Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585658" start="26994" end="27012" title="Marcus Garvey Park" label="Marcus Garvey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310674" start="27027" end="27047" title="Tompkins Square Park" label="Tompkins Square Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123358" start="27113" end="27134" title="City Parks Foundation" label="City Parks Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641751" start="27142" end="27175" title="Annual Charlie Parker Celebration" label="Annual Charlie Parker Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q174210" start="27509" end="27523" title="Julio Cortázar" label="Julio Cortázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182386" start="27733" end="27744" title="Phil Schaap" label="Phil Schaap"/>
<link wikidata="Q449037" start="27950" end="27961" title="Alvin Ailey" label="Alvin Ailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q865056" start="28143" end="28147" title="Bird (1988 film)" label="Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q182763" start="28164" end="28179" title="Forest Whitaker" label="Forest Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="28206" end="28220" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224607" start="28277" end="28285" title="Saratoga (band)" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850648" start="28418" end="28424" title="Henri Selmer Paris" label="Selmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099663" start="28665" end="28677" title="Clef Records" label="Clef Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q174161" start="28751" end="28758" title="Al Haig" label="Al Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q981283" start="28769" end="28780" title="Percy Heath" label="Percy Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q98687911" start="28824" end="28842" title="Parker&amp;#x27;s Mood" label="Parker&amp;#x27;s Mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q353943" start="28913" end="28923" title="John Lewis (pianist)" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956634" start="28934" end="28948" title="Curley Russell" label="Curley Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="29015" end="29027" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742068" start="29258" end="29271" title="King Pleasure" label="King Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q155407" start="29275" end="29295" title="Jean-Michel Basquiat" label="Jean-Michel Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105323437" start="29360" end="29377" title="Charles the First (1982 painting)" label="Charles the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008127" start="29410" end="29423" title="Bird on Money" label="Bird on Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q216051" start="29495" end="29508" title="Charlie Watts" label="Charlie Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="29522" end="29540" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15648198" start="29753" end="29761" title="Whiplash (2014 film)" label="Whiplash"/>
<link wikidata="Q108479502" start="30034" end="30060" title="Marvel&amp;#x27;s Spider-Man 2" label="Marvel&amp;#x27;s Spider-Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30173" end="30199" title="Alternative versions of Spider-Man #Insomniac&amp;#x27;s Miles Morales" label="Miles Morales / Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306037" start="30403" end="30415" title="The Far Side" label="The Far Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="30550" end="30557" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681364" start="30738" end="30754" title="Jamey Aebersold" label="Aebersold, Jamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085353" start="30777" end="30800" title="Charlie Parker Omnibook" label="Charlie Parker Omnibook"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="31425" end="31432" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54409" wikidata="Q1684430" url="?curid=54409" title="Jazz band">
<text>A jazz band (jazz ensemble or jazz combo) is a musical ensemble that plays jazz music. Jazz bands vary in the quantity of its members and the style of jazz that they play but it is common to find a jazz band made up of a rhythm section and a horn section.

The size of a jazz band is closely related to the style of jazz they play as well as the type of venues in which they play. Smaller jazz bands, also known as &quot;combos&quot;, are common in night clubs and other small venues and will be made up of three to seven musicians; whereas big bands are found in dance halls and other larger venues.

Jazz bands can vary in size from a big band, to a smaller trio or quartet. Some bands use vocalists, while others are purely instrumental groups.

Jazz bands and their composition have changed many times throughout the years, just as the music itself changes with personal interpretation and improvisation of its performers.

==Ensemble types==
===Combos===
It is common for musicians in a combo to perform their music from memory. The improvisational nature of these performances make every show unique.

==Instrumentation==
The rhythm section consists of the percussion, double bass or bass guitar, and usually at least one instrument capable of playing chords, such as a piano, guitar, Hammond organ or vibraphone; most will usually have more than one of these. The standard rhythm section is piano, bass, and drums.

The horn section consists of a woodwind section and a brass section, which play the melody.

===Rhythm section===

====Banjo====

The banjo has been used in jazz since the earliest jazz bands. The earliest use of the banjo in a jazz band was by Frank Duson in 1917, however Laurence Marrero claims it became popular in 1915.

There are three common types of banjo, the plectrum banjo, tenor banjo, and cello banjo. Over time, the four-stringed tenor banjo became the most common banjo used in jazz. The drum-like sound box on the banjo made it louder than the acoustic guitars that were common with early jazz bands, and banjos were popular for recording.

====Bass====

Beginning in the early 1950s, some jazz bass players began to use the electric bass guitar in place of the double bass.

====Drums====
Jazz drumming is the art of playing percussion, usually the drum set, in jazz styles ranging from 1910s-style Dixieland jazz to 1970s-era jazz-rock fusion and 1980s-era Latin jazz. Stylistically, this aspect of performance was shaped by its starting place, New Orleans, as well as numerous other regions of the world, including other parts of the United States, the Caribbean, and Africa.

Jazz required a method of playing percussion different from traditional European styles, one that was easily adaptable to the different rhythms of the new genre, fostering the creation of jazz drumming&#x27;s hybrid technique.

===Woodwind section===

====Clarinet====
The clarinet is a woodwind instrument with a single-reed mouthpiece. A clarinet player is known as a clarinetist. Originally, the clarinet was a central instrument in jazz, beginning with the New Orleans players in the 1910s. It remained a signature instrument of jazz through much of the big band era into the 1940s. Larry Shields was the clarinetist for the Original Dixieland Jazz Band, the first jazz band to record commercially in 1917. The American players Ted Lewis and Jimmie Noone were pioneers of the instrument in jazz bands. The B soprano clarinet was the most common instrument, but a few early jazz musicians such as Alcide Nunez preferred the C soprano clarinet, and many New Orleans jazz brass bands have used an E soprano clarinet. 
Swing clarinetists such as Benny Goodman, Artie Shaw, and Woody Herman led successful big bands and smaller groups from the 1930s onward.

With the decline of the big bands&#x27; popularity in the late 1940s, the clarinet faded from its prominent position in jazz and the saxophone rose in importance in many jazz bands, probably because it uses a less complicated fingering system. But the clarinet did not entirely disappear. In the late 50s, traditional jazz experienced a revival, with the notable example of clarinetist Acker Bilk&#x27;s Bristol Paramount Jazz Band. Some of the works of Bilk&#x27;s jazz band reached the pop charts.

====Saxophone section====
In the saxophone section, all of the saxophones will play a similar melodic line, but the baritone sax doubles by occasionally joining in with the bass trombone and bass to play the bass line. A big band saxophone section typically consists of two alto saxophones, two tenor saxophones, and one baritone saxophone.

===String section===
====Violin====
Jazz violin is the use of the violin or electric violin to improvise solo lines. Although the violin has been used in jazz recordings since the first decades of the 20th century, it is more commonly associated with folk music than jazz. Jazz musician Milt Hinton claimed that the decline in violin players coincided with the introduction of sound movies, as many violin players were used as accompaniment for silent films.

===Vocalists===

The definition of a jazz vocalist can be unclear because jazz has shared a great deal with blues and pop music since the 1920s. In their book &quot;Essential Jazz&quot;, Henry Martin and Keith Waters identify five main characteristics that identify jazz singing, three of which are: &quot;Loose phrasing [...], use of blue notes [...], [and] free melodic embellishment.&quot; Often the human voice can act in place of a brass section in playing melodies, both written and improvised.

Scat singing is vocal improvisation with wordless vocables, nonsense syllables or without words at all. Though scat singing is improvised, the melodic lines are often variations on scale and arpeggio fragments, stock patterns and riffs, as is the case with instrumental improvisers. The deliberate choice of scat syllables is also a key element in vocal jazz improvisation. Syllable choice influences the pitch articulation, coloration, and resonance of the performance.

==Repertoire==
Another important aspect of jazz is improvisation (&quot;jams&quot;). Bands playing in this fashion fall under the category of jam bands. A common way to incorporate improvisation is to feature solo performances from band members made up on the spot, allowing them to showcase their skill.

==Gallery==
==See also==

*Juvenile jazz band
*List of big bands
*List of jazz musicians

==References==
===Works cited===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1684430" start="2" end="11" title="Jazz band" label="jazz band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684430" start="13" end="26" title="Jazz band" label="jazz ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684430" start="30" end="40" title="Jazz band" label="jazz combo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="47" end="63" title="musical ensemble" label="musical ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="75" end="79" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="221" end="235" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902628" start="242" end="254" title="horn section" label="horn section"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="541" end="549" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="1132" end="1146" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="1163" end="1173" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="1175" end="1186" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1190" end="1201" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="1258" end="1264" title="chord (music)" label="chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1276" end="1281" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1283" end="1289" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="1291" end="1304" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="1308" end="1318" title="vibraphone" label="vibraphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902628" start="1427" end="1439" title="horn section" label="horn section"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824192" start="1477" end="1490" title="brass section" label="brass section"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="1507" end="1513" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1668" end="1679" title="Frank Duson" label="Frank Duson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1697" end="1713" title="Laurence Marrero" label="Laurence Marrero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1792" end="1806" title="Banjo#Four-string banjos" label="plectrum banjo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1808" end="1819" title="Banjo#Tenor banjo" label="tenor banjo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1825" end="1836" title="Banjo#Low banjos" label="cello banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="2289" end="2297" title="drum set" label="drum set"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="2367" end="2383" title="jazz-rock fusion" label="jazz-rock fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q837389" start="2398" end="2408" title="Latin jazz" label="Latin jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2576" end="2589" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="2595" end="2604" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2610" end="2616" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2691" end="2697" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185626" start="2933" end="2944" title="single-reed" label="single-reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="3177" end="3185" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568121" start="3206" end="3219" title="Larry Shields" label="Larry Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q933710" start="3248" end="3276" title="Original Dixieland Jazz Band" label="Original Dixieland Jazz Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q447255" start="3351" end="3360" title="Ted Lewis (musician)" label="Ted Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q492247" start="3365" end="3377" title="Jimmie Noone" label="Jimmie Noone"/>
<link wikidata="Q725117" start="3519" end="3531" title="Alcide Nunez" label="Alcide Nunez"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="3665" end="3678" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q320065" start="3680" end="3690" title="Artie Shaw" label="Artie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q349357" start="3696" end="3708" title="Woody Herman" label="Woody Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45610" start="4163" end="4173" title="Acker Bilk" label="Acker Bilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q808218" start="4394" end="4406" title="baritone saxophone" label="baritone sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194854" start="4451" end="4464" title="bass trombone" label="bass trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="4469" end="4473" title="bass (guitar)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q445275" start="4552" end="4566" title="alto saxophone" label="alto saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="4573" end="4588" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684562" start="4656" end="4667" title="Jazz violin" label="Jazz violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q685663" start="4696" end="4711" title="electric violin" label="electric violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q491411" start="4907" end="4918" title="Milt Hinton" label="Milt Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="4997" end="5009" title="movie" label="sound movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="5065" end="5077" title="silent films" label="silent films"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="5188" end="5193" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="5198" end="5207" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130689" start="5392" end="5400" title="Musical phrasing" label="phrasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151992" start="5415" end="5425" title="blue notes" label="blue notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623202" start="5582" end="5594" title="Scat singing" label="Scat singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="5604" end="5617" title="Musical improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369058" start="5642" end="5660" title="pseudoword" label="nonsense syllables"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="5763" end="5768" title="Musical scale" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q506986" start="5773" end="5781" title="arpeggio" label="arpeggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q477989" start="5793" end="5807" title="lick (music)" label="stock patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="5812" end="5816" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q372923" start="5993" end="6005" title="articulation (music)" label="articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="6023" end="6032" title="Sonorant" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168370" start="6105" end="6118" title="Jazz improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="6126" end="6130" title="Jam session" label="jams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="6196" end="6204" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318958" start="6387" end="6405" title="Juvenile jazz band" label="Juvenile jazz band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425648" start="6407" end="6424" title="List of big bands" label="List of big bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506313" start="6426" end="6448" title="List of jazz musicians" label="List of jazz musicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54410" wikidata="Q14384" url="?curid=54410" title="Triceratops">
<text>Triceratops ( ; ) is a genus of chasmosaurine ceratopsian dinosaur that lived during the late Maastrichtian age of the Late Cretaceous period, about 68 to 66 million years ago in what is now western North America. It was one of the last-known non-avian dinosaurs and lived until the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago. The name &quot;Triceratops&quot;, which means &#x27;three-horned face&#x27;, is derived from the Greek words () meaning &#x27;three&#x27;, () meaning &#x27;horn&#x27;, and () meaning &#x27;face&#x27;.

Bearing a large bony frill, three horns on the skull, and a large, four-legged body, exhibiting convergent evolution with bovines and rhinoceroses, &quot;Triceratops&quot; is one of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs and the best-known ceratopsian. It was also one of the largest, measuring around long and weighing up to . It shared the landscape with and was most likely preyed upon by &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;, though it is less certain that two adults would battle in the fanciful manner often depicted in museum displays and popular media. The functions of the frills and three distinctive facial horns on its head have inspired countless debates. Traditionally, these have been viewed as defensive weapons against predators. More recent interpretations find it probable that these features were primarily used in species identification, courtship, and dominance display, much like the antlers and horns of modern ungulates.

&quot;Triceratops&quot; was traditionally placed within the &quot;short-frilled&quot; ceratopsids, but modern cladistic studies show it to be a member of Chasmosaurinae, which usually have long frills. Two species, T. horridus and T. prorsus, are considered valid today. Seventeen different species, however, have been named throughout history. Research published in 2010 concluded that the contemporaneous &quot;Torosaurus&quot;, a ceratopsid long regarded as a separate genus, represents &quot;Triceratops&quot; in its mature form. This view has still been highly disputed and much more data is needed to settle this ongoing debate.

&quot;Triceratops&quot; has been documented by numerous remains collected since the genus was first described in 1889 by American paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh. Specimens representing life stages from hatchling to adult have been found. As the archetypal ceratopsian, &quot;Triceratops&quot; is one of the most beloved, popular dinosaurs and has been featured in numerous films, postage stamps, and many other types of media.

==Discovery and identification==
The first named fossil specimen now attributed to &quot;Triceratops&quot; is a pair of brow horns attached to a skull roof that were found by George Lyman Cannon near Denver, Colorado, in the spring of 1887. This specimen was sent to Othniel Charles Marsh, who believed that the formation from which it came from dated from the Pliocene and that the bones belonged to a particularly large and unusual bison, which he named &quot;Bison alticornis&quot;. He realized that there were horned dinosaurs by the next year, which saw his publication of the genus &quot;Ceratops&quot; from fragmentary remains, but he still believed &quot;B. alticornis&quot; to be a Pliocene mammal. It took a third and much more complete skull to fully change his mind. 

Although not confidently assignable, fossils possibly belonging to &quot;Triceratops&quot; were described as two taxa, &quot;Agathaumas sylvestris&quot; and &quot;Polyonax mortuarius&quot;, in 1872 and 1874, respectively, by Marsh&#x27;s archrival Edward Drinker Cope. &quot;Agathaumas&quot; was named based on a pelvis, several vertebrae, and a few ribs collected by Fielding Bradford Meek and Henry Martyn Bannister near the Green River of southeastern Wyoming from layers coming from the Maastrichtian Lance Formation. Due to the fragmentary nature of the remains, it can only confidently be assigned to Ceratopsidae. &quot;Polyonax mortuarius&quot; was collected by Cope himself in 1873 from northeastern Colorado, possibly coming from the Maastrichtian Denver Formation. The fossils only consisted of fragmentary horn cores, 3 dorsal vertebrae, and fragmentary limb elements. &quot;Polyonax&quot; has the same issue as &quot;Agathaumas&quot;, with the fragmentary remains non-assignable beyond Ceratopsidae.

The &quot;Triceratops&quot; holotype, YPM 1820, was collected in 1888 from the Lance Formation of Wyoming by fossil hunter John Bell Hatcher, but Marsh initially described this specimen as another species of &quot;Ceratops&quot;. Cowboy Edmund B. Wilson had been startled by the sight of a monstrous skull poking out of the side of a ravine. He tried to recover it by throwing a lasso around one of the horns. When it broke off, the skull tumbling to the bottom of the cleft, Wilson brought the horn to his boss. His boss was rancher and avid fossil collector Charles Arthur Guernsey, who just so happened to show it to Hatcher. Marsh subsequently ordered Hatcher to locate and salvage the skull. The holotype was first named &quot;Ceratops horridus&quot;. When further preparation uncovered the third nose horn, Marsh changed his mind and gave the piece the new generic name &quot;Triceratops&quot; (), accepting his &quot;Bison alticornis&quot; as another species of &quot;Ceratops&quot;. It would, however, later be added to &quot;Triceratops&quot;. The sturdy nature of the animal&#x27;s skull has ensured that many examples have been preserved as fossils, allowing variations between species and individuals to be studied. &quot;Triceratops&quot; remains have subsequently been found in Montana and South Dakota (and more in Colorado and Wyoming), as well as the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta.

===Species===

After &quot;Triceratops&quot; was described, between 1889 and 1891, Hatcher collected another thirty-one of its skulls with great effort. The first species had been named &quot;T. horridus&quot; by Marsh. Its specific name was derived from the Latin word meaning &quot;rough&quot; or &quot;rugose&quot;, perhaps referring to the type specimen&#x27;s rough texture, later identified as an aged individual. The additional skulls varied to a lesser or greater degree from the original holotype. This variation is unsurprising, given that &quot;Triceratops&quot; skulls are large three-dimensional objects from individuals of different ages and both sexes that which were subjected to different amounts and directions of pressure during fossilization.

In the first attempt to understand the many species, Richard Swann Lull found two groups, although he did not say how he distinguished them. One group composed of &quot;T. horridus&quot;, &quot;T. prorsus&quot;, and &quot;T. brevicornus&quot; (&#x27;the short-horned&#x27;). The other composed of &quot;T. elatus&quot; and &quot;T. calicornis&quot;. Two species (&quot;T. serratus&quot; and &quot;T. flabellatus&quot;) stood apart from these groups. By 1933, alongside his revision of the landmark 1907 Hatcher–Marsh–Lull monograph of all known ceratopsians, he retained his two groups and two unaffiliated species, with a third lineage of &quot;T. obtusus&quot; and &quot;T. hatcheri&quot; (&#x27;Hatcher&#x27;s&#x27;) that was characterized by a very small nasal horn. &quot;T. horridus–T. prorsus–T. brevicornus&quot; was now thought to be the most conservative lineage, with an increase in skull size and a decrease in nasal horn size. &quot;T. elatus–T. calicornis&quot; was defined by having large brow horns and small nasal horns. Charles Mortram Sternberg made one modification by adding &quot;T. eurycephalus&quot; (&#x27;the wide-headed&#x27;) and suggesting that it linked the second and third lineages closer together than they were to the &quot;T. horridus&quot; lineage.

With time, the idea that the differing skulls might be representative of individual variation within one (or two) species gained popularity. In 1986, John Ostrom and Peter Wellnhofer published a paper in which they proposed that there was only one species, &quot;Triceratops horridus&quot;. Part of their rationale was that there are generally only one or two species of any large animal in a region. To their findings, Thomas Lehman added the old Lull–Sternberg lineages combined with maturity and sexual dimorphism, suggesting that the &quot;T. horridus–T. prorsus–T. brevicornus&quot; lineage was composed of females, the &quot;T. calicornis–T. elatus&quot; lineage was made up of males, and the &quot;T. obtusus–T. hatcheri&quot; lineage was of pathologic old males.

These findings were contested a few years later by paleontologist Catherine Forster, who reanalyzed &quot;Triceratops&quot; material more comprehensively and concluded that the remains fell into two species, &quot;T. horridus&quot; and &quot;T. prorsus&quot;, although the distinctive skull of &quot;T.&quot; (&quot;Nedoceratops&quot;) &quot;hatcheri&quot; differed enough to warrant a separate genus. She found that &quot;T. horridus&quot; and several other species belonged together and that &quot;T. prorsus&quot; and &quot;T. brevicornus&quot; stood alone. Since there were many more specimens in the first group, she suggested that this meant the two groups were two species. It is still possible to interpret the differences as representing a single species with sexual dimorphism.

In 2009, John Scannella and Denver Fowler supported the separation of &quot;T. prorsus&quot; and &quot;T. horridus&quot;, noting that the two species are also separated stratigraphically within the Hell Creek Formation, indicating that they did not live together at the same time.

====Valid species====

* &quot;T. horridus&quot; (type species)
* &quot;T. prorsus&quot; 

====Synonyms and doubtful species====
Some of the following species are synonyms, as indicated in parentheses (&quot;=&quot;T. horridus&quot;&quot; or &quot;=&quot;T. prorsus&quot;&quot;). All the others are each considered a () because they are based on remains too poor or incomplete to be distinguished from pre-existing &quot;Triceratops&quot; species.

* &quot;T. albertensis&quot; 
* &quot;T. alticornis&quot; 
* &quot;T. brevicornus&quot; (=&quot;T. prorsus&quot;)
* &quot;T. calicornis&quot; (=&quot;T. horridus&quot;)
* &quot;T. elatus&quot; (=&quot;T. horridus&quot;)
* &quot;T. eurycephalus&quot; 
* &quot;T. flabellatus&quot; (= &quot;Sterrholophus&quot; ) (=&quot;T. horridus&quot;)
* &quot;T. galeus&quot; 
* &quot;T. hatcheri&quot; (contentious; see &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; below)
* &quot;T. ingens&quot; 
* &quot;T. maximus&quot; 
* &quot;T. mortuarius&quot; (&quot;nomen dubium&quot;; originally &quot;Polyonax mortuarius&quot;)
* &quot;T. obtusus&quot; (=&quot;T. horridus&quot;)
* &quot;T. serratus&quot; (=&quot;T. horridus&quot;)
* &quot;T. sulcatus&quot; 
* &quot;T. sylvestris&quot; (&quot;nomen dubium&quot;; originally &quot;Agathaumas sylvestris&quot;)

==Description==
===Size===

&quot;Triceratops&quot; was a very large animal, measuring around in length and weighing up to . A specimen of &quot;T. horridus&quot; named Kelsey measured long, has a skull, stood about tall, and was estimated by the Black Hills Institute to weigh approximately .

===Skull===

Like all chasmosaurines, &quot;Triceratops&quot; had a large skull relative to its body size, among the largest of all land animals. The largest-known skull, specimen MWC 7584 (formerly BYU 12183), is estimated to have been in length when complete and could reach almost a third of the length of the entire animal.

The front of the head was equipped with a large beak in front of its teeth. The core of the top beak was formed by a special rostral bone. Behind it, the premaxillae bones were located, embayed from behind by very large, circular nostrils. In chasmosaurines, the premaxillae met on their midline in a complex bone plate, the rear edge of which was reinforced by the &quot;narial strut&quot;. From the base of this strut, a triangular process jutted out into the nostril. &quot;Triceratops&quot; differs from most relatives in that this process was hollowed out on the outer side. Behind the toothless premaxilla, the maxilla bore thirty-six to forty tooth positions, in which three to five teeth per position were vertically stacked. The teeth were closely appressed, forming a &quot;dental battery&quot; curving to the inside. The skull bore a single horn on the snout above the nostrils. In &quot;Triceratops&quot;, the nose horn is sometimes recognisable as a separate ossification, the epinasal. 

The skull also featured a pair of supraorbital &quot;brow&quot; horns approximately long, with one above each eye. The jugal bones pointed downward at the rear sides of the skull and were capped by separate epijugals. With &quot;Triceratops&quot;, these were not particularly large and sometimes touched the quadratojugals. The bones of the skull roof were fused and by a folding of the frontal bones, a &quot;double&quot; skull roof was created. In &quot;Triceratops&quot;, some specimens show a fontanelle, an opening in the upper roof layer. The cavity between the layers invaded the bone cores of the brow horns.
At the rear of the skull, the outer squamosal bones and the inner parietal bones grew into a relatively short, bony frill, adorned with epoccipitals in young specimens. These were low triangular processes on the frill edge, representing separate skin ossifications or osteoderms. Typically, with &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimens, there are two epoccipitals present on each parietal bone, with an additional central process on their border. Each squamosal bone had five processes. Most other ceratopsids had large parietal fenestrae, openings in their frills, but those of &quot;Triceratops&quot; were noticeably solid, unless the genus &quot;Torosaurus&quot; represents mature &quot;Triceratops&quot; individuals, which it most likely does not. Under the frill, at the rear of the skull, a huge occipital condyle, up to in diameter, connected the head to the neck.

The lower jaws were elongated and met at their tips in a shared epidentary bone, the core of the toothless lower beak. In the dentary bone, the tooth battery curved to the outside to meet the battery of the upper jaw. At the rear of the lower jaw, the articular bone was exceptionally wide, matching the general width of the jaw joint. &quot;T. horridus&quot; can be distinguished from &quot;T. prorsus&quot; by having a shallower snout.

===Postcranial skeleton===

Chasmosaurines showed little variation in their postcranial skeleton. The skeleton of &quot;Triceratops&quot; is markedly robust. Both &quot;Triceratops&quot; species possessed a very sturdy build, with strong limbs, short hands with three hooves each, and short feet with four hooves each. The vertebral column consisted of ten neck, twelve back, ten sacral, and about forty-five tail vertebrae. The front neck vertebrae were fused into a syncervical. Traditionally, this was assumed to have incorporated the first three vertebrae, thus implying that the frontmost atlas was very large and sported a neural spine. Later interpretations revived an old hypothesis by John Bell Hatcher that, at the very front, a vestige of the real atlas can be observed, the syncervical then consisting of four vertebrae. The vertebral count mentioned is adjusted to this view. In &quot;Triceratops&quot;, the neural spines of the neck are constant in height and don&#x27;t gradually slope upwards. Another peculiarity is that the neck ribs only begin to lengthen with the ninth cervical vertebra.

The rather short and high vertebrae of the back were, in its middle region, reinforced by ossified tendons running along the tops of the neural arches. The straight sacrum was long and adult individuals show a fusion of all sacral vertebrae. In &quot;Triceratops&quot; the first four and last two sacrals had transverse processes, connecting the vertebral column to the pelvis, that were fused at their distal ends. Sacrals seven and eight had longer processes, causing the sacrum to have an oval profile in top view. On top of the sacrum, a neural plate was present formed by a fusion of the neural spines of the second through fifth vertebrae. &quot;Triceratops&quot; had a large pelvis with a long ilium. The ischium was curved downwards. The foot was short with four functional toes. The phalangeal formula of the foot is 2-3-4-5-0.
Although certainly quadrupedal, the posture of horned dinosaurs has long been the subject of some debate. Originally, it was believed that the front legs of the animal had to be sprawling at a considerable angle from the thorax in order to better bear the weight of the head. This stance can be seen in paintings by Charles Knight and Rudolph Zallinger. Ichnological evidence in the form of trackways from horned dinosaurs and recent reconstructions of skeletons (both physical and digital) seem to show that &quot;Triceratops&quot; and other ceratopsids maintained an upright stance during normal locomotion, with the elbows flexed to behind and slightly bowed out, in an intermediate state between fully upright and fully sprawling, comparable to the modern rhinoceros.

The hands and forearms of &quot;Triceratops&quot; retained a fairly primitive structure when compared to other quadrupedal dinosaurs, such as thyreophorans and many sauropods. In those two groups, the forelimbs of quadrupedal species were usually rotated so that the hands faced forward with palms backward (&quot;pronated&quot;) as the animals walked. &quot;Triceratops&quot;, like other ceratopsians and related quadrupedal ornithopods (together forming the Cerapoda), walked with most of their fingers pointing out and away from the body, the original condition for dinosaurs. This was also retained by bipedal forms, like theropods. In &quot;Triceratops&quot;, the weight of the body was carried by only the first three fingers of the hand, while digits 4 and 5 were vestigial and lacked claws or hooves. The phalangeal formula of the hand is 2-3-4-3-1, meaning that the first or innermost finger of the forelimb has two bones, the next has three, the next has four, etc.

=== Skin ===
Preserved skin from &quot;Triceratops&quot; is known. This skin consist of large scales, some of which exceed across, which have conical projections rising from their center. A preserved piece of skin from the frill of a specimen is also known, which consists of small polygonal basement scales.

==Classification==

&quot;Triceratops&quot; is the best-known genus of Ceratopsidae, a family of large, mostly North American ceratopsians. The exact relationship of &quot;Triceratops&quot; among the other ceratopsids has been debated over the years. Confusion stemmed mainly from the combination of a short, solid frill (similar to that of Centrosaurinae), with long brow horns (more akin to Chasmosaurinae). In the first overview of ceratopsians, R. S. Lull hypothesized the existence of two lineages, one of &quot;Monoclonius&quot; and &quot;Centrosaurus&quot; leading to &quot;Triceratops&quot;, the other with &quot;Ceratops&quot; and &quot;Torosaurus&quot;, making &quot;Triceratops&quot; a centrosaurine as the group is understood today. Later revisions supported this view when Lawrence Lambe, in 1915, formally describing the first, short-frilled group as Centrosaurinae (including &quot;Triceratops&quot;), and the second, long-frilled group as Chasmosaurinae.

In 1949, Charles Mortram Sternberg was the first to question this position, proposing instead that &quot;Triceratops&quot; was more closely related to &quot;Arrhinoceratops&quot; and &quot;Chasmosaurus&quot; based on skull and horn features, making &quot;Triceratops&quot; a chasmosaurine (&quot;ceratopsine&quot; in his usage) genus. He was largely ignored, with John Ostrom and later David Norman placing &quot;Triceratops&quot; within the Centrosaurinae.

Subsequent discoveries and analyses, however, proved the correctness of Sternberg&#x27;s view on the position of &quot;Triceratops&quot;, with Thomas Lehman defining both subfamilies in 1990 and diagnosing &quot;Triceratops&quot; as &quot;ceratopsine&quot; on the basis of several morphological features. Apart from the one feature of a shortened frill, &quot;Triceratops&quot; shares no derived traits with centrosaurines. Further research by Peter Dodson, including a 1990 cladistic analysis and a 1993 study using resistant-fit theta-rho analysis, or RFTRA (a morphometric technique which systematically measures similarities in skull shape), reinforces &quot;Triceratops&quot;″ placement as a chasmosaurine.
The cladogram below follows Longrich (2014), who named a new species of &quot;Pentaceratops&quot;, and included nearly all species of chasmosaurine.
For many years after its discovery, the deeper evolutionary origins of &quot;Triceratops&quot; and its close relatives remained largely obscure. In 1922, the newly discovered &quot;Protoceratops&quot; was seen as its ancestor by Henry Fairfield Osborn, but many decades passed before additional findings came to light. Recent years have been fruitful for the discovery of several antecedents of &quot;Triceratops&quot;. &quot;Zuniceratops&quot;, the earliest-known ceratopsian with brow horns, was described in the late 1990s, and &quot;Yinlong&quot;, the first known Jurassic ceratopsian, was described in 2005.

These new finds have been vital in illustrating the origins of ceratopsians in general, suggesting an Asian origin in the Jurassic and the appearance of truly horned ceratopsians by the beginning of the Late Cretaceous in North America.

In phylogenetic taxonomy, the genus &quot;Triceratops&quot; has been used as a reference point in the definition of Dinosauria. Dinosaurs have been designated as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of &quot;Triceratops&quot; and modern birds. Furthermore, Ornithischia has been defined as those dinosaurs more closely related to &quot;Triceratops&quot; than to modern birds.

==Paleobiology==

Although &quot;Triceratops&quot; is commonly portrayed as a herding animal, there is currently little evidence to suggest that they lived in herds. While several other ceratopsians are known from bone beds preserving bones from two to hundreds or even thousands of individuals, there is currently only one documented bonebed dominated by &quot;Triceratops&quot; bones: a site in southeastern Montana with the remains of three juveniles. It may be significant that only juveniles were present. In 2012, a group of three &quot;Triceratops&quot; in relatively complete condition, each of varying sizes from a full-grown adult to a small juvenile, were found near Newcastle, Wyoming. The remains are currently under excavation by paleontologist Peter Larson and a team from the Black Hills Institute. It is believed that the animals were traveling as a family unit, but it remains unknown if the group consists of a mated pair and their offspring, or two females and a juvenile they were caring for. The remains also show signs of predation or scavenging from &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;, particularly on the largest specimen, with the bones of the front limbs showing breakage and puncture wounds from &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; teeth. In 2020, Illies and Fowler described the co-ossified distal caudal vertebrae of &quot;Triceratops&quot;. According to them, this pathology could have arisen after one &quot;Triceratops&quot; accidentally stepped on the tail of another member of the herd.
For many years, &quot;Triceratops&quot; finds were known only from solitary individuals. These remains are very common. For example, Bruce Erickson, a paleontologist of the Science Museum of Minnesota, has reported having seen 200 specimens of &quot;T. prorsus&quot; in the Hell Creek Formation of Montana. Similarly, Barnum Brown claimed to have seen over 500 skulls in the field. Because &quot;Triceratops&quot; teeth, horn fragments, frill fragments, and other skull fragments are such abundant fossils in the Lancian faunal stage of the late Maastrichtian (Late Cretaceous, 66 mya) of western North America, it is regarded as one of the dominant herbivores of the time, if not the most dominant. In 1986, Robert Bakker estimated it as making up five sixths of the large dinosaur fauna at the end of the Cretaceous. Unlike most animals, skull fossils are far more common than postcranial bones for &quot;Triceratops&quot;, suggesting that the skull had an unusually high preservation potential.

Analysis of the endocranial anatomy of &quot;Triceratops&quot; suggest its sense of smell was poor compared to that of other dinosaurs. Its ears were attuned to low frequency sounds, given the short cochlear lengths recorded in an analysis by Sakagami &quot;et al,&quot;. This same study also suggests that &quot;Triceratops&quot; held its head about 45 degrees to the ground, an angle which would showcase the horns and frill most effectively that simultaneously allowed the animal to take advantage of food through grazing. 
A 2022 study by Wiemann and colleagues of various dinosaur genera, including &quot;Triceratops&quot;, suggests that it had an ectothermic (cold blooded) or gigantothermic metabolism, on par with that of modern reptiles. This was uncovered using the spectroscopy of lipoxidation signals, which are byproducts of oxidative phosphorylation and correlate with metabolic rates. They suggested that such metabolisms may have been common for ornithischian dinosaurs in general, with the group evolving towards ectothermy from an ancestor with an endothermic (warm blooded) metabolism.

===Dentition and diet===

&quot;Triceratops&quot; were herbivorous and, because of their low slung head, their primary food was probably low growing vegetation, although they may have been able to knock down taller plants with their horns, beak, and sheer bulk. The jaws were tipped with a deep, narrow beak, believed to have been better at grasping and plucking than biting.

&quot;Triceratops&quot; teeth were arranged in groups called batteries, which contained 36 to 40 tooth columns in each side of each jaw and 3 to 5 stacked teeth per column, depending on the size of the animal. This gives a range of 432 to 800 teeth, of which only a fraction were in use at any given time (as tooth replacement was continuous throughout the life of the animal). They functioned by shearing in a vertical to near-vertical orientation. Additionally, their teeth wore as they fed, creating fullers that minimised friction as they masticated. The great size and numerous teeth of &quot;Triceratops&quot; suggests that they ate large volumes of fibrous plant material. Some researchers suggest it, along with its cousin &quot;Torosaurus&quot; ate palms and cycads and others suggest it ate ferns, which then grew in prairies.

===Functions of the horns and frill===
There has been much speculation over the functions of &quot;Triceratops&quot;″ head adornments. The two main theories have revolved around use in combat and in courtship display, with the latter now thought to be the most likely primary function.

Early on, Lull postulated that the frills may have served as anchor points for the jaw muscles to aid chewing by allowing increased size and power for the muscles. This has been put forward by other authors over the years, but later studies do not find evidence of large muscle attachments on the frill bones.

&quot;Triceratops&quot; were long thought to have used their horns and frills in combat with large predators, such as &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;, the idea being discussed first by Charles H. Sternberg in 1917 and 70 years later by Robert Bakker. There is evidence that &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; did have aggressive head-on encounters with &quot;Triceratops&quot;, based on partially healed tyrannosaur tooth marks on a &quot;Triceratops&quot; brow horn and squamosal. The bitten horn is also broken, with new bone growth after the break. Which animal was the aggressor, however, is unknown. Paleontologist Peter Dodson estimates that, in a battle against a bull &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;, the &quot;Triceratops&quot; had the upper hand and would successfully defend itself by inflicting fatal wounds to the &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; using its sharp horns. &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; is also known to have fed on &quot;Triceratops&quot;, as shown by a heavily tooth-scored &quot;Triceratops&quot; ilium and sacrum. 

In addition to combat with predators using its horns, &quot;Triceratops&quot; are popularly shown engaging each other in combat with horns locked. While studies show that such activity would be feasible, if unlike that of present-day horned animals, there is disagreement about whether they did so. Although pitting, holes, lesions, and other damage on &quot;Triceratops&quot; skulls (and the skulls of other ceratopsids) are often attributed to horn damage in combat, a 2006 study finds no evidence for horn thrust injuries causing these forms of damage (with there being no evidence of infection or healing). Instead, non-pathological bone resorption, or unknown bone diseases, are suggested as causes. A 2009 study compared incidence rates of skull lesions and periosteal reaction in &quot;Triceratops&quot; and &quot;Centrosaurus&quot;, showing that these were consistent with &quot;Triceratops&quot; using its horns in combat and the frill being adapted as a protective structure, while lower pathology rates in &quot;Centrosaurus&quot; may indicate visual use over physical use of cranial ornamentation or a form of combat focused on the body rather than the head. The frequency of injury was found to be 14% in &quot;Triceratops&quot;. The researchers also concluded that the damage found on the specimens in the study was often too localized to be caused by bone disease. Histological examination reveals that the frill of &quot;Triceratops&quot; is composed of fibrolamellar bone. This contains fibroblasts that play a critical role in wound healing and is capable of rapidly depositing bone during remodeling.
One skull was found with a hole in the jugal bone, apparently a puncture wound sustained while the animal was alive, as indicated by signs of healing. The hole has a diameter close to that of the distal end of a &quot;Triceratops&quot; horn. This and other apparent healed wounds in the skulls of ceratopsians have been cited as evidence of non-fatal intra-specific competition in these dinosaurs. Another specimen, referred to as &quot;Big John&quot;, has a similar fenestra to the squamosal caused by what appears to be another &quot;Triceratops&quot; horn and the squamosal bone shows signs of significant healing, further vindicating the hypothesis that this ceratopsian used its horns for intra-specific combat.

The large frill also may have helped to increase body area to regulate body temperature. A similar theory has been proposed regarding the plates of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, although this use alone would not account for the bizarre and extravagant variation seen in different members of Ceratopsidae, which would rather support the sexual display theory.

The theory that frills functioned as a sexual display was first proposed by Davitashvili in 1961 and has gained increasing acceptance since. Evidence that visual display was important, either in courtship or other social behavior, can be seen in the ceratopsians differing markedly in their adornments, making each species highly distinctive. Also, modern living creatures with such displays of horns and adornments use them similarly. A 2006 study of the smallest &quot;Triceratops&quot; skull, ascertained to be that of a juvenile, shows the frill and horns developed at a very early age, predating sexual development. That would suggest they were probably important for visual communication and species recognition in general. However, the use of the exaggerated structures to enable dinosaurs to recognize their own species has been questioned, as no such function exists for such structures in modern species.

===Growth and ontogeny===

In 2006, the first extensive ontogenetic study of &quot;Triceratops&quot; was published in the journal &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Society&quot;. The study, by John R. Horner and Mark Goodwin, found that individuals of &quot;Triceratops&quot; could be divided into four general ontogenetic groups: babies, juveniles, subadults, and adults. With a total number of 28 skulls studied, the youngest was only long. Ten of the 28 skulls could be placed in order in a growth series with one representing each age. Each of the four growth stages were found to have identifying features. Multiple ontogenetic trends were discovered, including the size reduction of the epoccipitals, development and reorientation of postorbital horns, and hollowing out of the horns.

====&quot;Torosaurus&quot; as growth stage of &quot;Triceratops&quot;====

&quot;Torosaurus&quot; is a ceratopsid genus first identified from a pair of skulls in 1891, two years after the identification of &quot;Triceratops&quot; by Othneil Charles Marsh. The genus &quot;Torosaurus&quot; resembles &quot;Triceratops&quot; in geological age, distribution, anatomy, and size, so it has been recognised as a close relative. Its distinguishing features are an elongated skull and the presence of two ovular fenestrae in the frill. Paleontologists investigating dinosaur ontogeny in Montana&#x27;s Hell Creek Formation have recently presented evidence that the two represent a single genus.
John Scannella, in a paper presented in Bristol at the conference of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (September 25, 2009), reclassified &quot;Torosaurus&quot; as especially mature &quot;Triceratops&quot; individuals, perhaps representing a single sex. Horner, Scannella&#x27;s mentor at Bozeman Campus, Montana State University, noted that ceratopsian skulls consist of metaplastic bone. A characteristic of metaplastic bone is that it lengthens and shortens over time, extending and resorbing to form new shapes. Significant variety is seen even in those skulls already identified as &quot;Triceratops&quot;, Horner said, &quot;where the horn orientation is backwards in juveniles and forward in adults&quot;. Approximately 50% of all subadult &quot;Triceratops&quot; skulls have two thin areas in the frill that correspond with the placement of &quot;holes&quot; in &quot;Torosaurus&quot; skulls, suggesting that holes developed to offset the weight that would otherwise have been added as maturing &quot;Triceratops&quot; individuals grew longer frills. A paper describing these findings in detail was published in July 2010 by Scannella and Horner. It formally argues that &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and the similar contemporary &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; are synonymous with &quot;Triceratops&quot;.

The assertion has since ignited much debate. Andrew Farke had, in 2006, stressed that no systematic differences could be found between &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot;, apart from the frill. He nevertheless disputed Scannella&#x27;s conclusion by arguing in 2011 that the proposed morphological changes required to &quot;age&quot; a &quot;Triceratops&quot; into a &quot;Torosaurus&quot; would be without precedent among ceratopsids. Such changes would include the growth of additional epoccipitals, reversion of bone texture from an adult to immature type and back to adult again, and growth of frill holes at a later stage than usual. A study by Nicholas Longrich and Daniel Field analyzed 35 specimens of both &quot;Triceratops&quot; and &quot;Torosaurus&quot;. The authors concluded that &quot;Triceratops&quot; individuals too old to be considered immature forms are represented in the fossil record, as are &quot;Torosaurus&quot; individuals too young to be considered fully mature adults. The synonymy of &quot;Triceratops&quot; and &quot;Torosaurus&quot; cannot be supported, they said, without more convincing intermediate forms than Scannella and Horner initially produced. Scannella&#x27;s &quot;Triceratops&quot; specimen with a hole on its frill, they argued, could represent a diseased or malformed individual rather than a transitional stage between an immature &quot;Triceratops&quot; and mature &quot;Torosaurus&quot; form.

====Other genera as growth stages of &quot;Triceratops&quot;====
Opinion has varied on the validity of a separate genus for &quot;Nedoceratops&quot;. Scannella and Horner regarded it as an intermediate growth stage between &quot;Triceratops&quot; and &quot;Torosaurus&quot;. Farke, in his 2011 redescription of the only known skull, concluded that it was an aged individual of its own valid taxon, &quot;Nedoceratops hatcheri&quot;. Longrich and Fields also did not consider it a transition between &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot;, suggesting that the frill holes were pathological.

As described above, Scannella had argued in 2010 that &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; should be considered a synonym of &quot;Triceratops&quot;. Farke (2011) maintained that it represents a valid distinct genus. Longrich agreed with Scannella about &quot;Nedoceratops&quot; and made a further suggestion that the recently described &quot;Ojoceratops&quot; was likewise a synonym. The fossils, he argued, are indistinguishable from the &quot;Triceratops horridus&quot; specimens that were previously attributed to the defunct species &quot;Triceratops serratus&quot;.

Longrich observed that another newly described genus, &quot;Tatankaceratops&quot;, displayed a strange mix of characteristics already found in adult and juvenile &quot;Triceratops&quot;. Rather than representing a distinct genus, &quot;Tatankaceratops&quot; could as easily represent a dwarf &quot;Triceratops&quot; or a &quot;Triceratops&quot; individual with a developmental disorder that caused it to stop growing prematurely.

==Paleoecology==

&quot;Triceratops&quot; lived during the Late Cretaceous of western North America, its fossils coming from the Evanston Formation, Scollard Formation, Laramie Formation, Lance Formation, Denver Formation, and Hell Creek Formation. These fossil formations date back to the time of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, which has been dated to 66 ± 0.07 million years ago. Many animals and plants have been found in these formations, but mostly from the Lance Formation and Hell Creek Formation. &quot;Triceratops&quot; was one of the last ceratopsian genera to appear before the end of the Mesozoic. The related &quot;Torosaurus&quot; and more distantly related diminutive &quot;Leptoceratops&quot; were also present, though their remains have been rarely encountered.

Theropods from these formations include genera of dromaeosaurids, tyrannosaurids, ornithomimids, troodontids, avialans, and caenagnathids. Dromaeosaurids from the Hell Creek Formation are &quot;Acheroraptor&quot; and &quot;Dakotaraptor&quot;. Indeterminate dromaeosaurs are known from other fossil formations. Common teeth previously referred to &quot;Dromaeosaurus&quot; and &quot;Saurornitholestes&quot; were considered to be those of &quot;Acheroraptor&quot;. The tyrannosaurids from the formation are &quot;Nanotyrannus&quot; and &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;, although the former is most likely a junior synonym of the latter. Among ornithomimids are the genera &quot;Struthiomimus&quot; and &quot;Ornithomimus&quot;. An undescribed animal named &quot;Orcomimus&quot; could be from the formation. Troodontids are only represented by &quot;Pectinodon&quot; and &quot;Paronychodon&quot; in the Hell Creek Formation with a possible species of &quot;Troodon&quot; from the Lance Formation. One species of unknown coelurosaur is known from teeth in the Hell Creek and similar formations by a single species, &quot;Richardoestesia&quot;. Only three oviraptorosaurs are from the Hell Creek Formation: &quot;Anzu&quot;, &quot;Leptorhynchos&quot; and a giant species of caenagnathid, very similar to &quot;Gigantoraptor&quot;, from South Dakota. However, only fossilized foot prints were discovered. The avialans known from the formation are &quot;Avisaurus&quot;, multiple species of &quot;Brodavis&quot;, and several other species of hesperornithoforms, as well as several species of true birds, including &quot;Cimolopteryx&quot;.
Ornithischians are abundant in the Scollard, Laramie, Lance, Denver, and Hell Creek Formation. The main groups of ornithischians are ankylosaurians, ornithopods, ceratopsians, and pachycephalosaurians. Three ankylosaurians are known: &quot;Ankylosaurus&quot;, &quot;Denversaurus&quot;, and possibly a species of &quot;Edmontonia&quot; or an undescribed genus. Multiple genera of ceratopsians are known from the formation other than &quot;Triceratops&quot;. These include the leptoceratopsid &quot;Leptoceratops&quot; and the chasmosaurine ceratopsids &quot;Torosaurus&quot;, &quot;Nedoceratops&quot;, and &quot;Tatankaceratops&quot;. Ornithopods are common in the Hell Creek Formation and are known from several species of the thescelosaurine &quot;Thescelosaurus&quot; and the hadrosaurid &quot;Edmontosaurus&quot;. Several pachycephalosaurians have been found in the Hell Creek Formation and in similar formations. Among them are the derived pachycephalosaurids &quot;Stygimoloch&quot;, &quot;Dracorex&quot;, &quot;Pachycephalosaurus&quot;, &quot;Sphaerotholus&quot;, and an undescribed specimen from North Dakota. The first two might be junior synonyms of &quot;Pachycephalosaurus&quot;.

Mammals are plentiful in the Hell Creek Formation. Groups represented include multituberculates, metatherians, and eutherians. The multituberculates represented include &quot;Paracimexomys,&quot; the cimolomyids &quot;Paressonodon&quot;, &quot;Meniscoessus&quot;, &quot;Essonodon&quot;, &quot;Cimolomys&quot;, &quot;Cimolodon&quot;, and &quot;Cimexomys&quot;, and the neoplagiaulacids &quot;Mesodma&quot; and &quot;Neoplagiaulax&quot;. The metatherians are represented by the alphadontids &quot;Alphadon&quot;, &quot;Protalphodon&quot;, and &quot;Turgidodon&quot;, the pediomyids &quot;Pediomys&quot;, &quot;Protolambda&quot;, and &quot;Leptalestes&quot;, the stagodontid &quot;Didelphodon&quot;, the deltatheridiid &quot;Nanocuris&quot;, the herpetotheriid &quot;Nortedelphys&quot;, and the glasbiid &quot;Glasbius&quot;. A few eutherians are known, being represented by &quot;Alostera&quot;, &quot;Protungulatum&quot;, the cimolestids &quot;Cimolestes&quot; and &quot;Batodon&quot;, the gypsonictopsid &quot;Gypsonictops&quot; , and the possible nyctitheriid &quot;Paranyctoides&quot;.
==Cultural significance==

&quot;Triceratops&quot; is the official state fossil of South Dakota. It is also the official state dinosaur of Wyoming. In 1942, Charles R. Knight painted a mural incorporating a confrontation between a &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; and a &quot;Triceratops&quot; in the Field Museum of Natural History for the National Geographic Society, establishing them as enemies in the popular imagination. Paleontologist Robert Bakker said of the imagined rivalry between &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; and &quot;Triceratops&quot;, &quot;No matchup between predator and prey has ever been more dramatic. It&#x27;s somehow fitting that those two massive antagonists lived out their co-evolutionary belligerence through the last days of the last epoch of the Age of Dinosaurs.&quot;
==References==
==External links==
*
*
* &quot;Triceratops&quot; at The Dinosaur Picture Database
* LiveScience: Facts about &quot;Triceratops&quot; at LiveScience.com
* Dinosaur Mailing List post on &quot;Triceratops&quot; stance 
* Smithsonian Exhibit
* &quot;Triceratops&quot; in the Dino Directory
* &quot;Triceratops&quot; (short summary and good color illustration)
* &quot;Triceratops&quot; For Kids (a fact sheet about the &quot;Triceratops&quot; with activities for kids)
* &quot;Triceratops&quot;, BBC Dinosaurs
* Triceratops – Liste de Dinosauria et Extinction</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="23" end="28" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="32" end="45" title="Chasmosaurinae" label="chasmosaurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="46" end="57" title="Ceratopsia" label="ceratopsian"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="58" end="66" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="94" end="107" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="124" end="134" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="135" end="141" title="Period (geology)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="158" end="175" title="million years ago" label="million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="283" end="320" title="Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="440" end="445" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917827" start="566" end="571" title="neck frill" label="frill"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="641" end="661" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="667" end="673" title="bovine" label="bovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="679" end="689" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="943" end="956" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="1469" end="1477" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="1591" end="1600" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="1635" end="1649" title="Chasmosaurinae" label="Chasmosaurinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1687" end="1694" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491" start="1894" end="1904" title="Torosaurus" label="Torosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="2262" end="2283" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="2368" end="2378" title="archetypal" label="archetypal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2600" end="2606" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="2751" end="2757" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2759" end="2767" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="2818" end="2839" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="2863" end="2872" title="geologic formation" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="2912" end="2920" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="2985" end="2990" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q134704" start="3145" end="3153" title="Ceratops" label="Ceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="3251" end="3257" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131751" start="3457" end="3478" title="Agathaumas" label="Agathaumas sylvestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142071" start="3495" end="3514" title="Polyonax" label="Polyonax mortuarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q298933" start="3580" end="3599" title="Edward Drinker Cope" label="Edward Drinker Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411596" start="3700" end="3722" title="Fielding Bradford Meek" label="Fielding Bradford Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q983538" start="3759" end="3770" title="Green River, Wyoming" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="3787" end="3794" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483389" start="3837" end="3852" title="Lance Formation" label="Lance Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259726" start="4090" end="4106" title="Denver Formation" label="Denver Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="4374" end="4382" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483389" start="4425" end="4440" title="Lance Formation" label="Lance Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041829" start="4469" end="4486" title="John Bell Hatcher" label="John Bell Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="5638" end="5645" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="5650" end="5662" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="5736" end="5748" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="5753" end="5760" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="5987" end="6000" title="specific name (zoology)" label="specific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465858" start="6580" end="6598" title="Richard Swann Lull" label="Richard Swann Lull"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="7049" end="7058" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065421" start="7565" end="7590" title="Charles Mortram Sternberg" label="Charles Mortram Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q373726" start="7963" end="7974" title="John Ostrom" label="John Ostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q95837" start="7979" end="7995" title="Peter Wellnhofer" label="Peter Wellnhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="8312" end="8329" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9185252" start="8651" end="8668" title="Catherine Forster" label="Catherine Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="9706" end="9718" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="9819" end="9827" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q132602" start="10518" end="10530" title="Nedoceratops" label="Nedoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q142071" start="10667" end="10686" title="Polyonax mortuarius" label="Polyonax mortuarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q922448" start="10861" end="10873" title="nomen dubium" label="nomen dubium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131751" start="10898" end="10919" title="Agathaumas sylvestris" label="Agathaumas sylvestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152099" start="11175" end="11196" title="Black Hills Institute" label="Black Hills Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="11245" end="11259" title="Chasmosaurinae" label="chasmosaurines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11403" end="11406" title="Museum of Western Colorado" label="MWC"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="11422" end="11425" title="Brigham Young University" label="BYU"/>
<link wikidata="Q244969" start="11706" end="11716" title="premaxilla" label="premaxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q182895" start="12169" end="12176" title="maxilla" label="maxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178594" start="12673" end="12683" title="jugal bone" label="jugal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295" start="12941" end="12953" title="frontal bone" label="frontal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q752693" start="13051" end="13061" title="fontanelle" label="fontanelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727623" start="13207" end="13221" title="squamosal bone" label="squamosal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298" start="13237" end="13250" title="parietal bone" label="parietal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="13307" end="13319" title="epoccipitals" label="epoccipitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="13439" end="13449" title="osteoderms" label="osteoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258240" start="13694" end="13703" title="Fenestra (anatomy)" label="fenestrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491" start="13814" end="13824" title="Torosaurus" label="Torosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q943060" start="13967" end="13984" title="occipital condyle" label="occipital condyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q951861" start="14290" end="14304" title="articular bone" label="articular bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="14800" end="14816" title="vertebral column" label="vertebral column"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="14891" end="14899" title="vertebra" label="vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q655357" start="15071" end="15076" title="atlas (anatomy)" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041829" start="15171" end="15188" title="John Bell Hatcher" label="John Bell Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="15724" end="15735" title="neural arch" label="neural arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q728889" start="16288" end="16293" title="Ilium (bone)" label="ilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q531029" start="16299" end="16306" title="ischium" label="ischium"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907045" start="16443" end="16452" title="quadruped" label="quadruped"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16602" end="16611" title="Terrestrial locomotion#Posture" label="sprawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="16645" end="16651" title="thorax" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q725877" start="16740" end="16754" title="Charles R. Knight" label="Charles Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377412" start="16759" end="16776" title="Rudolph F. Zallinger" label="Rudolph Zallinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q853800" start="16778" end="16790" title="Ichnological" label="Ichnological"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114983" start="16815" end="16824" title="fossil trackway" label="trackways"/>
<link wikidata="Q823931" start="17339" end="17350" title="thyreophora" label="thyreophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q14416" start="17362" end="17370" title="sauropod" label="sauropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q467430" start="17623" end="17633" title="ornithopod" label="ornithopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q379167" start="17657" end="17665" title="Cerapoda" label="Cerapoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q188438" start="17823" end="17831" title="theropod" label="theropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q263925" start="18555" end="18567" title="Ceratopsidae" label="Ceratopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="18610" end="18622" title="Ceratopsia" label="ceratopsians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132304" start="18825" end="18839" title="Centrosaurinae" label="Centrosaurinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="18877" end="18891" title="Chasmosaurinae" label="Chasmosaurinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465858" start="18933" end="18943" title="R. S. Lull" label="R. S. Lull"/>
<link wikidata="Q131571" start="19001" end="19012" title="Monoclonius" label="Monoclonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131589" start="19029" end="19041" title="Centrosaurus" label="Centrosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134704" start="19105" end="19113" title="Ceratops" label="Ceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491" start="19130" end="19140" title="Torosaurus" label="Torosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q149798" start="19270" end="19284" title="Lawrence Lambe" label="Lawrence Lambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065421" start="19465" end="19490" title="Charles Mortram Sternberg" label="Charles Mortram Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131595" start="19613" end="19628" title="Arrhinoceratops" label="Arrhinoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131586" start="19645" end="19657" title="Chasmosaurus" label="Chasmosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373726" start="19820" end="19831" title="John Ostrom" label="John Ostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q583417" start="20359" end="20371" title="Peter Dodson" label="Peter Dodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="20390" end="20399" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851434" start="20478" end="20500" title="morphometrics" label="morphometric technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q131253" start="20705" end="20718" title="Pentaceratops" label="Pentaceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506" start="20957" end="20970" title="Protoceratops" label="Protoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q312069" start="21005" end="21027" title="Henry Fairfield Osborn" label="Henry Fairfield Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q131773" start="21202" end="21214" title="Zuniceratops" label="Zuniceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q132877" start="21313" end="21320" title="Yinlong" label="Yinlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="21344" end="21352" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="21631" end="21652" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052390" start="21813" end="21840" title="most recent common ancestor" label="most recent common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="21872" end="21883" title="Neornithes" label="modern bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q191488" start="21899" end="21911" title="Ornithischia" label="Ornithischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209542" start="22097" end="22101" title="herd" label="herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q892302" start="22233" end="22241" title="bone bed" label="bone bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q677533" start="22697" end="22715" title="Newcastle, Wyoming" label="Newcastle, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152099" start="22811" end="22832" title="Black Hills Institute" label="Black Hills Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="23099" end="23112" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121544" start="23308" end="23319" title="Ossification" label="co-ossified"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827907" start="23655" end="23669" title="Bruce Erickson (paleontologist)" label="Bruce Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777245" start="23695" end="23722" title="Science Museum of Minnesota" label="Science Museum of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="23796" end="23816" title="Hell Creek Formation" label="Hell Creek Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="23820" end="23827" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23139" start="23840" end="23852" title="Barnum Brown" label="Barnum Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483765" start="24035" end="24055" title="Lancian" label="Lancian faunal stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="24068" end="24081" title="Maastrichtian" label="Maastrichtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="24083" end="24098" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q352107" start="24231" end="24244" title="Robert Bakker" label="Robert Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234132" start="24401" end="24411" title="postcrania" label="postcrania"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="24496" end="24518" title="preservation potential" label="preservation potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q587698" start="25174" end="25185" title="ectothermic" label="ectothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714881" start="25204" end="25218" title="gigantothermic" label="gigantothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="25297" end="25309" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="25359" end="25384" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="25587" end="25598" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="25682" end="25693" title="herbivorous" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="25867" end="25871" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="26660" end="26673" title="Flowering plant" label="fibrous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="26762" end="26767" title="Arecaceae" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="26772" end="26777" title="cycad" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="26805" end="26809" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="27564" end="27577" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064705" start="27619" end="27639" title="Charles Hazelius Sternberg" label="Charles H. Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727623" start="27896" end="27905" title="squamosal" label="squamosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q728889" start="28434" end="28439" title="ilium (bone)" label="ilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="28444" end="28450" title="sacrum" label="sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941581" start="29091" end="29106" title="bone resorption" label="bone resorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168683" start="29218" end="29237" title="periosteal reaction" label="periosteal reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131589" start="29275" end="29287" title="Centrosaurus" label="Centrosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463418" start="29958" end="29968" title="fibroblast" label="fibroblast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30113" end="30123" title="Jugal bone#In dinosaurs" label="jugal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="30854" end="30879" title="thermoregulation" label="regulate body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q14388" start="30946" end="30957" title="Stegosaurus" label="Stegosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q263925" start="31078" end="31090" title="Ceratopsidae" label="Ceratopsidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193201" start="32199" end="32231" title="Proceedings of the Royal Society" label="Proceedings of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q247264" start="32253" end="32267" title="John R. Horner" label="John R. Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491" start="32933" end="32943" title="Torosaurus" label="Torosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="33419" end="33427" title="ontogeny" label="ontogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="33446" end="33466" title="Hell Creek Formation" label="Hell Creek Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="33579" end="33586" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638588" start="33612" end="33646" title="Society of Vertebrate Paleontology" label="Society of Vertebrate Paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="33849" end="33873" title="Montana State University" label="Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q132602" start="34781" end="34793" title="Nedoceratops" label="Nedoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="35349" end="35360" title="epoccipital" label="epoccipital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="36696" end="36701" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936104" start="37239" end="37250" title="Ojoceratops" label="Ojoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q18915569" start="37529" end="37544" title="Tatankaceratops" label="Tatankaceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415999" start="38029" end="38047" title="Evanston Formation" label="Evanston Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434305" start="38049" end="38067" title="Scollard Formation" label="Scollard Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077404" start="38069" end="38086" title="Laramie Formation" label="Laramie Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483389" start="38088" end="38103" title="Lance Formation" label="Lance Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259726" start="38105" end="38121" title="Denver Formation" label="Denver Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="38127" end="38147" title="Hell Creek Formation" label="Hell Creek Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="38202" end="38239" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491" start="38540" end="38550" title="Torosaurus" label="Torosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131328" start="38601" end="38614" title="Leptoceratops" label="Leptoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q130995" start="38742" end="38756" title="dromaeosaurids" label="dromaeosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131050" start="38758" end="38772" title="tyrannosaurids" label="tyrannosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131440" start="38774" end="38787" title="ornithomimids" label="ornithomimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q132452" start="38789" end="38800" title="troodontids" label="troodontids"/>
<link wikidata="Q782930" start="38802" end="38810" title="avialans" label="avialans"/>
<link wikidata="Q133539" start="38816" end="38829" title="caenagnathids" label="caenagnathids"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215620" start="38886" end="38898" title="Acheroraptor" label="Acheroraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21282866" start="38915" end="38927" title="Dakotaraptor" label="Dakotaraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131082" start="39044" end="39057" title="Dromaeosaurus" label="Dromaeosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132174" start="39074" end="39091" title="Saurornitholestes" label="Saurornitholestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="39203" end="39215" title="Nanotyrannus" label="Nanotyrannus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="39232" end="39245" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310535" start="39361" end="39374" title="Struthiomimus" label="Struthiomimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131067" start="39391" end="39403" title="Ornithomimus" label="Ornithomimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q100294953" start="39445" end="39454" title="Orcomimus" label="Orcomimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037858" start="39532" end="39542" title="Pectinodon" label="Pectinodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193022" start="39559" end="39571" title="Paronychodon" label="Paronychodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131043" start="39639" end="39646" title="Troodon" label="Troodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131092" start="39702" end="39713" title="coelurosaur" label="coelurosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029022" start="39802" end="39817" title="Richardoestesia" label="Richardoestesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131411" start="39836" end="39850" title="oviraptorosaur" label="oviraptorosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19983998" start="39893" end="39897" title="Anzu wyliei" label="Anzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878382" start="39911" end="39924" title="Leptorhynchos (dinosaur)" label="Leptorhynchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q310496" start="39990" end="40003" title="Gigantoraptor" label="Gigantoraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828982" start="40132" end="40141" title="Avisaurus" label="Avisaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333182" start="40175" end="40183" title="Brodavis" label="Brodavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132824" start="40220" end="40238" title="hesperornithoforms" label="hesperornithoforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="40275" end="40279" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120156" start="40298" end="40310" title="Cimolopteryx" label="Cimolopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q191488" start="40318" end="40330" title="Ornithischia" label="Ornithischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273617" start="40451" end="40463" title="ankylosauria" label="ankylosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q467430" start="40467" end="40477" title="ornithopod" label="ornithopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131381" start="40480" end="40490" title="ceratopsia" label="ceratopsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131376" start="40498" end="40516" title="pachycephalosauria" label="pachycephalosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40621" start="40558" end="40570" title="Ankylosaurus" label="Ankylosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012043" start="40584" end="40596" title="Denversaurus" label="Denversaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245262" start="40636" end="40646" title="Edmontonia" label="Edmontonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123245" start="40793" end="40808" title="leptoceratopsid" label="leptoceratopsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131328" start="40815" end="40828" title="Leptoceratops" label="Leptoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q137441" start="40843" end="40856" title="chasmosaurine" label="chasmosaurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q263925" start="40857" end="40868" title="ceratopsids" label="ceratopsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491" start="40875" end="40885" title="Torosaurus" label="Torosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132602" start="40899" end="40911" title="Nedoceratops" label="Nedoceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q18915569" start="40929" end="40944" title="Tatankaceratops" label="Tatankaceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574271" start="41045" end="41060" title="Thescelosaurinae" label="thescelosaurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131150" start="41067" end="41081" title="Thescelosaurus" label="Thescelosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q271841" start="41096" end="41107" title="hadrosaurid" label="hadrosaurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q309466" start="41114" end="41127" title="Edmontosaurus" label="Edmontosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131376" start="41143" end="41161" title="pachycephalosauria" label="pachycephalosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131376" start="41262" end="41281" title="pachycephalosaurids" label="pachycephalosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14455" start="41288" end="41299" title="Stygimoloch" label="Stygimoloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14455" start="41313" end="41321" title="Dracorex" label="Dracorex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14455" start="41335" end="41353" title="Pachycephalosaurus" label="Pachycephalosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134104" start="41367" end="41380" title="Sphaerotholus" label="Sphaerotholus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="41510" end="41516" title="Mammal" label="Mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131181" start="41588" end="41605" title="multituberculates" label="multituberculates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096960" start="41607" end="41617" title="metatheria" label="metatheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092469" start="41625" end="41633" title="eutheria" label="eutheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133949" start="41685" end="41698" title="Paracimexomys" label="Paracimexomys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120157" start="41710" end="41721" title="cimolomyidae" label="cimolomyids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136863" start="41728" end="41740" title="Paressonodon" label="Paressonodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901024" start="41754" end="41766" title="Meniscoessus" label="Meniscoessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399954" start="41780" end="41789" title="Essonodon" label="Essonodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120158" start="41803" end="41812" title="Cimolomys" label="Cimolomys"/>
<link wikidata="Q780915" start="41826" end="41835" title="Cimolodon" label="Cimolodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120126" start="41853" end="41862" title="Cimexomys" label="Cimexomys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993692" start="41878" end="41894" title="neoplagiaulacidae" label="neoplagiaulacids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985422" start="41901" end="41908" title="Mesodma" label="Mesodma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993693" start="41925" end="41938" title="Neoplagiaulax" label="Neoplagiaulax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904934" start="41986" end="41998" title="alphadontidae" label="alphadontids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768782" start="42005" end="42013" title="Alphadon" label="Alphadon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42027" end="42039" title="Protalphodon" label="Protalphodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768795" start="42057" end="42067" title="Turgidodon" label="Turgidodon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42079" end="42089" title="pediomyidae" label="pediomyids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901422" start="42096" end="42104" title="Pediomys" label="Pediomys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42118" end="42129" title="Protolambda" label="Protolambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527881" start="42147" end="42158" title="Leptalestes" label="Leptalestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2772855" start="42170" end="42181" title="stagodontidae" label="stagodontid"/>
<link wikidata="Q135001" start="42188" end="42199" title="Didelphodon" label="Didelphodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254832" start="42211" end="42225" title="deltatheridiidae" label="deltatheridiid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964019" start="42232" end="42241" title="Nanocuris" label="Nanocuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743809" start="42253" end="42267" title="herpetotheriidae" label="herpetotheriid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42274" end="42286" title="Nortedelphys" label="Nortedelphys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42302" end="42310" title="glasbiidae" label="glasbiid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42317" end="42325" title="Glasbius" label="Glasbius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42388" end="42396" title="Alostera" label="Alostera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197682" start="42410" end="42423" title="Protungulatum" label="Protungulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q867388" start="42435" end="42446" title="cimolestidae" label="cimolestids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273848" start="42453" end="42463" title="Cimolestes" label="Cimolestes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42480" end="42487" title="Batodon" label="Batodon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42499" end="42513" title="gypsonictopsidae" label="gypsonictopsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9001635" start="42520" end="42532" title="Gypsonictops" label="Gypsonictops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752854" start="42558" end="42570" title="nyctitheriidae" label="nyctitheriid"/>
<link wikidata="Q30894951" start="42577" end="42590" title="Paranyctoides" label="Paranyctoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044076" start="42665" end="42677" title="state fossil" label="state fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="42681" end="42693" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="42737" end="42744" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q725877" start="42755" end="42772" title="Charles R. Knight" label="Charles R. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="42892" end="42923" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="42932" end="42959" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q352107" start="43033" end="43046" title="Robert T. Bakker" label="Robert Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131396" start="43090" end="43103" title="Tyrannosauroidea" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="43329" end="43338" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="last days"/>
<link wikidata="Q278141" start="43346" end="43356" title="Maastrichtian" label="last epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="43364" end="43380" title="Mesozoic" label="Age of Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="43895" end="43898" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54412" wikidata="Q223924" url="?curid=54412" title="Unicycle">
<text>A unicycle is a vehicle that touches the ground with only one wheel. The most common variation has a frame with a saddle, and has a pedal-driven direct-drive. A two speed hub is commercially available for faster unicycling. Unicycling is practiced professionally in circuses, by street performers, in festivals, and as a hobby. Unicycles have also been used to create new sports such as unicycle hockey. In recent years, unicycles have also been used in mountain unicycling, an activity similar to mountain biking or trials.

==History==

US patents for single-wheeled &#x27;velocipedes&#x27; were published in 1869 by Frederick Myers and in 1881 by Battista Scuri.

Unicycle design has developed since the Penny Farthing and later the advent of the first unicycle into many variations including: the seatless unicycle (&quot;ultimate wheel&quot;) the tall (&quot;giraffe&quot;) unicycle and &quot;2-wheelers&quot; or &quot;3-wheelers&quot; (multiple wheels stacked directly on top of each other). During the late 1980s some extreme sportsmen took an interest in the unicycle and modified unicycles to enable them to engage in off-road or mountain unicycling, trials unicycling and street unicycling.

==Unicycles compared to other pedal powered vehicles==
Bicycles, tricycles and quadracycles share (with minor variations) several basic parts including wheels, pedals, cranks, forks, and the saddle with unicycles.
Without a rider, unicycles lack stability – however, a proficient unicyclist is usually more stable than a similarly proficient rider on a bicycle as the wheel is not constrained by the linear axis of a frame.
Unicycles usually, but not always, lack brakes, gears, and the ability to freewheel. Given these differences, the injuries that can occur from unicycle use tend to be different from that of bicycle use. In particular, head injuries are significantly less likely among unicycle use compared to bicycle use.

==Construction==

Unicycles have a few key parts:

* The wheel (which includes the tire, tube, rim, spokes, hub and axle)
* The cranks (which attach the pedals to the wheel hub)
* The hub (connects the spokes to a central point and also transfers pedalling power to the wheel)
* Pedals
* Fork-style frame
* Seatpost
* Saddle (the seat of the unicycle)

The wheel is usually similar to a bicycle wheel with a special hub designed so the axle is a fixed part of the hub. This means the rotation of the cranks directly controls the rotation of the wheel (called direct-drive). The frame sits on top of the axle bearings, while the cranks attach to the ends of the axle, and the seatpost slides into the frame to allow the saddle to be height adjusted.

==Types of unicycles==

Types of unicycle include:

* Freestyle unicycles
* Trials unicycles
* Mountain unicycles (also called Munis)
* Giraffe unicycles
* Commuter unicycles
* Street unicycles
* Cruiser unicycles
* Road unicycles

Each type has many combinations of frame strength, wheel diameter, and crank length.

===Freestyle unicycles===
Generally used for flatland skills and freestyle routines, freestyle unicycles typically have a relatively high seatpost, a narrow saddle, and a squared fork (used for one-footed tricks). These unicycles are used similarly to flatland bicycles. Wheel size is usually , but smaller riders may use unicycles. Some people prefer wheels. Many freestyle unicyclists will use white tires to avoid tire marks when riding indoors.

===Trials unicycles===
Designed for unicycle trials, these unicycles are stronger than standard unicycles in order to withstand the stresses caused by jumping, dropping, and supporting the weight of the unicycle and rider on components such as the pedals and cranks. Many trials unicycles also have wide, knobby tires to absorb some of the impact on drops.

===Mountain unicycles (&quot;Munis&quot;)===
Mountain unicycling (abbreviated to muni or mUni) consists of riding specialized unicycles on mountain bike trails or otherwise off-roading. Mountain unicycles have thicker, wider tires for better traction. Riders may occasionally lower air pressure for increased shock absorption. Many riders choose to use long cranks to increase power when riding up hills and over rough terrain. A disc brake is sometimes used for descents; the brake handle is attached to the underside of the handle on the front of the saddle.

===Touring/commuter unicycles===

Used for long distances, these unicycles are specially made to cover distances. They have a large wheel diameter, between , so more distance is covered in less pedal rotation. A 36″ unicycle made by the Coker Tire company started the big wheel trend. Some variations on the traditional touring unicycle include the Schlumpf &quot;GUni&quot; (geared unicycle), which uses a two-speed internal fixed-geared hub. Larger direct-drive wheels tend to have shorter cranks to allow for easier cadence and more speed. Geared wheels, with an effective diameter larger than the wheel itself, tend to use longer cranks to increase torque as they are not required to achieve such high cadences as direct-drive wheels, but demand greater force per pedal stroke.

=== Other variations ===
* Giraffe, a chain-driven unicycle. Use of a chain or multiple wheels in a gear-like configuration can make the unicycle much taller than standard unicycles (note that multi-wheel unicycles can be described as &quot;giraffes&quot;). Standard unicycles don&#x27;t have a chain, which limits the seat height based on how long the rider&#x27;s legs are, because there the crank is attached directly to the wheel axle. Giraffe unicycles can range in heights from to over high.
* Geared unicycle, or GUni, a unicycle whose wheel rotates faster than the pedal cadence. They are used for distance riding and racing.
* Multi-wheeled unicycle, a unicycle with more than one wheel, stacked on top of each other so that only one wheel touches the ground (nicknamed &quot;stacks&quot;). The wheels are linked together by chains or direct contact with each other. These unicycles can also be called &quot;giraffes&quot;.
* Kangaroo unicycle, a unicycle that has both the cranks facing in the same direction. They are so named due to the hopping motion of the rider&#x27;s legs, supposedly resembling the jumping of a kangaroo.
* Eccentric unicycle, a unicycle that has the hub off-center in the wheel. Putting an eccentric wheel on a kangaroo unicycle can make riding easier, and the rider&#x27;s motion appear more kangaroo-like.
* Ultimate wheel, a unicycle with no frame or seat, just a wheel and pedals.
* Impossible wheel, or BC wheel, a wheel with pegs or metal plates connected to the axle for the rider to stand on. These wheels are for coasting and jumping. A purist form of unicycle, without cranks.
* Monocycle, or monowheel, a large wheel inside which the rider sits (as in a hamster wheel), either motorized or pedal-powered. The greater gyroscopic properties and lower center of mass make it easier to balance than a normal unicycle but less maneuverable.
* Self-balancing unicycle or electric unicycle, a computer-controlled, motor-driven, self-balancing unicycle.
* Freewheeling unicycle, a unicycle in which the hub has a freewheel mechanism, allowing the rider, to coast or move forward without pedaling, as a common bicycle does. These unicycles almost always have brakes because they cannot stop the way traditional unicycles do. The brake lever is generally mounted in the bottom of the saddle. These unicycles also cannot go backwards.
* Tandem
* Recumbent
* Hydraulic giraffe that can change in height while being ridden

==Training aids==
Training aids are sometimes used to make it easier to become comfortable with riding a unicycle. One method for training is using a spotter to make riding easier. Another method is finding a narrow hallway that can be used to help alleviate left and right balancing while allowing a beginner to focus on forward and backward balance. Equally, riding back and forth between two chairs, faced back to back, while holding on to the chair backs allows the user to gauge how to appropriately position oneself before setting off. Using props such as sticks or ski poles is generally discouraged as they hinder balance and create dependence. A fall onto props could also cause serious injury.

==Riding styles==


Traditionally, unicycling has been seen as a circus skill which has been performed at events to entertain the public in the circus or during parades, carnivals or street festivals. Recent developments in the strength and durability of bicycle (and consequently unicycle) parts have given rise to many new activities including trials of unicycling and mountain unicycling. Unicycling is arguably now as much a competitive sport and recreational pursuit as an entertainment activity.

The principal types of unicycling are:

; Freestyle: Perhaps the oldest form of unicycling, traditional freestyle riding is based on performance. Freestyle tricks and moves are derived from different ways of riding the unicycle, and linking these moves together into one long flowing line that is aesthetically pleasing. Competitions look very similar to figure skating, with riders performing routines to music.

; Comedy: Along with freestyle it is a performance style of unicycling. Often employed by clowns and other circus skills performers. Comedy unicycling exaggerates the perceived difficulty of riding a unicycle to create a comedic performance.

; Trials unicycling: Trials unicycling is specifically aimed at negotiating obstacles. Analogous to trials bike riding.

; Street unicycling: Street unicycling as a style involves riders using a combination of objects found in urbanized settings (such as ledges, handrails, and stairs) to perform a wide variety of tricks. Many tricks are similar to those performed in other extreme sports, such as BMX and skateboarding.

; Off-road or mountain unicycling (abbreviated to &#x27;MUni&#x27;): Muni is riding on rough terrain and has developed as a form of unicycling in recent years.

; Touring or commuting: This style concentrates on distance riding. With a wheel cruising speeds of or more can easily be reached.

; Flatland unicycling: This style of unicycling is similar to freestyle in that various tricks and movements are performed on flat ground. Flatland, however, does not have the performance element of freestyle, but instead has tricks that are similar to those in BMX and skateboarding.

==Unicycle team sports==
Unicycling is also performed as a team sport.

===Unicycle basketball===
Unicycle basketball uses a regulation basketball on a regular basketball court with the same rules, e.g., one must dribble the ball while riding. There are a number of rules that are particular to unicycle basketball as well, e.g., a player must be mounted on the unicycle when in-bounding the ball. Unicycle basketball is usually played using or smaller unicycles, and using plastic pedals, both to preserve the court and the players&#x27; shins. In North America, regular unicycle basketball games are organized in Berkeley, San Luis Obispo, Detroit, Phoenix, Minneapolis, and Toronto. Switzerland, France, Germany and Puerto Rico are all field teams. The Puerto Rico All Star Unicycling Basketball Team has been one of the dominant teams and has won several world championships.

===Unicycle hockey===
Unicycle hockey follows rules similar to rink hockey, using a tennis ball and ice-hockey sticks. Play is mostly non-contact. The sport has active leagues in Germany, Switzerland, Australia and the UK and international tournaments held at least bi-annually. Tournaments in the UK are held by various teams across the country usually in sports halls, but occasionally outside. Each tournament lasts a day and around 8 teams normally compete in a round-robin league with the winner being whoever has the most points. If two teams have the same number of points the winner can be decided by goal difference or a penalty shoot-out.

==Notable unicyclists==

===Known as unicyclists===

====Individuals====
* Kris Holm and George Peck, pioneers in mountain unicycling
* Rudy Horn, a German juggler
* , a German juggler
* Jiang Yan Jing, Chinese acrobat
* Ted Jorgensen, circus unicyclist, president of the Albuquerque Unicycle Club
* Michael Goudeau, an American juggler
* Skeeter Reece, an American clown
* Amy Shields, an American freestyle unicyclist
* Dustin Kelm, worldwide variety unicycle performer
* &quot;Wobbling&quot; Wally Watts, round the world unicyclist, April 1976 to October 1978
* Ed Pratt, round the world unicyclist, March 2015 to July 2018
*Mike Taylor, World Champion in Unicycle High Jump in 2014, 2016 &amp; 2018

====Groups====

* Albuquerque Unicycle Club world&#x27;s first unicycle hockey club
* The King Charles Troupe, the first African American circus troupe, and one of the longest running acts in Ringling Bros history

===Known in other fields===
* Adam Carolla, American comedian and actor
* Rupert Grint, actor who played Ronald Weasley in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; films
* Mark Ruffalo, actor 
* Mika Häkkinen, Formula One racing driver
* Lewis Hamilton, Formula One racing driver
* Eddie Izzard, comedian and actor
* Leslie Mann, American actress who performed on &quot;The Ellen DeGeneres Show&quot;
* Chris Martin, lead singer of Coldplay
* Demetri Martin, American comedian and actor
* Ulrich Mühe, late German actor, best known for his role in The Lives of Others
* Michael Nesmith, former guitarist of The Monkees
* Miles Plumlee, American professional basketball player
* Nico Rosberg, Formula One racing driver
* Donald Rumsfeld, former United States Secretary of Defense
* Claude Shannon, founder of information theory
* Take That members Mark Owen, Jason Orange, and Howard Donald unicycled for the circus-based video for their song &quot;Said It All&quot;
* Andrew Tosh, son of Peter and also a Jamaican reggae musician
* Peter Tosh: Jamaican reggae musician from The Wailers
* Steve Young, former National Football League quarterback
* Ilya Zhitomirskiy: Russian-American software developer and entrepreneur

==UNICON and regional championships==
UNICON, Eurocycle and APUC are regular international unicycling conventions.

The UNICON (International Unicycling Convention), sanctioned by the International Unicycling Federation, comprises all major unicycling disciplines and is a major event on the international unicycling calendar. Events include: artistic (group, pairs, individual, standard skill , open-X), track racing (100 metres, 400 metres, 800 metres, 30 metres walk the wheel, 50 metres one-foot), 10 kilometres, marathon (42.195 km), muni (cross-country, uphill, downhill, North Shore downhill), trials, basketball and hockey.

The Eurocycle (EUROpean uniCYCLE meeting) is a similar convention but based in Europe.

APUC, the Asia Pacific Unicycle Championships, are held biannually, alternately with Unicon. The first APUC, in 2007, was in Singapore. Subsequently, the event has been held in Hong Kong (2009), Seoul (2011), Canberra (2013), and Singapore (2015).

EUC, the Extreme Unicycle Championship, is the convention for urban unicycling (Street, Trials and Flatland). The event is held in two editions: summer and winter. Winter EUC is usually held at Cologne, Germany, while locations of the summer edition vary.

== Races ==

The world&#x27;s first multi-stage unicycle race, Ride the Lobster, took place in Nova Scotia in June 2008. Some 35 teams from 14 countries competed over a total distance of 800 km. Each team consisted of a maximum of 3 riders and 1 support person.

Unicross, or unicycle cyclocross is an emerging race format in which unicycles race over a cyclocross course.

==Manufacturers==
Unicycle makers include:
* Coker
* Impact Unicycles
* Kris Holm Unicycles
* Mad4One
* Miyata
* Nimbus Unicycles
* Torker (formerly)
* Unicycle.com
* Schwinn
* Qu-Ax

==See also==
* Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics
* Monowheel
* Self-balancing unicycle
* Uniracers

==References==
==External links==
* International Unicycling Federation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="2" end="10" title="Unicycle" label="unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="16" end="23" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="62" end="67" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167130" start="101" end="106" title="bicycle frame" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076532" start="114" end="120" title="bicycle saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63247926" start="132" end="144" title="human-powered vehicle" label="pedal-driven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065011" start="145" end="157" title="direct-drive mechanism" label="direct-drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="266" end="272" title="circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="279" end="296" title="street performance" label="street performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="301" end="310" title="festivals" label="festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="321" end="326" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="372" end="377" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308522" start="387" end="402" title="unicycle hockey" label="unicycle hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="454" end="473" title="mountain unicycling" label="mountain unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="498" end="513" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763915" start="517" end="523" title="Mountain bike trials" label="trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="542" end="548" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="826" end="840" title="ultimate wheel" label="ultimate wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="1139" end="1158" title="mountain unicycling" label="mountain unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321113" start="1160" end="1177" title="trials unicycling" label="trials unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="1182" end="1199" title="street unicycling" label="street unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="1257" end="1265" title="Bicycles" label="Bicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q536135" start="1267" end="1276" title="tricycles" label="tricycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754713" start="1281" end="1293" title="quadracycles" label="quadracycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293233" start="1700" end="1709" title="freewheel" label="freewheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="1990" end="1995" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q771452" start="2016" end="2020" title="Bicycle tire" label="tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49717" start="2061" end="2067" title="Crankset" label="cranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q305026" start="2212" end="2218" title="Bicycle pedal" label="Pedals"/>
<link wikidata="Q651103" start="2221" end="2225" title="Bicycle fork" label="Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317537" start="2240" end="2248" title="Seatpost" label="Seatpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076532" start="2251" end="2257" title="Bicycle saddle" label="Saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q161798" start="2320" end="2333" title="bicycle wheel" label="bicycle wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065011" start="2492" end="2504" title="direct-drive mechanism" label="direct-drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2737" end="2756" title="#Freestyle unicycles" label="Freestyle unicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321113" start="2759" end="2775" title="unicycle trials" label="Trials unicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="2778" end="2796" title="mountain unicycling" label="Mountain unicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321113" start="3487" end="3502" title="unicycle trials" label="unicycle trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="3854" end="3873" title="Mountain unicycling" label="Mountain unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141727" start="4608" end="4618" title="Coker Tire" label="Coker Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072666" start="4720" end="4728" title="Schlumpf Drive" label="Schlumpf"/>
<link wikidata="Q742924" start="5733" end="5740" title="cadence (cycling)" label="cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q189940" start="5988" end="5993" title="bicycle chain" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="6283" end="6291" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632956" start="6778" end="6787" title="Monocycle" label="Monocycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q967168" start="6854" end="6867" title="hamster wheel" label="hamster wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="6917" end="6927" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="6949" end="6963" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448027" start="7038" end="7061" title="Self-balancing unicycle" label="Self-balancing unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448027" start="7065" end="7082" title="electric unicycle" label="electric unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293233" start="7205" end="7214" title="freewheel" label="freewheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="7350" end="7355" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7420" end="7431" title="Brake lever#Brake levers" label="brake lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="7474" end="7480" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292640" start="8183" end="8192" title="ski poles" label="ski poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990963" start="8381" end="8393" title="circus skills" label="circus skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="8460" end="8466" title="circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="8486" end="8495" title="carnivals" label="carnivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="8499" end="8515" title="street festivals" label="street festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="9323" end="9329" title="clowns" label="clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321113" start="9478" end="9495" title="Trials unicycling" label="Trials unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="9599" end="9616" title="Street unicycling" label="Street unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="9913" end="9932" title="mountain unicycling" label="mountain unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10194" end="10213" title="Flatland unicycling" label="Flatland unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25066500" start="11234" end="11281" title="Puerto Rico All Star Unicycling Basketball Team" label="Puerto Rico All Star Unicycling Basketball Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748406" start="11422" end="11433" title="rink hockey" label="rink hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="11825" end="11836" title="Round-robin tournament" label="round-robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789061" start="12084" end="12093" title="Kris Holm" label="Kris Holm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12098" end="12109" title="George Peck (unicyclist)" label="George Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q109235" start="12145" end="12154" title="Rudy Horn" label="Rudy Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q97749941" start="12230" end="12243" title="Ted Jorgensen" label="Ted Jorgensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q117530643" start="12281" end="12306" title="Albuquerque Unicycle Club" label="Albuquerque Unicycle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830698" start="12309" end="12324" title="Michael Goudeau" label="Michael Goudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q113911363" start="12348" end="12361" title="Skeeter Reece" label="Skeeter Reece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749386" start="12383" end="12394" title="Amy Shields" label="Amy Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214025" start="12431" end="12442" title="Dustin Kelm" label="Dustin Kelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q97490329" start="12574" end="12582" title="Edward Pratt" label="Ed Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q117530643" start="12731" end="12756" title="Albuquerque Unicycle Club" label="Albuquerque Unicycle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308522" start="12776" end="12791" title="unicycle hockey" label="unicycle hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204316" start="12799" end="12822" title="The King Charles Troupe" label="The King Charles Troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="12905" end="12918" title="Ringling Bros" label="Ringling Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119" start="12958" end="12970" title="Adam Carolla" label="Adam Carolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q19190" start="13002" end="13014" title="Rupert Grint" label="Rupert Grint"/>
<link wikidata="Q173998" start="13033" end="13047" title="Ronald Weasley" label="Ronald Weasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="13055" end="13085" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot; films"/>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="13088" end="13100" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="13111" end="13124" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="13126" end="13137" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="13154" end="13168" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="13170" end="13181" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q254022" start="13198" end="13210" title="Eddie Izzard" label="Eddie Izzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q229011" start="13233" end="13244" title="Leslie Mann" label="Leslie Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q839150" start="13286" end="13310" title="The Ellen DeGeneres Show" label="The Ellen DeGeneres Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="13319" end="13331" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="13348" end="13356" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q717951" start="13359" end="13373" title="Demetri Martin" label="Demetri Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57292" start="13405" end="13416" title="Ulrich Mühe" label="Ulrich Mühe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153882" start="13464" end="13483" title="The Lives of Others" label="The Lives of Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q954997" start="13486" end="13501" title="Michael Nesmith" label="Michael Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="13523" end="13534" title="The Monkees" label="The Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080886" start="13537" end="13550" title="Miles Plumlee" label="Miles Plumlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q75820" start="13594" end="13606" title="Nico Rosberg" label="Nico Rosberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="13608" end="13619" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="13636" end="13651" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="13660" end="13694" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="United States Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="13697" end="13711" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="13724" end="13742" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q152066" start="13745" end="13754" title="Take That" label="Take That"/>
<link wikidata="Q130557" start="13763" end="13772" title="Mark Owen" label="Mark Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130547" start="13774" end="13786" title="Jason Orange" label="Jason Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130565" start="13792" end="13805" title="Howard Donald" label="Howard Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650450" start="13864" end="13875" title="Said It All" label="Said It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q508059" start="13884" end="13895" title="Andrew Tosh" label="Andrew Tosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q273049" start="13948" end="13958" title="Peter Tosh" label="Peter Tosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525354" start="13990" end="14001" title="Bob Marley and The Wailers" label="The Wailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q740086" start="14004" end="14015" title="Steve Young" label="Steve Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="14024" end="14048" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q241361" start="14063" end="14080" title="Ilya Zhitomirskiy" label="Ilya Zhitomirskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="14099" end="14117" title="software developer" label="software developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="14122" end="14134" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q360682" start="14256" end="14262" title="UNICON" label="UNICON"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227832" start="14320" end="14355" title="International Unicycling Federation" label="International Unicycling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="14675" end="14679" title="mountain unicycling" label="muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105257" start="14773" end="14782" title="Eurocycle" label="Eurocycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770756" start="14857" end="14861" title="Asia-Pacific Unicycle Competition" label="APUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332538" start="15426" end="15442" title="Ride the Lobster" label="Ride the Lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="15458" end="15469" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335638" start="15648" end="15658" title="cyclocross" label="cyclocross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15782" end="15787" title="Coker Tire#Bicycles and unicycles" label="Coker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15790" end="15806" title="Impact Unicycles" label="Impact Unicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789061" start="15809" end="15828" title="Kris Holm" label="Kris Holm Unicycles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15831" end="15838" title="Mad4One" label="Mad4One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869287" start="15841" end="15847" title="Miyata (bicycle)" label="Miyata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15850" end="15866" title="Nimbus Unicycles" label="Nimbus Unicycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825866" start="15869" end="15875" title="Torker" label="Torker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15889" end="15901" title="Unicycle.com" label="Unicycle.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q73053" start="15904" end="15911" title="Schwinn" label="Schwinn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15914" end="15919" title="Qu-Ax" label="Qu-Ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903772" start="15936" end="15967" title="Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics" label="Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632956" start="15970" end="15979" title="Monowheel" label="Monowheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448027" start="15982" end="16005" title="Self-balancing unicycle" label="Self-balancing unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088033" start="16008" end="16017" title="Uniracers" label="Uniracers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54415" wikidata="Q6925591" url="?curid=54415" title="Mountain unicycling">
<text>Mountain unicycling is an adventure sport that consists of traversing rough terrain on a unicycle. Mountain unicycling (muni) is undertaken on similar terrain to mountain biking. However, muni requires much more attention to the microfeatures of the short distance in front of the wheel. Unicycles&#x27; lack of a freewheel means that descents must be controlled all the way, and the typical lack of a gear system (though two-gear hubs are available) prevents the rider from reaching high speeds. Muni usually takes place on specially designed unicycles, which are equipped with strong hubs, large, knobbly tires, high-grip pedals and rugged frames. Some are also equipped with rim or disc brakes, having the lever mounted under the nose of the saddle. The brake primarily helps to compensate the downhill-slope force, while more expert riders also use it to decelerate or stop.

Muni riders also need a few additional skills than required for either mountain biking or regular unicycling, with core strength, endurance and balance being key.

== Skills ==
The ability to stall (rock the cranks back and forth while remaining in the same location) and bunny hop (hop up and down while remaining in the same location) are helpful.

Highspeed gliding is a technique to rush down a smooth path with the feet off the pedals and braking with one shoe on the top of the tire.

== Equipment ==

The unicycle typically has broad tires with grippy profile, filled with medium air pressure. The grippy pedals may have a tilt front contour (viewed from the side). The cranks should not be too long – relative to the rim size – to maintain clearance from bigger stones on the ground. Rims are rather broad to be sturdy and may have bores between the spoke holes to save weight, as a typical trial bike wheel. The banana saddle is fixed (not spring suspended) on the fork and carries a front and back bumper made of stiff plastics. The front bumper is used by three fingers from underneath as a handle, when the rider jumps or dismounts – or falls.

The rider wears shoes with grip, uses a helmet and protectors at shins, knees and at least gloves on the hands.

A helmet camera needs a wide angle lens and picture stabilization, because the rider makes sudden and quick head movements to watch the trail.

== Events ==

* Muni events recognized by the International Unicycling Federation at Unicons are: cross-country, uphill and downhill with the possibility of North Shore downhill.
* In the United States, the California Mountain Unicycle Weekend and the Moab, Utah Muni Fest (ended as of 2009).
* In the UK, the British Muni Weekend (BMW).
* The first Colorado Munifest took place in October 2007, organized by Colorado Muni.
* The first Arizona Mountain Unicycle Weekend was held in February 2009, organized by the Arizona Unicycle Club.
* In Australia, Cross County and Downhill are included in UniNats, held by the Australian Unicycle Society every 12–18 months.
* In Liechtenstein and Switzerland, the Elsbet (abbreviation for , English: Unique Mountain Unicycling Meeting of Liechtenstein and Switzerland)

== Gallery ==

== Riders ==
===Canada===
* Kris Holm – Mountain unicycling pioneer and founder of Kris Holm Unicycles
* Ryan Kremsater

===Austria===
* Gerald Rosenkranz – First finisher of Red Bull Dolomitenmann on a unicycle (2015)
* Markus Pröglhöf

===Germany===
*Lutz Eichholz

== See also ==

* Unicycle
* Unicycle trials
* Mountain biking

== References ==
== External links ==
*International Unicycling Federation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="0" end="19" title="Mountain unicycling" label="Mountain unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="89" end="97" title="unicycle" label="unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="108" end="118" title="unicycling" label="unicycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925591" start="120" end="124" title="Mountain unicycling" label="muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="162" end="177" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293233" start="314" end="323" title="freewheel" label="freewheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="685" end="695" title="disc brake" label="disc brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763915" start="1779" end="1789" title="Mountain bike trials" label="trial bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227832" start="2340" end="2375" title="International Unicycling Federation" label="International Unicycling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q360682" start="2379" end="2385" title="UNICON" label="Unicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2482" end="2495" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2596" end="2598" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2644" end="2652" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2730" end="2737" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2836" end="2845" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="2963" end="2976" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2981" end="2992" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789061" start="3147" end="3156" title="Kris Holm" label="Kris Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236296" start="3303" end="3316" title="Dolomitenmann" label="Dolomitenmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q223924" start="3405" end="3413" title="Unicycle" label="Unicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321113" start="3416" end="3431" title="Unicycle trials" label="Unicycle trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="3434" end="3449" title="Mountain biking" label="Mountain biking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54416" wikidata="Q5639" url="?curid=54416" title="Trolleybus">
<text>A trolleybus (also known as trolley bus, trolley coach, trackless trolley, trackless tramin the 1910s and 1920sor trolley) is an electric bus that draws power from dual overhead wires (generally suspended from roadside posts) using spring-loaded trolley poles. Two wires, and two trolley poles, are required to complete the electrical circuit. This differs from a tram or streetcar, which normally uses the track as the return path, needing only one wire and one pole (or pantograph). They are also distinct from other kinds of electric buses, which usually rely on batteries. Power is most commonly supplied as 600-volt direct current, but there are exceptions.

Currently, around 300 trolleybus systems are in operation, in cities and towns in 43 countries. Altogether, more than 800 trolleybus systems have existed, but not more than about 400 concurrently.

==History==

The trolleybus dates back to 29 April 1882, when Dr. Ernst Werner Siemens demonstrated his &quot;Elektromote&quot; in a Berlin suburb. This experiment continued until 13 June 1882, after which there were few developments in Europe, although separate experiments were conducted in the United States. In 1899, another vehicle which could run either on or off rails was demonstrated in Berlin. The next development was when Louis Lombard-Gérin operated an experimental line at the Paris Exhibition of 1900 after four years of trials, with a circular route around Lake Daumesnil that carried passengers. Routes followed in six places including Eberswalde and Fontainebleau. Max Schiemann on 10 July 1901 opened the world&#x27;s fourth passenger-carrying trolleybus system, which operated at Bielatal (Biela Valley, near Dresden), Germany. Schiemann built and operated the Bielatal system, and is credited with developing the under-running trolley current collection system, with two horizontally parallel overhead wires and rigid trolleypoles spring-loaded to hold them up to the wires. Although this system operated only until 1904, Schiemann had developed what is now the standard trolleybus current collection system. In the early days there were many other methods of current collection. The Cédès-Stoll (Mercédès-Électrique-Stoll) system was first operated near Dresden between 1902 and 1904, and 18 systems followed. The Lloyd-Köhler or Bremen system was tried out in Bremen with 5 further installations, and the Cantono Frigerio system was used in Italy.

Throughout this period, trackless freight systems and electric canal boats were also built.
Leeds and Bradford became the first cities to put trolleybuses into service in Great Britain, on 20 June 1911. Supposedly, though it was opened on 20 June, the public was not admitted to the Bradford route until the 24th. Bradford was also the last city to operate trolleybuses in the UK; the system closed on 26 March 1972. The last rear-entrance trolleybus in service in Britain was also in Bradford and is now owned by the Bradford Trolleybus Association. Birmingham was the first UK city to replace a tram route with trolleybuses, while Wolverhampton, under the direction of Charles Owen Silvers, became world-famous for its trolleybus designs. There were 50 trolleybus systems in the UK, London&#x27;s being the largest. By the time trolleybuses arrived in Britain in 1911, the Schiemann system was well established and was the most common, although the Cédès-Stoll (Mercédès-Électrique-Stoll) system was tried in West Ham (in 1912) and in Keighley (in 1913).

Smaller trackless trolley systems were built in the US early as well. The first non-experimental system was a seasonal municipal line installed near Nantasket Beach in 1904; the first year-round commercial line was built to open a hilly property to development just outside Los Angeles in 1910. The trackless trolley was often seen as an interim step, leading to streetcars. In the US, some systems subscribed to the all-four concept of using buses, trolleybuses, streetcars (&quot;trams, trolleys)&quot;, and rapid transit subway and/or elevated lines (metros), as appropriate, for routes ranging from the lightly used to the heaviest trunk line. Buses and trolleybuses in particular were seen as entry systems that could later be upgraded to rail as appropriate. In a similar fashion, many cities in Britain originally viewed trolleybus routes as extensions to tram (streetcar) routes where the cost of constructing or restoring track could not be justified at the time, though this attitude changed markedly (to viewing them as outright replacements for tram routes) in the years after 1918. Trackless trolleys were the dominant form of new post-World War I electric traction, with extensive systems in among others, Los Angeles, Chicago, Boston, Rhode Island, and Atlanta; San Francisco and Philadelphia still maintain an &quot;all-four&quot; fleet.
Some trolleybus lines in the United States (and in Britain, as noted above) came into existence when a trolley or tram route did not have sufficient ridership to warrant track maintenance or reconstruction. In a similar manner, a proposed tram scheme in Leeds, United Kingdom, was changed to a trolleybus scheme to cut costs.
Trolleybuses are uncommon today in North America, but their use is widespread in Europe and Russia. They remain common in many countries which were part of the Soviet Union. Generally trolleybuses occupy a position in usage between street railways (trams) and motorbuses. Worldwide, around 300 cities or metropolitan areas on 5 continents are served by trolleybuses (further detail under Use and preservation, below).

This mode of transport operates in large cities, such as Belgrade, Lyon, Pyongyang, São Paulo, Seattle, Sofia, St. Petersburg, and Zurich, as well as in smaller ones such as Dayton, Gdynia, Lausanne, Limoges, Modena, and Salzburg. As of 2020, Kyiv has, due to its history in the former Soviet Union, the largest trolleybus system in the world in terms of route length while another formerly Soviet city, Minsk, has the largest system in terms of number of routes (which also date back to the Soviet era). Landskrona has the smallest system in terms of route length, while Mariánské Lázně is the smallest city to be served by trolleybuses. Opened in 1914, Shanghai&#x27;s trolleybus system is the oldest operating system in the world. With a length of 86 km, route #52 of Crimean Trolleybus is the longest trolleybus line in the world. &quot;See also Trolleybus usage by country.&quot;

Transit authorities in some cities have reduced or discontinued the use of trolleybuses in recent years, while others, wanting to add or expand use of zero-emission vehicles in an urban environment, have opened new systems or are planning new systems. For example, new systems opened in Lecce, Italy, in 2012; in Malatya, Turkey, in 2015; and in Marrakesh, Morocco, in 2017. Beijing and Shanghai have been expanding their respective systems, with Beijing expanding to a 31-line system operated with a fleet of over 1,250 trolleybuses. Trolleybuses have been long encouraged in North Korea with the newest city to have a network being Manpo in December 2019. Since the year 2022, the city of Prague is constructing a new trolleybus system. Meanwhile, in 2023, plans for a trolleybus line in Berlin were scrapped in favour of a solution with battery-powered vehicles.

==Vehicle design==
Modern design vehicles

==Advantages==

===Comparison to trams===
*Cheaper infrastructureThe initial start up cost of trams is much higher, due to rail, signals, and other infrastructure. Trolleybuses can pull over to the kerb like other buses, eliminating the need for special boarding stations or boarding islands in the middle of the street, thus stations can be moved as needed.
*Better hill climbingTrolleybuses&#x27; rubber tyres have better adhesion than trams&#x27; steel wheels on steel rails, giving them better hill-climbing capability and braking.
*Easier traffic avoidanceUnlike trams (where side tracks are often unavailable), an out-of-service vehicle can be moved to the side of the road and its trolley poles lowered. The ability to drive a substantial distance from the power wires allows trackless vehicles to avoid obstacles, although it also means a possibility that the vehicle may steer or skid far enough that the trolley pole can no longer reach the wire, stranding the vehicle. Trackless trolleys also are able to avoid collisions by manoeuvring around obstacles, similar to motor buses and other road vehicles, while trams can only change speed.
*QuietnessTrolleybuses are generally quieter than trams.
*Easier trainingThe control of trolleybuses is relatively similar to motorbuses; the potential operator pool for all buses is much larger than for trams.

===Comparison to motorbuses===


==Disadvantages==
===Comparison to trams===
&quot;Note: As there are numerous variations of tram and light-rail technology, the disadvantages listed may be applicable only with a specific technology or design.&quot;

*Like any bus, much less capacity than trams.
*More control requiredTrolleybuses must be driven like motorbuses, requiring directional control by the driver.
*Higher rolling resistanceRubber-tired vehicles generally have more rolling resistance than steel wheels, which decreases energy efficiency.
*Less efficient use of right-of-wayLanes must be wider for unguided buses than for streetcars, since unguided buses can drift side-to-side. The use of guidance rail allows trams running in parallel lanes to pass closer together than drivers could safely steer.
*Difficulties with platform loadingImplementation of level platform loading with minimal gap, either at design stage or afterwards, is easier and cheaper to implement with rail vehicles.
*Wear of rubber tires leads to significant rubber pollution.

===Comparison to motorbuses===
*Difficult to re-routeWhen compared to motorbuses, trolleybuses have greater difficulties with temporary or permanent re-routings, wiring for which is not usually readily available outside of downtown areas where the buses may be re-routed via adjacent business area streets where other trolleybus routes operate. This problem was highlighted in Vancouver in July 2008, when an explosion closed several roads in the city&#x27;s downtown core. Because of the closure, trolleys were forced to detour several miles off their route in order to stay on the wires, leaving major portions of their routes not in service and off-schedule.
*AestheticsThe jumble of overhead wires may be seen as unsightly. Intersections often have a &quot;webbed ceiling&quot; appearance, due to multiple crossing and converging sets of trolley wires.
*DewirementsTrolley poles sometimes come off the wire. Dewirements are relatively rare in modern systems with well-maintained overhead wires, hangers, fittings and contact shoes. Trolleybuses are equipped with special insulated pole ropes which drivers use to reconnect the trolley poles with the overhead wires. When approaching switches, trolleybuses usually must decelerate in order to avoid dewiring, and this deceleration can potentially add slightly to traffic congestion. In 1998, a dewirement in Shenyang on poorly maintained infrastructure killed 5 people and ultimately led to the destruction of the trolleybus network.
*Unable to overtake other trolleybusesTrolleybuses cannot overtake one another in regular service unless two separate sets of wires with a switch are provided or the vehicles are equipped with off-wire capability, with the latter an increasingly common feature of new trolleybuses.
*Higher capital cost of equipmentTrolleybuses are often long-lived equipment, with limited market demand. This generally leads to higher prices relative to internal combustion buses. The long equipment life may also complicate upgrades.
*More training requiredDrivers must learn how to prevent dewiring, slowing down at turns and through switches in the overhead wire system, for example.
*Overhead wires create obstructionTrolleybus systems employ overhead wires above the roads, often shared with other vehicles. The wires can restrict tall motor vehicles such as delivery trucks (&quot;lorries&quot;) and double decker buses from using or crossing roads fitted with overhead wires, as such vehicles would hit the wires or pass dangerously close to them, risking damage and dangerous electrical faults. The wires also may impede positioning of overhead signage and create a hazard to activities such as road repairs using tall excavators or piling rigs, use of scaffolding, etc.

==Off-wire power developments==

With the re-introduction of hybrid designs, trolleybuses are no longer tied to overhead wires. The Public Service Company of New Jersey, with Yellow Coach, developed &quot;All Service Vehicles&quot;; trackless trolleys capable of operating as gas-electric buses when off wire, and used them successfully between 1935 and 1948. Since the 1980s, systems such as Muni in San Francisco, TransLink in Vancouver, and Beijing, among others, have bought trolleybuses equipped with batteries to allow them to operate fairly long distances away from the wires. Supercapacitors can be also used to move buses short distances.

Trolleybuses can optionally be equipped either with limited off-wire capability—a small diesel engine or battery pack—for auxiliary or emergency use only, or full dual-mode capability. A simple auxiliary power unit can allow a trolleybus to get around a route blockage or can reduce the amount (or complexity) of overhead wiring needed at operating garages (depots). This capability has become increasingly common in newer trolleybuses, particularly in China, North America and Europe, where the vast majority of new trolleybuses delivered since the 1990s are fitted with at least limited off-wire capability. These have gradually replaced older trolleybuses which lacked such capability. In Philadelphia, new trackless trolleys equipped with small hybrid diesel-electric power units for operating short distances off-wire were placed in service by SEPTA in 2008. This is instead of the trolleys using a conventional diesel drive train or battery-only system for their off-wire movement.

King County Metro in Seattle, Washington and the MBTA in Boston&#x27;s Silver Line have used dual-mode buses that run on electric power from overhead wires on a fixed right-of-way and on diesel power on city streets. Metro used special-order articulated Breda buses, introduced in 1990, and most were retired in 2005. A limited number of the Breda dual-mode buses had their diesel engines removed, and operated exclusively as trolleybuses until 2016. Since 2004, the MBTA has used dual-mode buses on its Silver Line (Waterfront) route. The last of these were be replaced by diesel hybrid and battery-electric buses in June 2023.

===In Motion Charging===
IMC (In Motion Charging) trolleybuses are equipped with a light-weight battery, the size of which is adapted to the line profile used. This battery allows them not to depend on overhead lines. They can thus operate with a mix of electric wire and batteries (60% of the time on the wire and 40% on the battery).
With the development of battery technology in recent years, trolleybuses with extended off-wire capability through on-board batteries are becoming popular. The on-board battery is charged while the vehicle is in motion under the overhead wires and then allows off-wire travel for significant distances, often in excess of 15 km. Such trolleybuses are called, among others, trolleybuses with In-Motion Charging, hybrid trolleybuses, battery trolleybuses and electric buses with dynamic charging. The main advantages of this technology over conventional battery electric buses are reduced cost and weight of the battery due to its smaller size, no delays for charging at end stops as the vehicle charges while in motion and reduced need for dedicated charging stations that take up public space. This new development allows the extension of trolleybus routes or the electrification of bus routes without the need to build overhead wires along the whole length of the route. Cities that utilize such trolleybuses include Beijing, Ostrava, Shanghai, Mexico City, Saint Petersburg, and Bergen. The new trolleybus systems in Marrakesh, Baoding and Prague are based exclusively on battery trolleybuses. In 2020, the city of Berlin, Germany announced plans to build a new trolleybus system with 15 routes and 190 battery trolleybuses. However, in early 2023 it was announced that the planned lines would use battery powered electric buses instead.

Introducing new flexible, high-capacity public transport of in motion charging (IMC) trolleybuses are electric buses that can charge dynamically via an overhead contact network and can run on batteries for up to half of their route. Because an IMC bus is operated electrically just as a tramcar without limitation of the range. It concept of trolleybus and ebus with Battery electric bus. IMC500 transfers energy from the infrastructure to the vehicle at a power of up to 500 kW. The e.g. 2 x 160 kW motors are supplied in parallel to the battery charging with e.g. 200 kW.

==Other considerations==

With increasing diesel fuel costs and problems caused by particulate matter and NOx emissions in cities, trolleybuses can be an attractive alternative, either as the primary transit mode or as a supplement to rapid transit and commuter rail networks.

Trolleybuses are quieter than internal combustion engine vehicles. Mainly a benefit, it also provides much less warning of a trolleybus&#x27;s approach. A speaker attached to the front of the vehicle can raise the noise to a desired &quot;safe&quot; level. This noise can be directed to pedestrians in front of the vehicle, as opposed to motor noise which typically comes from the rear of a bus and is more noticeable to bystanders than to pedestrians.

Trolleybuses can share overhead wires and other electrical infrastructure (such as substations) with tramways. This can result in cost savings when trolleybuses are added to a transport system that already has trams, though this refers only to potential savings over the cost of installing and operating trolleybuses alone.

== The two parallel wires ==
The wires are attached to poles next to the street and carefully stretched and mounted so that they are the same width apart and same height over the road (usually about 18 to 20 feet (~5.7m)). The pair of wires is insulated from the poles and provides about 500 to 600 volts to the bus below.

==Wire switches==
Trolleybus wire switches (called &quot;frogs&quot; in the UK) are used where a trolleybus line branches into two or where two lines join. A switch may be either in a &quot;straight through&quot; or &quot;turnout&quot; position; it normally remains in the &quot;straight through&quot; position unless it has been triggered, and reverts to it after a few seconds or after the pole shoe passes through and strikes a release lever (in Boston, the resting or &quot;default&quot; position is the &quot;leftmost&quot; position). Triggering is typically accomplished by a pair of contacts, one on each wire close to and before the switch assembly, which power a pair of electromagnets, one in each frog with diverging wires (&quot;frog&quot; generally refers to one fitting that guides one trolley wheel/shoe onto a desired wire or across one wire. Occasionally, &quot;frog&quot; has been used to refer to the entire switch assembly).

Multiple branches may be handled by installing more than one switch assembly. For example, to provide straight-through, left-turn or right-turn branches at an intersection, one switch is installed some distance from the intersection to choose the wires over the left-turn lane, and another switch is mounted closer to or in the intersection to choose between straight through and a right turn (this would be the arrangement in countries such as the United States, where traffic directionality is right-handed; in left-handed traffic countries such as the United Kingdom and New Zealand, the first switch (before the intersection) would be used to access the right-turn lanes, and the second switch (usually in the intersection) would be for the left-turn).

Three common types of switches exist: power-on/power-off (the picture of a switch above is of this type), Selectric, and Fahslabend.

A power-on/power-off switch is triggered if the trolleybus is drawing considerable power from the overhead wires, usually by accelerating, at the moment the poles pass over the contacts (the contacts are lined up on the wires in this case). If the trolleybus &quot;coasts&quot; through the switch, the switch will not activate. Some trolleybuses, such as those in Philadelphia and Vancouver, have a manual &quot;power-coast&quot; toggle switch that turns the power on or off. This allows a switch to be triggered in situations that would otherwise be impossible, such as activating a switch while braking or accelerating through a switch without activating it. One variation of the toggle switch will simulate accelerating by causing a larger power draw (through a resistance grid), but will not simulate coasting and prevent activation of the switch by cutting the power.

A Selectric switch has a similar design, but the contacts on the wires are skewed, often at a 45-degree angle, rather than being lined up. This skew means that a trolleybus going straight through will not trigger the switch, but a trolleybus making a turn will have its poles match the contacts in a matching skew (with one pole shoe ahead of the other), which will trigger the switch regardless of power draw (accelerating versus coasting).

For a Fahslabend switch, the trolleybus&#x27; turn indicator control (or a separate driver-controlled switch) causes a coded radio signal to be sent from a transmitter, often attached to a trolley pole. The receiver is attached to the switch and causes it to trigger if the correct code is received. This has the advantage that the driver does not need to be accelerating the bus (as with a power-on/power-off switch) or trying to make a sharp turn (as with a Selectric switch).

Trailing switches (where two sets of wires merge) do not require action by the operator. The frog runners are pushed into the desired position by the trolley shoe, or the frog is shaped so the shoe is guided onto the exit wire without any moving parts.

==Manufacturing==
Well over 200 different trolleybus makers have existed – mostly commercial manufacturers, but in some cases (particularly in communist countries), built by the publicly owned operating companies or authorities. Of the defunct or former trolleybus manufacturers, the largest producers in North America and Western Europe – ones whose production totalled more than 1,000 units each – included the U.S. companies Brill (approx. 3,250 total), Pullman-Standard (2,007), and Marmon-Herrington (1,624); the English companies AEC (approx. 1,750), British United Traction (BUT) (1,573), Leyland (1,420) and Sunbeam (1,379); France&#x27;s Vétra (more than 1,750); and the Italian builders Alfa Romeo (2,044) and Fiat (approx. 1,700). The largest former trolleybus manufacture is Trolza (formerly Uritsky, or ZiU) since 1951, until they declared their bankruptcy in 2017, building over 65000 trolleybuses. Also, Canadian Car and Foundry built 1,114 trolleybuses based on designs by Brill.

As of the 2010s, at least 30 trolleybus manufacturers exist. They include companies that have been building trolleybuses for several decades, such as Škoda since 1936 and New Flyer, among others, along with several younger companies. Current trolleybus manufacturers in western and central Europe include Solaris, Van Hool, and Hess, among others. In Russia ZiU/Trolza has historically been the world&#x27;s largest trolleybus manufacturer, producing over 65,000 since 1951, mostly for Russia/CIS countries, but after its bankruptcy, its facilities were partially loaned out to PC Transport Systems. Škoda is Western and Central Europe&#x27;s largest and the second largest in the world, having produced over 14,000 trolleybuses since 1936, mostly for export, and it also supplies trolleybus electrical equipment for other bus builders such as Solaris, SOR and Breda. In Mexico, trolleybus production ended when MASA, which had built more than 860 trolleybuses since 1979, was acquired in 1998 by Volvo. However, Dina, which is now that country&#x27;s largest bus and truck manufacturer, began building trolleybuses in 2013.

==Transition to low-floor designs==
A significant change to trolleybus designs starting in the early 1990s was the introduction of low-floor models, which began only a few years after the first such models were introduced for motorbuses. These have gradually replaced high-floor designs, and by 2012, every existing trolleybus system in Western Europe had purchased low-floor trolleybuses, with the La Spezia (Italy) system being the last one to do so, and several systems in other parts of the world have purchased low-floor vehicles.

In the United States, some transit agencies had already begun to accommodate persons in wheelchairs by purchasing buses with wheelchair lifts, and early examples of fleets of lift-equipped trolleybuses included 109 AM General trolleybuses built for the Seattle trolleybus system in 1979 and the retrofitting of lifts in 1983 to 64 Flyer E800s in the Dayton system&#x27;s fleet. The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 required that all new transit vehicles placed into service after 1 July 1993 be accessible to such passengers.
Trolleybuses in other countries also began to introduce better access for the disabled in the 1990s, when the first two low-floor trolleybus models were introduced in Europe, both built in 1991, a &quot;Swisstrolley&quot; demonstrator built by Switzerland&#x27;s NAW/Hess and an N6020 demonstrator built by Neoplan. The first production-series low-floor trolleybuses were built in 1992: 13 by NAW for the Geneva system and 10 Gräf &amp; Stift for the . By 1995, such vehicles were also being made by several other European manufacturers, including Skoda, Breda, Ikarus, and Van Hool. The first Solaris &quot;Trollino&quot; made its debut in early 2001. In the former Soviet Union countries, Belarus&#x27; Belkommunmash built its first low-floor trolleybus (model AKSM-333) in 1999, and other manufacturers in the former Soviet countries joined the trend in the early 2000s.

However, because the lifespan of a trolleybus is typically longer than that of a motorbus, the budget allocation and purchase typically factored in the longevity; the introduction of low-floor vehicles applied pressures on operators to retire high-floor trolleybuses that were only a few years old and replace them with low-floor trolleybuses. Responses varied, with some systems keeping their high-floor fleets, and others retiring them early but, in many instances, selling them second-hand for continued use in countries where there was a demand for low-cost second-hand trolleybuses, in particular in Romania and Bulgaria. The Lausanne system dealt with this dilemma in the 1990s by purchasing new low-floor passenger trailers to be towed by its high-floor trolleybuses, a choice later also made by Lucerne.
Outside Europe, 14 vehicles built by, and for, the Shanghai trolleybus system in mid-1999 were the first reported low-floor trolleybuses in Southeast Asia. Wellington, New Zealand, took delivery of its first low-floor trolleybus in March 2003, and by the end of 2009 had renewed its entire fleet with such vehicles. Unlike Europe, where low floor means &quot;100%&quot; low floor from front to back, most &quot;low floor&quot; buses on other continents are actually only low-entry or part-low floor.

In the Americas, the first low-floor trolleybus was a Busscar vehicle supplied to the São Paulo EMTU system in 2001. In North America, wheelchair lifts were again chosen for disabled access in new trolleybuses delivered to San Francisco in 1992–94, to Dayton in 1996–1999, and to Seattle in 2001–2002, but the first low-floor trolleybus was built in 2003, with the first of 28 Neoplan vehicles for the Boston system. Subsequently, the Vancouver system and the Philadelphia system have converted entirely to low-floor vehicles, and in 2013 the Seattle and Dayton systems both placed orders for their first low-floor trolleybuses. Outside São Paulo, almost all trolleybuses currently in service in Latin America are high-floor models built before 2000. However, in 2013, the first domestically manufactured low-floor trolleybuses were introduced in both Argentina and Mexico.

With regard to non-passenger aspects of vehicle design, the transition from high-floor to low-floor has meant that some equipment previously placed under the floor has been moved to the roof. Some transit operators have needed to modify their maintenance facilities to accommodate this change, a one-time expense.

==Double-decker trolleybuses==
Since the end of 1997, no double-decker trolleybuses have been in service anywhere in the world, but, in the past, several manufacturers made such vehicles. Most builders of double-deck trolleybuses were in the United Kingdom, but there were a few, usually solitary, instances of such trolleybuses being built in other countries, including in Germany by Henschel (for Hamburg); in Italy, by Lancia (for Porto, Portugal); in Russia, by the Yaroslavl motor plant (for Moscow) and in Spain, by Maquitrans (for Barcelona). British manufacturers of double-deck trolleybuses included AEC, BUT, Crossley, Guy, Leyland, Karrier, Sunbeam and others.

In 2001, Citybus (Hong Kong) converted a Dennis Dragon (#701) into a double-decker trolleybus, and it was tested on a 300-metre track in Wong Chuk Hang in that year. Hong Kong decided not to build a trolleybus system, and the testing of this prototype did not lead to any further production of vehicles.

==Use and preservation==
There are currently 300 cities or metropolitan areas where trolleybuses are operated, and more than 500 additional trolleybus systems have existed in the past. For an overview, by country, see Trolleybus usage by country, and for complete lists of trolleybus systems by location, with dates of opening and (where applicable) closure, see List of trolleybus systems and the related lists indexed there.

Of the systems existing as of 2012, the majority are located in Europe and Asia, including 85 in Russia and 43 in Ukraine. However, there are eight systems existing in North America and nine in South America.
Trolleybuses have been preserved in most of the countries where they have operated. The United Kingdom has the largest number of preserved trolleybuses with more than 110, while the United States has around 70. Most preserved vehicles are on static display only, but a few museums are equipped with a trolleybus line, allowing trolleybuses to operate for visitors. Museums with operational trolleybus routes include three in the UK – the Trolleybus Museum at Sandtoft, the East Anglia Transport Museum, and the Black Country Living Museum – and three in the United States – the Illinois Railway Museum, the Seashore Trolley Museum, and the Shore Line Trolley Museum – but operation of trolleybuses does not necessarily occur on a regular schedule of dates at these museums.

==System of eBRT==
Trolleybuses are also used in bus rapid transit systems ( electrified bus rapid transit, eBRT ), the current routes are listed below:

==See also==

* Battery electric bus
* Bus rapid transit
* Dual-mode bus
* Electric bus
* Electric vehicle battery
* Electromote
* Guided bus
* Gyrobus
* List of trolleybus manufacturers
* List of trolleybus systems
* Parallel overhead lines
* Traction substation
* Trolleytruck
==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Bruce, Ashley R. &quot;Lombard-Gerin and Inventing the Trolleybus&quot;. (2017) Trolleybooks (UK). 
* Cheape, Charles W. &quot;Moving the masses: urban public transit in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, 1880-1912&quot; (Harvard University Press, 1980)
* Dunbar, Charles S. (1967). &quot;Buses, Trolleys &amp; Trams&quot;. Paul Hamlyn Ltd. (UK) [republished 2004 with or 9780753709702]
* McKay, John P. &quot;Tramways and Trolleys: The Rise of Urban Mass Transport in Europe&quot; (1976)
* Murray, Alan (2000). &quot;World Trolleybus Encyclopaedia&quot;. Trolleybooks (UK). 
* Porter, Harry; and Worris, Stanley F.X. (1979). &quot;Trolleybus Bulletin No. 109: Databook II&quot;. North American Trackless Trolley Association (defunct)
* Sebree, Mac; and Ward, Paul (1973). &quot;Transit&#x27;s Stepchild, The Trolley Coach&quot; (Interurbans Special 58). Los Angeles: Interurbans. LCCN 73-84356
* Sebree, Mac; and Ward, Paul (1974). &quot;The Trolley Coach in North America&quot; (Interurbans Special 59). Los Angeles: Interurbans. LCCN 74-20367

===Periodicals===
* &quot;Trolleybus Magazine&quot; (). National Trolleybus Association (UK), bi-monthly
* &quot;Trackless&quot;, Bradford Trolleybus Association, quarterly
* &quot;Trolleybus&quot;, British Trolleybus Society (UK), monthly

==External links==
*(in German) TrolleyMotionan international action group to promote modern trolleybus systems, and database of systems in the world
*British Trolleybuses
*Trolleybuses in Latin America
*North American trolleybus pictures
*Trolleybuses in Europe
*Urban Electric Transit - Database/Photo gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="2" end="12" title="Trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="28" end="39" title="Trolleybus" label="trolley bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="41" end="54" title="Trolleybus" label="trolley coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="56" end="73" title="Trolleybus" label="trackless trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="75" end="89" title="Trolleybus" label="trackless tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="114" end="121" title="Trolleybus" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q926499" start="129" end="141" title="electric bus" label="electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="169" end="182" title="overhead wire" label="overhead wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353239" start="246" end="258" title="trolley pole" label="trolley pole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="261" end="270" title="Overhead line#Parallel overhead lines" label="Two wires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="364" end="368" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q657874" start="472" end="482" title="pantograph (transport)" label="pantograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925184" start="528" end="542" title="Battery electric bus" label="electric buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q902054" start="566" end="575" title="Automotive battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="616" end="620" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="621" end="635" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="928" end="948" title="Werner von Siemens" label="Ernst Werner Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q260878" start="972" end="983" title="Electromote" label="Elektromote"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="995" end="1001" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99590347" start="1296" end="1315" title="Louis Lombard-Gérin" label="Louis Lombard-Gérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753646" start="1353" end="1377" title="Exposition Universelle (1900)" label="Paris Exhibition of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1545" end="1558" title=":de:Max Schiemann" label="Max Schiemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="1691" end="1698" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530561" start="1743" end="1758" title="Biela Valley Trolleybus" label="Bielatal system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2167" end="2178" title="Cédès-Stoll" label="Cédès-Stoll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2298" end="2310" title="Lloyd-Köhler" label="Lloyd-Köhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="2345" end="2351" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21683917" start="2390" end="2413" title="Cantono Frigerio system" label="Cantono Frigerio system"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="2526" end="2531" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="2536" end="2544" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845205" start="2952" end="2983" title="Trolleybuses in Bradford" label="Bradford Trolleybus Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2985" end="2995" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="3067" end="3080" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q990168" start="3471" end="3479" title="Keighley" label="Keighley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414193" start="3641" end="3656" title="Hull, MA" label="Nantasket Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3766" end="3777" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="3855" end="3865" title="tram" label="streetcars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="4002" end="4015" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="4653" end="4670" title="Railway electrification" label="electric traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4725" end="4732" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010124" start="4734" end="4740" title="Trolleybuses in Greater Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749457" start="4742" end="4754" title="United Electric Railways" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845199" start="4760" end="4767" title="Trolleybuses in Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320538" start="4769" end="4782" title="Trolleybuses in San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540264" start="4787" end="4799" title="Trolleybuses in Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5332" end="5344" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5560" end="5580" title="#Use and preservation" label="Use and preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361736" start="5648" end="5656" title="Trolleybuses in Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10175" start="5658" end="5662" title="Trolleybuses in Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321552" start="5664" end="5673" title="Trolleybuses in Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845271" start="5675" end="5684" title="Trolleybuses in São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845262" start="5686" end="5693" title="Trolleybuses in Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561683" start="5695" end="5700" title="Trolleybuses in Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5702" end="5716" title="Saint Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q681311" start="5722" end="5728" title="Trolleybuses in Zürich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845217" start="5765" end="5771" title="Trolleybuses in Dayton" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463170" start="5773" end="5779" title="Trolleybuses in Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q665791" start="5781" end="5789" title="Trolleybuses in Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q384842" start="5791" end="5798" title="Trolleybuses in Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933666" start="5800" end="5806" title="Trolleybuses in Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q460645" start="5812" end="5820" title="Trolleybuses in Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400178" start="5834" end="5838" title="Trolleybuses in Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632574" start="5995" end="6000" title="Trolleybuses in Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q54352" start="6096" end="6106" title="Landskrona" label="Landskrona"/>
<link wikidata="Q523469" start="6163" end="6178" title="Mariánské Lázně" label="Mariánské Lázně"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845261" start="6246" end="6279" title="Trolleybuses in Shanghai" label="Shanghai&amp;#x27;s trolleybus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146301" start="6362" end="6380" title="Crimean Trolleybus" label="Crimean Trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845196" start="6441" end="6468" title="Trolleybus usage by country" label="Trolleybus usage by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120578" start="6628" end="6650" title="Zero-emissions vehicle" label="zero-emission vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933664" start="6764" end="6769" title="Trolleybuses in Lecce" label="Lecce"/>
<link wikidata="Q165995" start="6790" end="6797" title="Malatya" label="Malatya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17621723" start="6823" end="6832" title="BRT Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881181" start="6852" end="6859" title="Beijing Bus" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845261" start="6864" end="6872" title="Trolleybuses in Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q698064" start="7111" end="7116" title="Manpo" label="Manpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="7481" end="7485" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="7786" end="7792" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188666" start="7811" end="7819" title="adhesion" label="adhesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="8464" end="8475" title="bus" label="motor buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="8882" end="8892" title="Light rail" label="light-rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q914921" start="9224" end="9242" title="rolling resistance" label="rolling resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202292" start="9639" end="9650" title="platform gap" label="minimal gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q85798108" start="9788" end="9804" title="rubber pollution" label="rubber pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="9877" end="9887" title="Bus" label="motorbuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="10494" end="10508" title="overhead line" label="overhead wires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353239" start="10676" end="10688" title="Trolley pole" label="Trolley pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15934748" start="11154" end="11176" title="1998 Shenyang trolleybus electrocution accident" label="dewirement in Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="11732" end="11751" title="Internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="12165" end="12172" title="Truck" label="lorries"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="12352" end="12379" title="Electric arc" label="dangerous electrical faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835134" start="12690" end="12726" title="Transport of New Jersey" label="Public Service Company of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239559" start="12733" end="12745" title="Yellow Coach Manufacturing Company" label="Yellow Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140138" start="12951" end="12955" title="San Francisco Municipal Railway" label="Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142140" start="12974" end="12983" title="TransLink (British Columbia)" label="TransLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="13002" end="13009" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q754523" start="13142" end="13156" title="Supercapacitor" label="Supercapacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139980" start="13370" end="13390" title="dual-mode bus" label="dual-mode capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="13899" end="13911" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="13956" end="13962" title="Hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037863" start="14056" end="14061" title="SEPTA" label="SEPTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411393" start="14196" end="14213" title="King County Metro" label="King County Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="14217" end="14236" title="Seattle" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="14245" end="14249" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="14253" end="14259" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q172201" start="14267" end="14278" title="Silver Line (MBTA)" label="Silver Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139980" start="14289" end="14302" title="dual-mode bus" label="dual-mode bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="14383" end="14389" title="Diesel engine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q904589" start="14450" end="14455" title="Società Italiana Ernesto Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q172201" start="14700" end="14724" title="Silver Line (MBTA)" label="Silver Line (Waterfront)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116508" start="14770" end="14783" title="hybrid electric bus" label="diesel hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925184" start="14788" end="14810" title="Battery electric bus" label="battery-electric buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881181" start="16180" end="16187" title="Beijing Bus" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8385" start="16189" end="16196" title="Ostrava" label="Ostrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845261" start="16198" end="16206" title="Trolleybuses in Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845243" start="16208" end="16219" title="Trolleybuses in Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="16221" end="16237" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522993" start="16243" end="16249" title="Trolleybuses in Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="16281" end="16290" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q58584" start="16292" end="16299" title="Baoding" label="Baoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="16304" end="16310" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="16379" end="16385" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q926499" start="16960" end="16964" title="Electric bus" label="ebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925184" start="16970" end="16990" title="Battery electric bus" label="Battery electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="17284" end="17287" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q803616" start="17993" end="18004" title="Traction substation" label="substations"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="19239" end="19252" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459608" start="19359" end="19372" title="Current collector" label="trolley wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459608" start="19373" end="19377" title="Current collector" label="shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="19975" end="19997" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="traffic directionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="22591" end="22610" title="Communist state" label="communist countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676325" start="22876" end="22881" title="J. G. Brill Company" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="22905" end="22921" title="Pullman Company" label="Pullman-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902231" start="22935" end="22952" title="Marmon-Herrington" label="Marmon-Herrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q240913" start="22984" end="22987" title="Associated Equipment Company" label="AEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304288" start="23005" end="23034" title="British United Traction" label="British United Traction (BUT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126617" start="23044" end="23051" title="Leyland Motors" label="Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402749" start="23064" end="23071" title="Sunbeam Commercial Vehicles" label="Sunbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564407" start="23095" end="23100" title="Vétra" label="Vétra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="23145" end="23155" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="23168" end="23172" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q979476" start="23235" end="23241" title="Trolza" label="Trolza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029804" start="23367" end="23391" title="Canadian Car and Foundry" label="Canadian Car and Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q391795" start="23595" end="23600" title="Škoda Works" label="Škoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162850" start="23616" end="23625" title="New Flyer" label="New Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q838369" start="23750" end="23757" title="Solaris Bus &amp;amp; Coach" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339832" start="23759" end="23767" title="Van Hool" label="Van Hool"/>
<link wikidata="Q690628" start="23773" end="23777" title="Carrosserie Hess" label="Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q85866685" start="24023" end="24043" title="PC Transport Systems" label="PC Transport Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714509" start="24357" end="24361" title="MASA (company)" label="MASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278607" start="24458" end="24462" title="DINA S.A." label="Dina"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="24702" end="24711" title="low-floor" label="low-floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="24797" end="24805" title="motorbus" label="motorbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621789" start="24839" end="24849" title="high-floor" label="high-floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933652" start="24970" end="24994" title="Trolleybuses in La Spezia" label="La Spezia (Italy) system"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="25196" end="25206" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164387" start="25233" end="25248" title="wheelchair lift" label="wheelchair lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q295481" start="25323" end="25333" title="AM General" label="AM General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845262" start="25361" end="25386" title="Trolleybuses in Seattle" label="Seattle trolleybus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162850" start="25439" end="25444" title="New Flyer" label="Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845217" start="25458" end="25471" title="Trolleybuses in Dayton" label="Dayton system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="25490" end="25529" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q365515" start="25904" end="25907" title="Nutzfahrzeuggesellschaft Arbon &amp;amp; Wetzikon" label="NAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q690628" start="25908" end="25912" title="Carrosserie Hess" label="Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q326013" start="25948" end="25955" title="Neoplan" label="Neoplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q663396" start="26046" end="26059" title="Trolleybuses in Geneva" label="Geneva system"/>
<link wikidata="Q694690" start="26067" end="26083" title="Gräf &amp;amp; Stift" label="Gräf &amp;amp; Stift"/>
<link wikidata="Q391795" start="26189" end="26194" title="Škoda Works" label="Skoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q904589" start="26196" end="26201" title="Società Italiana Ernesto Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q756669" start="26203" end="26209" title="Ikarus (Hungarian company)" label="Ikarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339832" start="26215" end="26223" title="Van Hool" label="Van Hool"/>
<link wikidata="Q838369" start="26235" end="26242" title="Solaris Bus &amp;amp; Coach" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q815665" start="26346" end="26359" title="Belkommunmash" label="Belkommunmash"/>
<link wikidata="Q665791" start="27147" end="27162" title="Trolleybuses in Lausanne" label="Lausanne system"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="27238" end="27246" title="trailer (vehicle)" label="trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q680196" start="27319" end="27326" title="Trolleybuses in Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845261" start="27379" end="27405" title="Trolleybuses in Shanghai" label="Shanghai trolleybus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010231" start="27484" end="27507" title="Trolleybuses in Wellington" label="Wellington, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017682" start="27883" end="27890" title="Busscar" label="Busscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845271" start="27915" end="27936" title="Trolleybuses in São Paulo" label="São Paulo EMTU system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320538" start="28052" end="28065" title="Trolleybuses in San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845217" start="28081" end="28087" title="Trolleybuses in Dayton" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010124" start="28231" end="28244" title="Trolleybuses in Greater Boston" label="Boston system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010215" start="28264" end="28280" title="Trolleybuses in Vancouver" label="Vancouver system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540264" start="28289" end="28308" title="Trolleybuses in Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia system"/>
<link wikidata="Q163580" start="29404" end="29412" title="Henschel &amp;amp; Son" label="Henschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="29441" end="29447" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240913" start="29628" end="29631" title="Associated Equipment Company" label="AEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304288" start="29633" end="29636" title="British United Traction" label="BUT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29638" end="29646" title="Crossley Motors#Buses" label="Crossley"/>
<link wikidata="Q861353" start="29648" end="29651" title="Guy Motors" label="Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126617" start="29653" end="29660" title="Leyland Motors" label="Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29662" end="29669" title="Karrier#Trolleybuses" label="Karrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402749" start="29671" end="29678" title="Sunbeam Commercial Vehicles" label="Sunbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124055" start="29701" end="29720" title="Citybus (Hong Kong)" label="Citybus (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q842285" start="29733" end="29746" title="Dennis Dragon" label="Dennis Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="29761" end="29774" title="Double-decker bus" label="double-decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845196" start="30215" end="30242" title="Trolleybus usage by country" label="Trolleybus usage by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759138" start="30360" end="30386" title="List of trolleybus systems" label="List of trolleybus systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129300" start="31068" end="31101" title="the Trolleybus Museum at Sandtoft" label="the Trolleybus Museum at Sandtoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327696" start="31107" end="31135" title="East Anglia Transport Museum" label="East Anglia Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q880185" start="31145" end="31172" title="Black Country Living Museum" label="Black Country Living Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999618" start="31212" end="31235" title="Illinois Railway Museum" label="Illinois Railway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262335" start="31241" end="31264" title="Seashore Trolley Museum" label="Seashore Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501308" start="31274" end="31299" title="Shore Line Trolley Museum" label="Shore Line Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="31458" end="31475" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925184" start="31579" end="31599" title="Battery electric bus" label="Battery electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="31602" end="31619" title="Bus rapid transit" label="Bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139980" start="31622" end="31635" title="Dual-mode bus" label="Dual-mode bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q926499" start="31638" end="31650" title="Electric bus" label="Electric bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q900762" start="31653" end="31677" title="Electric vehicle battery" label="Electric vehicle battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q260878" start="31680" end="31691" title="Electromote" label="Electromote"/>
<link wikidata="Q836547" start="31694" end="31704" title="Guided bus" label="Guided bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458136" start="31707" end="31714" title="Gyrobus" label="Gyrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004295" start="31717" end="31749" title="List of trolleybus manufacturers" label="List of trolleybus manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759138" start="31752" end="31778" title="List of trolleybus systems" label="List of trolleybus systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31781" end="31804" title="Overhead line#Parallel overhead lines" label="Parallel overhead lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q803616" start="31807" end="31826" title="Traction substation" label="Traction substation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739514" start="31829" end="31841" title="Trolleytruck" label="Trolleytruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722361" start="32612" end="32623" title="Mac Sebree" label="Sebree, Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057228" start="32743" end="32754" title="Interurban Press" label="Interurbans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54418" wikidata="Q83849" url="?curid=54418" title="The Magician (American TV series)">
<text>The Magician is an American television series that ran during the 1973–1974 season. It starred Bill Bixby as stage illusionist Anthony &quot;Tony&quot; Blake, a playboy philanthropist who used his skills to solve difficult crimes as needed. In the series pilot, the character was named Anthony Dorian; the name was changed due to a conflict with the name of a real-life stage magician.

==Plot==

Blake was a professional stage magician who used his skills to solve crimes and help the helpless. Years earlier, Blake had been in prison on a trumped-up espionage charge in an unnamed country in South America. He discovered a way to escape with his cellmate, which began his interest in escapology. The cellmate died and left him a fortune. The escape, apparently followed by exoneration of the false charges that had led to it, led to Blake&#x27;s pursuit of a career in stage magic, which made him famous. He never forgot his unjust imprisonment, which motivated him to seek justice for others.
Initially, Blake used a private Boeing Jet airliner named &quot;The Spirit&quot; as a base of operations; it was outfitted as a mobile residence (&quot;It&#x27;s like any other mobile home, only faster&quot;) with live-in pilot Jerry Anderson (Jerry Wallace in the pilot episode, same actor). Blake drove a white &#x27;73 Chevrolet Corvette C3 with soft nose, mostly open T-top Targa roof and custom vanity license plates (&quot;SPIRIT&quot;) and, for its time, an exotic feature - a car phone. Blake frequently received assistance from acerbic columnist Max Pomeroy, and Max&#x27;s brilliant son Dennis, who uses a wheelchair.

===Midseason changes===
The pilot film had shown a four engine jet airplane in gold and brown livery, parked on an apron in daylight, with &quot;Spirit&quot; painted as nose art. It was probably the very same Boeing 720 called The Starship used by touring rock musicians in the 1970s, with gold and brown livery plus band logos from the Led Zeppelin North American Tour in mid 1973 to The Allman Brothers Band in summer of 1974. Then it was painted in US red-white-blue. The TV series showed a twin engine Boeing 737 at night, and in addition, the Corvette entering the plane via a rear loading ramp, a feature only available on some dedicated cargo aircraft, but not on the Boeing 720 or 737 even when converted to freighter.

Midway through the program&#x27;s run, the idea of the jet airplane mobile home was dropped and Blake took up residence in a posh apartment at The Magic Castle, a real club devoted to magic acts in Los Angeles, California. At the same time, the supporting cast of the show was replaced with a new, single character, Dominick, a somewhat comical sidekick. No explanation for the changes was given in the series. Jerry continued to make occasional minor appearances, and Tony recruited Jerry and Max together for one further case in the new format.


==Cast==
* Bill Bixby as Anthony Blake (his character was named Anthony Dorian in the pilot episode)
* Keene Curtis as Max Pomeroy
* Joseph Sirola as Dominick
* Jim Watkins as Jerry Anderson (his character was named Jerry Wallace in the pilot)
* Todd Crespi as Dennis Pomeroy
* Cami Sebring as Kathy/Connie

Some episodes featured Larry Anderson, who later created the &quot;JawDroppers&quot; video magic course, as Blake&#x27;s assistant.

==Reception==
&quot;The Magician&quot; earned an Average Audience Nielsen rating of 16.9, ranking it #52 out of 81 shows for the 1973-1974 TV Season.

==Pilot==
==Episodes==
==Production==
===Magic on the program===
The show is noteworthy in that Bixby, a keen amateur magician, insisted on performing all of the illusions in person, without any trick photography, although it was not possible for this to be the case in the TV-movie/pilot. Many of the episodes of the regular series were preceded by an announcement that the magic tricks were accomplished without trick photography. He was instructed in these performances by the program&#x27;s technical advisor, Mark Wilson, who was credited as &quot;magic consultant&quot;. Once the format changed to have the hero based in a magic club, Wilson could occasionally be seen on the stage there, as well. In addition to escapes, Bixby performed feats of sleight of hand, mentalism, and stage illusions. After the series&#x27; cancellation, Bixby went on to host a string of magic specials on NBC and a series, &quot;The Wonderful World of Magic&quot;, in first-run syndication.

==Home media==
Visual Entertainment released the complete series on DVD in Region 1 on August 25, 2017.

==Influence==
Though it ran only a single season, &quot;The Magician&quot; was an influence on later series. The show was a favorite of &quot;The X-Files&quot; creator Chris Carter, who worked it into Special Agent Fox Mulder&#x27;s &quot;origin&quot; story: a teenaged Mulder was waiting to watch &quot;The Magician&quot; when his sister Samantha was abducted by mysterious forces.

In the &quot;Quantum Leap&quot; episode &quot;The Great Spontini&quot;, Scott Bakula&#x27;s character, Dr. Sam Beckett, leaps into an amateur magician in 1974 who aspires to appear on Bill Bixby&#x27;s &quot;The Magician&quot;; however, owing to his partial amnesia, Dr. Beckett, at first, can only recall Bixby&#x27;s connection with &quot;The Incredible Hulk,&quot; which had not been made at that time.

&quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot; series featured an episode that paid homage to both &quot;The Magician&quot; and Bixby&#x27;s earlier series, &quot;My Favorite Martian&quot;. In &quot;The Incredible Hulk&#x27;s&quot; &quot;My Favorite Magician&quot; episode, Bixby&#x27;s character became the temporary apprentice to a stage magician played by Bixby&#x27;s &quot;Martian&quot; co-star, Ray Walston. Mark Wilson was on hand again as the episode&#x27;s &quot;magic consultant&quot; as well. In addition, &quot;Martian&quot; co-star Pamela Britton appeared in an episode of &quot;The Magician&quot;.

Actor Andrew Robinson has stated that his &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; character, Elim Garak, was partially influenced by Bixby&#x27;s character.

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;The Magician&quot; by Ed Robertson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q498503" start="95" end="105" title="Bill Bixby" label="Bill Bixby"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="109" end="126" title="magic (illusion)" label="stage illusionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="594" end="607" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293082" start="686" end="696" title="escapology" label="escapology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596819" start="871" end="882" title="stage magic" label="stage magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120025" start="1035" end="1047" title="Jet airliner" label="Jet airliner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1309" end="1339" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C3)#1973–1974" label="&amp;#x27;73 Chevrolet Corvette C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535526" start="1374" end="1384" title="Targa roof" label="Targa roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740451" start="1396" end="1417" title="Vehicle license plates of the United States" label="vanity license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851878" start="1480" end="1489" title="car phone" label="car phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424696" start="1794" end="1802" title="nose art" label="nose art"/>
<link wikidata="Q833212" start="1834" end="1844" title="Boeing 720" label="Boeing 720"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766355" start="1852" end="1864" title="The Starship" label="The Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="1962" end="1974" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q507327" start="2010" end="2029" title="The Allman Brothers" label="The Allman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="2131" end="2141" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799" start="2269" end="2283" title="cargo aircraft" label="cargo aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q373273" start="2496" end="2512" title="The Magic Castle" label="The Magic Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q498503" start="2913" end="2923" title="Bill Bixby" label="Bill Bixby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881244" start="3005" end="3017" title="Keene Curtis" label="Keene Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608314" start="3035" end="3048" title="Joseph Sirola" label="Joseph Sirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663507" start="3063" end="3074" title="Julian Christopher" label="Jim Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827121" start="3233" end="3247" title="Larry Anderson (actor)" label="Larry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="3689" end="3706" title="Special effect" label="trick photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770382" start="4008" end="4019" title="Mark Wilson (magician)" label="Mark Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q350834" start="4247" end="4262" title="sleight of hand" label="sleight of hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q828524" start="4264" end="4273" title="mentalism" label="mentalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4279" end="4294" title="Magic (illusion)#Types of magic performance" label="stage illusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4385" end="4388" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936553" start="4487" end="4507" title="Visual Entertainment" label="Visual Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4547" end="4555" title="DVD region code#1" label="Region 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="4719" end="4730" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q437267" start="4745" end="4757" title="Chris Carter (screenwriter)" label="Chris Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="4778" end="4791" title="Special Agent" label="Special Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738" start="4792" end="4802" title="Fox Mulder" label="Fox Mulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q230506" start="4974" end="4986" title="Quantum Leap (1989 TV series)" label="Quantum Leap"/>
<link wikidata="Q311699" start="5033" end="5045" title="Scott Bakula" label="Scott Bakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q670579" start="5302" end="5321" title="The Incredible Hulk (1978 TV series)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q670579" start="5374" end="5393" title="The Incredible Hulk (1978 TV series)" label="The Incredible Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247907" start="5516" end="5535" title="My Favorite Martian" label="My Favorite Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q692800" start="5754" end="5765" title="Ray Walston" label="Ray Walston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770382" start="5767" end="5778" title="Mark Wilson (magician)" label="Mark Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361772" start="5898" end="5912" title="Pamela Britton" label="Pamela Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q506958" start="5972" end="5987" title="Andrew Robinson (actor)" label="Andrew Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6014" end="6040" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22971" start="6058" end="6068" title="Elim Garak" label="Elim Garak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54419" wikidata="Q245336" url="?curid=54419" title="Tangram">
<text>The tangram () is a dissection puzzle consisting of seven flat polygons, called &quot;tans&quot;, which are put together to form shapes. The objective is to replicate a pattern (given only an outline) generally found in a puzzle book using all seven pieces without overlap. Alternatively the &quot;tans&quot; can be used to create original minimalist designs that are either appreciated for their inherent aesthetic merits or as the basis for challenging others to replicate its outline. It is reputed to have been invented in China sometime around the late 18th century and then carried over to America and Europe by trading ships shortly after. It became very popular in Europe for a time, and then again during World War I. It is one of the most widely recognized dissection puzzles in the world and has been used for various purposes including amusement, art, and education.

==Etymology==

The origin of the English word &#x27;tangram&#x27; is unclear. One conjecture holds that it is a compound of the Greek element &#x27;-gram&#x27; derived from &quot;γράμμα&quot; (&#x27;written character, letter, that which is drawn&#x27;) with the &#x27;tan-&#x27; element being variously conjectured to be Chinese &quot;t&#x27;an&quot; &#x27;to extend&#x27; or Cantonese &quot;t&#x27;ang&quot; &#x27;Chinese&#x27;. Alternatively, the word may be derivative of the archaic English &#x27;tangram&#x27; meaning &quot;an odd, intricately contrived thing&quot;.

In either case, the first known use of the word is believed to be found in the 1848 book &quot;Geometrical Puzzle for the Young&quot; by mathematician and future Harvard University president Thomas Hill. Hill likely coined the term in the same work, and vigorously promoted the word in numerous articles advocating for the puzzle&#x27;s use in education, and in 1864 the word received official recognition in the English language when it was included in Noah Webster&#x27;s &quot;American Dictionary&quot;.

==History==

===Origins===
Despite its relatively recent emergence in the West, there is a much older tradition of dissection amusements in China which likely played a role in its inspiration. In particular, the modular banquet tables of the Song dynasty bear an uncanny resemblance to the playing pieces of the tangram and there were books dedicated to arranging them together to form pleasing patterns.

Several Chinese sources broadly report a well-known Song dynasty polymath Huang Bosi 黄伯思 who developed a form of entertainment for his dinner guests based on creative arrangements of six small tables called 宴几 or 燕几(&quot;feast tables&quot; or &quot;swallow tables&quot; respectively). One diagram shows these as oblong rectangles, and other reports suggest a seventh table was added later, perhaps by a later inventor.

According to Western sources, however, the tangram&#x27;s historical Chinese inventor is unknown except through the pen name Yang-cho-chu-shih (Dim-witted (?) recluse, recluse = 处士). It is believed that the puzzle was originally introduced in a book titled &quot;Ch&#x27;i chi&#x27;iao t&#x27;u&quot;, which was already reported as lost in 1815 by Shan-chiao in his book &quot;New Figures of the Tangram&quot;. Nevertheless, it is generally believed that the puzzle was invented about 20 years earlier.

The prominent third-century mathematician Liu Hui made use of construction proofs in his works and some bear a striking resemblance to the subsequently developed banquet tables which in turn seem to anticipate the tangram. While there is no reason to suspect that tangrams were used in the proof of the Pythagorean theorem, as is sometimes reported, it is likely that this style of geometric reasoning went on to exert an influence on Chinese cultural life that lead directly to the puzzle.

The early years of attempting to date the Tangram were confused by the popular but fraudulently written history by famed puzzle maker Samuel Loyd in his 1908 &quot;The Eighth Book Of Tan&quot;. This work contains many whimsical features that aroused both interest and suspicion amongst contemporary scholars who attempted to verify the account. By 1910 it was clear that it was a hoax. A letter dated from this year from the Oxford Dictionary editor Sir James Murray on behalf of a number of Chinese scholars to the prominent puzzlist Henry Dudeney reads &quot;The result has been to show that the man Tan, the god Tan, and the Book of Tan are entirely unknown to Chinese literature, history or tradition.&quot; Along with its many strange details &quot;The Eighth Book of Tan&#x27;s&quot; date of creation for the puzzle of 4000 years in antiquity had to be regarded as entirely baseless and false.

===Reaching the Western world (1815–1820s)===
The earliest extant tangram was given to the Philadelphia shipping magnate and congressman Francis Waln in 1802 but it was not until over a decade later that Western audiences, at large, would be exposed to the puzzle. In 1815, American Captain M. Donnaldson was given a pair of author Sang-Hsia-koi&#x27;s books on the subject (one problem and one solution book) when his ship, &quot;Trader&quot; docked there. They were then brought with the ship to Philadelphia, in February 1816. The first tangram book to be published in America was based on the pair brought by Donnaldson.

The puzzle eventually reached England, where it became very fashionable. The craze quickly spread to other European countries. This was mostly due to a pair of British tangram books, &quot;The Fashionable Chinese Puzzle&quot;, and the accompanying solution book, &quot;Key&quot;. Soon, tangram sets were being exported in great number from China, made of various materials, from glass, to wood, to tortoise shell.

Many of these unusual and exquisite tangram sets made their way to Denmark. Danish interest in tangrams skyrocketed around 1818, when two books on the puzzle were published, to much enthusiasm. The first of these was &quot;Mandarinen&quot; (About the Chinese Game). This was written by a student at Copenhagen University, which was a non-fictional work about the history and popularity of tangrams. The second, &quot;Det nye chinesiske Gaadespil&quot; (The new Chinese Puzzle Game), consisted of 339 puzzles copied from &quot;The Eighth Book of Tan&quot;, as well as one original.

One contributing factor in the popularity of the game in Europe was that although the Catholic Church forbade many forms of recreation on the sabbath, they made no objection to puzzle games such as the tangram.

===Second craze in Germany (1891–1920s)===

Tangrams were first introduced to the German public by industrialist Friedrich Adolf Richter around 1891. The sets were made out of stone or false earthenware, and marketed under the name &quot;The Anchor Puzzle&quot;.

More internationally, the First World War saw a great resurgence of interest in tangrams, on the homefront and trenches of both sides. During this time, it occasionally went under the name of &quot;The Sphinx&quot; an alternative title for the &quot;Anchor Puzzle&quot; sets.

==Paradoxes==

A tangram paradox is a dissection fallacy: Two figures composed with the same set of pieces, one of which seems to be a proper subset of the other. One famous paradox is that of the two monks, attributed to Henry Dudeney, which consists of two similar shapes, one with and the other missing a foot. In reality, the area of the foot is compensated for in the second figure by a subtly larger body.
The two-monks paradox – two similar shapes but one missing a foot:
The Magic Dice Cup tangram paradox – from Sam Loyd&#x27;s book &quot;The 8th Book of Tan&quot; (1903). Each of these cups was composed using the same seven geometric shapes. But the first cup is whole, and the others contain vacancies of different sizes. (Notice that the one on the left is slightly shorter than the other two. The one in the middle is ever-so-slightly wider than the one on the right, and the one on the left is narrower still.)
Clipped square tangram paradox – from Loyd&#x27;s book &quot;The Eighth Book of Tan&quot; (1903):


== Number of configurations ==

Over 6500 different tangram problems have been created from 19th century texts alone, and the current number is ever-growing. Fu Traing Wang and Chuan-Chih Hsiung proved in 1942 that there are only thirteen convex tangram configurations (segments drawn between any two points on the configuration are always completely contained inside the configuration, i.e., configurations with no recesses in the outline).

==Pieces==
Choosing a unit of measurement so that the seven pieces can be assembled to form a square of side one unit and having area one square unit, the seven pieces are:

* 2 large right triangles (hypotenuse 1, sides , area )
* 1 medium right triangle (hypotenuse , sides , area )
* 2 small right triangles (hypotenuse , sides , area )
* 1 square (sides , area )
* 1 parallelogram (sides of and , height of , area )

Of these seven pieces, the parallelogram is unique in that it has no reflection symmetry but only rotational symmetry, and so its mirror image can be obtained only by flipping it over. Thus, it is the only piece that may need to be flipped when forming certain shapes.

==See also==

*&quot;Tangram&quot; (video game)
*Egg of Columbus (tangram puzzle)
*Mathematical puzzle
*Ostomachion
*Tiling puzzle
*Attribute blocks

== References ==

;Sources
* 

==Further reading==
* Anno, Mitsumasa. &quot;Anno&#x27;s Math Games&quot; (three volumes). New York: Philomel Books, 1987. (v. 1), (v. 2), (v. 3).
* Botermans, Jack, et al. &quot;The World of Games: Their Origins and History, How to Play Them, and How to Make Them&quot; (translation of &quot;Wereld vol spelletjes&quot;). New York: Facts on File, 1989. .
* Dudeney, H. E. &quot;Amusements in Mathematics&quot;. New York: Dover Publications, 1958.
* Gardner, Martin. &quot;Mathematical Games—on the Fanciful History and the Creative Challenges of the Puzzle Game of Tangrams&quot;, &quot;Scientific American&quot; Aug. 1974, p. 98–103.
* Gardner, Martin. &quot;More on Tangrams&quot;, &quot;Scientific American&quot; Sep. 1974, p. 187–191.
* Gardner, Martin. &quot;The 2nd Scientific American Book of Mathematical Puzzles and Diversions&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1961. .
* Loyd, Sam. &quot;Sam Loyd&#x27;s Book of Tangram Puzzles (The 8th Book of Tan Part I)&quot;. Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, 1968.
* Slocum, Jerry, et al. &quot;Puzzles of Old and New: How to Make and Solve Them&quot;. De Meern, Netherlands: Plenary Publications International (Europe); Amsterdam, Netherlands: ADM International; Seattle: Distributed by University of Washington Press, 1986. .

==External links==

* Past &amp; Future: The Roots of Tangram and Its Developments
* Turning Your Set of Tangram Into A Magic Math Puzzle by puzzle designer G. Sarcone</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q245336" start="4" end="11" title="Tangram" label="tangram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282744" start="20" end="37" title="dissection puzzle" label="dissection puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="527" end="532" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="596" end="603" title="America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="608" end="614" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="714" end="725" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790681" start="1644" end="1655" title="Thomas Hill (clergyman)" label="Thomas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="1927" end="1958" title="American Dictionary of the English Language" label="&amp;quot;American Dictionary&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="2203" end="2215" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q316304" start="3334" end="3341" title="Liu Hui" label="Liu Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="3595" end="3614" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q337325" start="3918" end="3929" title="Sam Loyd" label="Samuel Loyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4209" end="4226" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q960207" start="4234" end="4250" title="James Murray (lexicographer)" label="Sir James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q723598" start="4319" end="4332" title="Henry Dudeney" label="Henry Dudeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5793" end="5800" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="6025" end="6046" title="Copenhagen University" label="Copenhagen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6394" end="6409" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15941401" start="6633" end="6656" title="Friedrich Adolf Richter" label="Friedrich Adolf Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377111" start="6711" end="6722" title="earthenware" label="earthenware"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="6986" end="6992" title="Sphinx" label="Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="7086" end="7093" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="7262" end="7266" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q723598" start="7283" end="7296" title="Henry Dudeney" label="Henry Dudeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259505" start="8326" end="8332" title="convex polygon" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q158688" start="8714" end="8729" title="Right angle triangle" label="right triangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="8874" end="8880" title="Square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q45867" start="8901" end="8914" title="parallelogram" label="parallelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955882" start="9020" end="9039" title="reflection symmetry" label="reflection symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="9049" end="9068" title="rotational symmetry" label="rotational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703478" start="9081" end="9093" title="mirror image" label="mirror image"/>
<link wikidata="Q119984488" start="9236" end="9268" title="Tangram (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Tangram&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347849" start="9270" end="9302" title="Egg of Columbus (tangram puzzle)" label="Egg of Columbus (tangram puzzle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151643" start="9304" end="9323" title="Mathematical puzzle" label="Mathematical puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679561" start="9325" end="9336" title="Ostomachion" label="Ostomachion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802162" start="9338" end="9351" title="Tiling puzzle" label="Tiling puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123751977" start="9353" end="9369" title="Attribute blocks" label="Attribute blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q677706" start="9852" end="9867" title="Martin Gardner" label="Gardner, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105247" start="10847" end="10857" title="Gianni A. Sarcone" label="G. Sarcone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54420" wikidata="Q157210" url="?curid=54420" title="Ryōji Noyori">
<text>is a Japanese chemist. He won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2001, Noyori shared a half of the prize with William S. Knowles for the study of chirally catalyzed hydrogenations; the second half of the prize went to K. Barry Sharpless for his study in chirally catalyzed oxidation reactions (Sharpless epoxidation).

==Education and career==
Ryōji Noyori was born in Kobe, Japan. Early in his school days Ryoji was interested in physics. His interest was kindled by the famous physicist Hideki Yukawa (1949 Nobel Prize in Physics winner), a close friend of his father. Later, he became fascinated with chemistry, after hearing a presentation on nylon at an industrial exposition. He saw the power of chemistry as being the ability to &quot;produce high value from almost nothing&quot;. He was a student at the School of Engineering (Department of Industrial Chemistry) of the Kyoto University, where he graduated in 1961. He subsequently obtained a Master&#x27;s degree in Industrial Chemistry from the Graduate School of Engineering of the Kyoto University. Between 1963 and 1967, he was a research associate at the School of Engineering of the Kyoto University, and an instructor in the research group of Hitoshi Nozaki. Noyori obtained a Doctor of Engineering degree (DEng) from the Kyoto University in 1967. He became an associate professor at the same university in 1968. After postdoctoral work with Elias J. Corey at Harvard he returned to Nagoya, becoming a full professor in 1972. He is still based at Nagoya, and served as president of RIKEN, a multi-site national research initiative with an annual budget of $800 million, from 2003 to 2015.

==Research==


Noyori believes strongly in the power of catalysis and of green chemistry; in a 2005 article he argued for the pursuit of &quot;practical elegance in synthesis&quot;. In this article he stated that &quot;&quot;our ability to devise straightforward and practical chemical syntheses is indispensable to the survival of our species.&quot; Elsewhere he has said that &quot;Research is for nations and mankind, not for researchers themselves.&quot; He encourages scientists to be politically active: &quot;Researchers must spur public opinions and government policies toward constructing the sustainable society in the 21st century.&quot;&quot;

Noyori is currently a chairman of the Education Rebuilding Council, which was set up by Japan&#x27;s PM Shinzō Abe after he came to power in 2006.

Noyori is most famous for asymmetric hydrogenation using as catalysts complexes of rhodium and ruthenium, particularly those based on the BINAP ligand. Asymmetric hydrogenation of an alkene in the presence of ((&quot;S&quot;)-BINAP)Ru(OAc)2 is used for the commercial production of enantiomerically pure (97% ee) naproxen, a nonsteriodal anti-inflammatory drug. The antibacterial agent levofloxacin is manufactured by asymmetric hydrogenation of ketones in the presence of a Ru(II) BINAP halide complex.

He has also worked on other asymmetric processes. Each year 3000 tonnes (after new expansion) of menthol are produced (in 94% ee) by Takasago International Corporation, using Noyori&#x27;s method for isomerisation of allylic amines.

More recently with Philip G. Jessop, Noyori has developed an industrial process for the manufacture of &quot;N,N&quot;-dimethylformamide from hydrogen, dimethylamine and supercritical carbon dioxide in the presence of as catalyst.

==Recognition==
The Ryoji Noyori Prize is named in his honour. In 2000 Noyori became Honorary Doctor at the University of Rennes 1, where he taught in 1995, and in 2005, he became Honorary Doctor at Technical University of Munich and RWTH Aachen University, Germany. Noyori was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2005. and an Honorary Doctorate degree from the Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai (formerly known as UDCT) on the 23rd day of February 2018.

He has also been awarded:

*1978 – Matsunaga prize
*1982 – Chuniichi Culture Award
*1985 – The Chemical Society of Japan Award
*1991 – John G. Kirkwood Award, American Chemical Society and Yale University
*1992 – Asahi Prize
*1993 – Tetrahedron Prize
*1995 – Japan Academy Prize (academics)
*1997 – Arthur C. Cope Award
*1997 – Chirality Medal
*1999 – King Faisal International Prize
*2001 – Wolf Prize in Chemistry
*2001 – Nobel Prize for Chemistry
*2009 – Lomonosov Gold Medal

==See also==

* List of Japanese Nobel laureates
* List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Kyoto University

==References==
==External links==
* including the Nobel Lecture December 8, 2001 &quot;Asymmetric Catalysis: Science and Technology&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="14" end="21" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="34" end="58" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110947" start="107" end="125" title="William S. Knowles" label="William S. Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812077" start="143" end="176" title="Asymmetric hydrogenation" label="chirally catalyzed hydrogenations"/>
<link wikidata="Q110925" start="215" end="233" title="K. Barry Sharpless" label="K. Barry Sharpless"/>
<link wikidata="Q902026" start="291" end="312" title="Sharpless epoxidation" label="Sharpless epoxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="366" end="377" title="Kobe" label="Kobe, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155777" start="486" end="499" title="Hideki Yukawa" label="Hideki Yukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="506" end="528" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="644" end="649" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="875" end="891" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="948" end="968" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="972" end="992" title="Industrial Chemistry" label="Industrial Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="1040" end="1056" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="1145" end="1161" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11645367" start="1206" end="1220" title="Hitoshi Nozaki" label="Hitoshi Nozaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965851" start="1240" end="1261" title="Doctor of Engineering" label="Doctor of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="1285" end="1301" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q135171" start="1405" end="1419" title="Elias J. Corey" label="Elias J. Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1423" end="1430" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153275" start="1545" end="1550" title="RIKEN" label="RIKEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="1709" end="1718" title="catalysis" label="catalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725361" start="1726" end="1741" title="green chemistry" label="green chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="2255" end="2274" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable society"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="2413" end="2423" title="Shinzō Abe" label="Shinzō Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812077" start="2483" end="2507" title="asymmetric hydrogenation" label="asymmetric hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="2517" end="2525" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="2527" end="2536" title="Complex (chemistry)" label="complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="2540" end="2547" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="2552" end="2561" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q795991" start="2595" end="2600" title="BINAP" label="BINAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="2601" end="2607" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="2620" end="2633" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="2640" end="2646" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q795991" start="2683" end="2688" title="BINAP" label="BINAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="2692" end="2695" title="Acetate" label="OAc"/>
<link wikidata="Q568761" start="2766" end="2768" title="Enantiomeric excess" label="ee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215575" start="2770" end="2778" title="naproxen" label="naproxen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="2782" end="2817" title="Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="nonsteriodal anti-inflammatory drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="2823" end="2836" title="antibacterial" label="antibacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q424193" start="2843" end="2855" title="levofloxacin" label="levofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="2903" end="2909" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q898628" start="2990" end="3010" title="asymmetric synthesis" label="asymmetric processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="3027" end="3033" title="tonnes" label="tonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q407418" start="3059" end="3066" title="menthol" label="menthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q568761" start="3088" end="3090" title="Enantiomeric excess" label="ee"/>
<link wikidata="Q611119" start="3095" end="3129" title="Takasago International Corporation" label="Takasago International Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q903420" start="3162" end="3175" title="isomerisation" label="isomerisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q423777" start="3179" end="3184" title="allyl" label="allyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="3187" end="3192" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409298" start="3315" end="3332" title="dimethylformamide" label="dimethylformamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3338" end="3346" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408022" start="3348" end="3361" title="dimethylamine" label="dimethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q682585" start="3366" end="3379" title="Supercritical fluid" label="supercritical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3380" end="3394" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761923" start="3444" end="3466" title="The Ryoji Noyori Prize" label="The Ryoji Noyori Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q726595" start="3536" end="3558" title="University of Rennes 1" label="University of Rennes 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="3627" end="3657" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q273263" start="3662" end="3684" title="RWTH Aachen University" label="RWTH Aachen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000858" start="3716" end="3770" title="List of Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 2005" label="Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040089" start="3814" end="3846" title="Institute of Chemical Technology" label="Institute of Chemical Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q904678" start="3974" end="3997" title="Chunichi Shimbun" label="Chuniichi Culture Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="4074" end="4099" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4104" end="4119" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q720434" start="4128" end="4139" title="Asahi Prize" label="Asahi Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061286" start="4148" end="4165" title="Tetrahedron Prize" label="Tetrahedron Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276057" start="4174" end="4205" title="Japan Academy Prize (academics)" label="Japan Academy Prize (academics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475932" start="4214" end="4234" title="Arthur C. Cope Award" label="Arthur C. Cope Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686552" start="4243" end="4258" title="Chirality Medal" label="Chirality Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795936" start="4267" end="4298" title="King Faisal International Prize" label="King Faisal International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q968876" start="4307" end="4330" title="Wolf Prize in Chemistry" label="Wolf Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="4339" end="4364" title="Nobel Prize for Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize for Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340199" start="4373" end="4393" title="Lomonosov Gold Medal" label="Lomonosov Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575045" start="4411" end="4443" title="List of Japanese Nobel laureates" label="List of Japanese Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635881" start="4446" end="4502" title="List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Kyoto University" label="List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Kyoto University"/>
</links>
</doc>
