<doc id="54421" wikidata="Q471757" url="?curid=54421" title="Sex-selective abortion">
<text>Sex-selective abortion is the practice of terminating a pregnancy based upon the predicted sex of the infant. The selective abortion of female fetuses is most common where male children are valued over female children, especially in parts of East Asia and South Asia (particularly in countries such as People&#x27;s Republic of China, India and Pakistan), as well as in the Caucasus, Western Balkans, and to a lesser extent North America. Based on the third National Family and Health Survey, results showed that if both partners, mother and father, or just the father, preferred male children, sex-selective abortion was more common. In cases where only the mother prefers sons, this is likely to result in sex-selective neglect in which the child is not likely to survive past infancy.

Sex-selective abortion was first documented in 1975, and became commonplace by the late 1980s in South Korea and China and around the same time or slightly later in India.

Sex-selective abortion affects the human sex ratio—the relative number of males to females in a given age group, with China and India, the two most populous countries of the world, having unbalanced gender ratios. Studies and reports focusing on sex-selective abortion are predominantly statistical; they assume that birth-sex ratio—the overall ratio of boys and girls at birth—for a regional population is an indicator of sex-selective abortion. This assumption has been questioned by some scholars. Researchers have shown that in India there are approximately 50,000 to 100,000 female abortions each year, significantly affecting the human sex ratio.

Recent studies have expanded the understanding of this issue by quantifying trends in conditional sex ratios (CSRs) among Asian diaspora populations in Australia, Canada, the UK, and the US, showing that sex selection practices have persisted among diaspora communities from 1999 to 2019. Research into the past four decades of sex-selective abortions in China highlights the significant role these practices have played in shaping the country&#x27;s demographic profile, despite challenges in estimating exact numbers due to underreporting and the controversial level of sex ratio at birth (SRB).

According to demographic scholarship, the expected birth-sex ratio range is 103 to 107 males to 100 females at birth.

== Human sex ratio at birth ==
Sex-selective abortion affects the human sex ratio—the relative number of males to females in a given age group. Studies and reports that discuss sex-selective abortion are based on the assumption that birth sex ratio—the overall ratio of boys and girls at birth for a regional population, is an indicator of sex-selective abortion.

The natural human sex ratio at birth was estimated, in a 2002 study, to be close to 106 boys to 100 girls. Human sex ratio at birth that is significantly different from 106 is often assumed to be correlated to the prevalence and scale of sex-selective abortion. Countries considered to have significant practices of sex-selective abortion are those with birth sex ratios of 108 and above (selective abortion of females), and 102 and below (selective abortion of males). This assumption is controversial, and the subject of continuing scientific studies.

=== High or low human sex ratio implies sex-selective abortion ===
One school of scholars suggest that any birth sex ratio of boys to girls that is outside of the normal 105–107 range, necessarily implies sex-selective abortion. These scholars claim that both the sex ratio at birth and the population sex ratio are remarkably constant in human populations. Significant deviations in birth sex ratios from the normal range can only be explained by manipulation, that is sex-selective abortion.

In a widely cited article, Amartya Sen compared the birth sex ratio in Europe (106) and the United States (105) with those in Asia (107+) and argued that the high sex ratios in East Asia, West Asia and South Asia may be due to excessive female mortality. Sen pointed to research that had shown that if men and women receive similar nutritional and medical attention and good health care then females have better survival rates, and it is the male which is the genetically fragile sex.

Sen estimated &#x27;missing women&#x27; from extra women who would have survived in Asia if it had the same ratio of women to men as Europe and the United States. According to Sen, the high birth sex ratio over decades implies a female shortfall of 11% in Asia, or over 100 million women as missing from the 3 billion combined population of South Asia, West Asia, North Africa and China.

=== High or low human sex ratio may be natural ===
Other scholars question whether birth sex ratio outside 103–107 can be due to natural reasons. William James and others suggest that conventional assumptions have been:
* there are equal numbers of X and Y chromosomes in mammalian sperms
* X and Y stand equal chance of achieving conception
* therefore equal number of male and female zygotes are formed, and that
* therefore any variation of sex ratio at birth is due to sex selection between conception and birth.

James cautions that available scientific evidence stands against the above assumptions and conclusions. He reports that there is an excess of males at birth in almost all human populations, and the natural sex ratio at birth is usually between 102 and 108. However the ratio may deviate significantly from this range for natural reasons such as early marriage and fertility, teenage mothers, average maternal age at birth, paternal age, age gap between father and mother, late births, ethnicity, social and economic stress, warfare, environmental and hormonal effects. This school of scholars support their alternate hypothesis with historical data when modern sex-selection technologies were unavailable, as well as birth sex ratio in sub-regions, and various ethnic groups of developed economies. They suggest that direct abortion data should be collected and studied, instead of drawing conclusions indirectly from human sex ratio at birth.

James&#x27; hypothesis is supported by historical birth sex ratio data before technologies for ultrasonographic sex-screening were discovered and commercialized in the 1960s and 1970s, as well by reverse abnormal sex ratios currently observed in Africa. Michel Garenne reports that many African nations have, over decades, witnessed birth sex ratios below 100, that is more girls are born than boys. Angola, Botswana and Namibia have reported birth sex ratios between 94 and 99, which is quite different from the presumed 104 to 106 as natural human birth sex ratio.

John Graunt noted that in London over a 35-year period in the 17th century (1628–62), the birth sex ratio was 1.07; while Korea&#x27;s historical records suggest a birth sex ratio of 1.13, based on 5 million births, in 1920s over a 10-year period. Other historical records from Asia too support James&#x27; hypothesis. For example, Jiang et al. claim that the birth sex ratio in China was 116–121 over a 100-year period in the late 18th and early 19th centuries; in the 120–123 range in the early 20th century; falling to 112 in the 1930s.

=== Data on human sex ratio at birth ===
In the United States, the sex ratios at birth over the period 1970–2002 were 105 for the white non-Hispanic population, 104 for Mexican Americans, 103 for African Americans and Native Americans, and 107 for mothers of Chinese or Filipino ethnicity. In the aggregated results of 56 Demographic and Health Surveys in African countries, the birth sex ratio was found to be 103, though there is also considerable country-to-country, and year-to-year variation.

In a 2005 study, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported sex ratio at birth in the United States from 1940 over 62 years. This statistical evidence suggested the following: For mothers having their first baby, the total sex ratio at birth was 106 overall, with some years at 107. For mothers having babies after the first, this ratio consistently decreased with each additional baby from 106 towards 103. The age of the mother affected the ratio: the overall ratio was 105 for mothers aged 25 to 35 at the time of birth; while mothers who were below the age of 15 or above 40 had babies with a sex ratio ranging between 94 and 111, and a total sex ratio of 104. This United States study also noted that American mothers of Hawaiian, Filipino, Chinese, Cuban and Japanese ethnicity had the highest sex ratio, with years as high as 114 and average sex ratio of 107 over the 62-year study period. Outside of United States, European nations with extensive birth records, such as Finland, report similar variations in birth sex ratios over a 250-year period, that is from 1751 to 1997 AD.

Female Selective abortions in Asia are predominantly practiced in areas such as Taiwan, China, and India. The Sex ratio at birth in Asia based on worldwide data is 104 and 107 males per 100 females, which was the accepted norm before sex selective abortion was available. Unfortunately, census results from 2000 are still being reviewed and currently unavailable.

In 2017, according to CIA estimates, the countries with the highest birth sex ratio were Liechtenstein (125), Northern Mariana Islands (116), China (114), Armenia (112), Falkland Islands (112), India (112), Grenada (110), Hong Kong (110), Vietnam (110), Albania (109), Azerbaijan (109), San Marino (109), Isle of Man (108), Kosovo (108) and Macedonia (108). Also in 2017 the lowest ratio (i.e. more girls born) was in Nauru at 83. There were ratios of 102 and below in several countries, most of them African countries or Black/African majority population Caribbean countries: Angola, Aruba, Barbados, Bermuda, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Cayman Islands, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Republic of the Congo, Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Togo, Uganda, Zambia.

There is controversy about the notion of the exact natural sex ratio at birth. In a study around 2002, the natural sex ratio at birth was estimated to be close to 1.06 males/female. There is controversy whether sex ratios outside the 103-107 range are due to sex-selection, as suggested by some scholars, or due to natural causes. The claims that unbalanced sex ratios are necessary due to sex selection have been questioned by some researchers. Some researchers argue that an unbalanced sex ratio should not be automatically held as evidence of prenatal sex-selection; Michel Garenne reports that many African nations have, over decades, witnessed birth sex ratios below 100, that is more girls are born than boys. Angola, Botswana and Namibia have reported birth sex ratios between 94 and 99, which is quite different than the presumed &quot;normal&quot; sex ratio, meaning that significantly more girls have been born in such societies.

In addition, in many developing countries there are problems with birth registration and data collection, which can complicate the issue. With regard to the prevalence of sex selection, the media and international attention has focused mainly on a few countries, such as China, India and the Caucasus, ignoring other countries with a significant sex imbalance at birth. For example, Liechtenstein&#x27;s sex ratio is far worse than that of those countries, but little has been discussed about it, and virtually no suggestions have been made that it may practice sex selection, although it is a very conservative country where women could not vote until 1984. At the same time, there have been accusations that the situation in some countries, such as Georgia, has been exaggerated. In 2017, Georgia&#x27; sex ratio at birth was 107, according to CIA statistics.

=== Data reliability ===
The estimates for birth sex ratios, and thus derived sex-selective abortion, are a subject of dispute as well. For example, United States&#x27; CIA projects the birth sex ratio for Switzerland to be 106, while the Switzerland&#x27;s Federal Statistical Office that tracks actual live births of boys and girls every year, reports the latest birth sex ratio for Switzerland as 107. Other variations are more significant; for example, CIA projects the birth sex ratio for Pakistan to be 105, United Nations FPA office claims the birth sex ratio for Pakistan to be 110, while the government of Pakistan claims its average birth sex ratio is 111.

The two most studied nations with high sex ratio and sex-selective abortion are China and India. The CIA estimates a birth sex ratio of 112 for both in recent years. However, The World Bank claims the birth sex ratio for China in 2009 was 120 boys for every 100 girls; while United Nations FPA estimates China&#x27;s 2011 birth sex ratio to be 118.

For India, the United Nations FPA claims a birth sex ratio of 111 over 2008–10 period, while The World Bank and India&#x27;s official 2011 Census reports a birth sex ratio of 108. These variations and data reliability is important as a rise from 108 to 109 for India, or 117 to 118 for China, each with large populations, represent a possible sex-selective abortion of about 100,000 girls.

Bias is due to the unreported births in hospitals which makes a slight difference on the data they report vs the census. If parents obtain sex testing before birth, and abortion was made and it was based on female fetus, it is more likely for the abortion to happen in the hospital for safety purposes and would have been reported. With no comparative data with hospitals vs nonhospital births the length of biased would be unable to determine opposed to those countries where most hospital births occur and are actually reported.

== Prenatal sex discernment ==

The earliest post-implantation test, cell free fetal DNA testing, involves taking a blood sample from the mother and isolating the small amount of fetal DNA that can be found within it. When performed after week seven of pregnancy, this method is about 98% accurate.

Obstetric ultrasonography, either transvaginally or transabdominally, checks for various markers of fetal sex. It can be performed at or after week 12 of pregnancy. At this point, of fetal sexes can be correctly determined, according to a 2001 study. Accuracy for males is approximately 50% and for females almost 100%. When performed after week 13 of pregnancy, ultrasonography gives an accurate result in almost 100% of cases.

The most invasive measures are chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and amniocentesis, which involve testing of the chorionic villus (found in the placenta) and amniotic fluid, respectively. Both techniques typically test for chromosomal disorders but can also reveal the sex of the child and are performed early in the pregnancy. However, they are often more expensive and more dangerous than blood sampling or ultrasonography, so they are seen less frequently than other sex determination techniques.

Prenatal sex determination is restricted in many countries, and so is the communication of the sex of the fetus to the pregnant woman or her family, in order to prevent sex selective abortion.
In India, prenatal sex determination is regulated under the Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994.

;Availability
China launched its first ultrasonography machine in 1979. Chinese health care clinics began introducing ultrasound technologies that could be used to determine prenatal sex in 1982. By 1991, Chinese companies were producing 5,000 ultrasonography machines per year. Almost every rural and urban hospital and family planning clinics in China had a good quality sex discernment equipment by 2001.

The launch of ultrasonography technology in India too occurred in 1979, but its expansion was slower than China. Ultrasound sex discernment technologies were first introduced in major cities of India in the 1980s, its use expanded in India&#x27;s urban regions in the 1990s, and became widespread in the 2000s.

==Africa and the Middle East==
Sex selective abortion based on son preference is significant in North Africa and the Middle East.

== Asia ==
The total numbers of &quot;missing women&quot; are about 11.9 million and 10.6 million in China and India respectively, out of 23 million world-wide, according to a 2019 study. Given that the total number of recorded abortions is much lower than that, some dispute those numbers.

=== China ===

China, the most populous country in the world, has a serious problem with an unbalanced sex ratio population. A 2010 BBC article stated that the sex birth ratio was 119 boys born per 100 girls, which rose to 130 boys per 100 girls in some rural areas. The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences estimated that more than 24 million Chinese men of marrying age could find themselves without spouses by 2020. In 1979, China enacted the one-child policy, which, within the country&#x27;s deeply patriarchal culture, resulted in an unbalanced birth sex ratio. The one child policy was enforced throughout the years, including through forced abortions and forced sterilizations, but gradually loosened until it was formally abolished in 2015.

When sex ratio began being studied in China in 1960, it was still within the normal range. However, it climbed to 111.9 by 1990 and to 118 by 2010 per its official census. Researchers believe that the causes of this sex ratio imbalance are increased female infant mortality, underreporting of female births and sex-selective abortion. According to Zeng et al. (1993), the most prominent cause is probably sex-selective abortion, but this is difficult to prove that in a country with little reliable birth data because of the hiding of &quot;illegal&quot; (under the One-Child Policy) births.

These illegal births have led to underreporting of female infants. Zeng et al., using a reverse survival method, estimate that underreporting keeps about 2.26% male births and 5.94% female births off the books. Adjusting for unreported illegal births, they conclude that the corrected Chinese sex ratio at birth for 1989 was 111 rather than 115. These national averages over time, mask the regional sex ratio data. For example, in 2005 Anhui, Jiangxi, Shaanxi, Hunan and Guangdong, had a sex ratio at birth of more than 130.

Traditional Chinese techniques have been used to determine sex for hundreds of years, primarily with unknown accuracy. It was not until ultrasonography became widely available in urban and rural China that sex was able to be determined scientifically. In 1986, the Ministry of Health posted the Notice on Forbidding Prenatal Sex Determination, but it was not widely followed. Three years later, the Ministry of Health outlawed the use of sex determination techniques, except for in diagnosing hereditary diseases. Individuals or clinics that violated the ban on prenatal determination at the request of the mother were subject to financial penalties, and the ban was repeatedly affirmed in the 1980s, early 1990s, and early 2000s. However, many people have personal connections to medical practitioners and strong son preference still dominates culture, leading to the widespread use of sex determination techniques.

Hardy, Gu, and Xie suggest sex-selective abortion is more prevalent in rural China because son preference is much stronger there. Urban areas of China, on average, are moving toward greater equality for both sexes, while rural China tends to follow more traditional views of gender. This is partially due to the belief that, while sons are always part of the family, daughters are only temporary, going to a new family when they marry. Additionally, if a woman&#x27;s firstborn child is a son, her position in society moves up, while the same is not true of a firstborn daughter. Families in China are aware of the critical lack of female children and its implication on marriage prospects in the future; many parents are beginning to work extra when their sons are young so that they will be able to pay for a bride for them.
In a 2005 study, Zhu, Lu, and Hesketh found that the highest sex ratio was for those ages 1–4, and two provinces, Tibet and Xinjiang, had sex ratios within normal limits. Two other provinces had a ratio over 140, four had ratios between 130 and 139, and seven had ratios between 120 and 129, each of which is significantly higher than the natural sex ratio.

The birth sex ratio in China, according to a 2012 news report, has decreased to 117 males born for every 100 females. The sex ratio peaked in 2004 at around 121, and had declined to around 112 in 2017. The ratio was forecast to drop below 112 by 2020 and 107 by 2030, according to the National Population Development Outline by the State Council.

In December 2016, researchers at the University of Kansas reported that the missing women might be largely a result of administrative under-reporting and that delayed registration of females, instead of abortion and infanticide practices. The finding questioned the earlier assumptions that rural Chinese villagers aborted their daughters on a massive scale and concluded that as many as 10 to 15 million missing women hadn&#x27;t received proper birth registration since 1982. The reason for underreporting was attributed to families trying to avoid penalties when girls were born, and local government concealing the lack of enforcement from the central government. This implied that the sex disparity of the Chinese newborns was likely exaggerated significantly in previous analyses. Though the degree of data discrepancy, the challenge in relation to sex-ratio imbalance in China is still disputed among scholars.

=== India ===

A research by Pew Research Center based on Union government data indicates foeticide of at least 9 million females in the years 2000–2019. The research found that 86.7% of these foeticides were by Hindus (80% of the population), followed by Sikhs (1.7% of the population) with 4.9%, and Muslims (14% of the population) with 6.6%. The research also indicated an overall decline in preference for sons in the time period.

India&#x27;s 2001 census revealed a national 0–6 age child sex ratio of 108, which increased to 109 according to 2011 census (927 girls per 1000 boys and 919 girls per 1000 boys respectively, compared to expected normal ratio of 943 girls per 1000 boys). The national average masks the variations in regional numbers according to 2011 census—Haryana&#x27;s ratio was 120, Punjab&#x27;s ratio was 118, Jammu &amp; Kashmir was 116, and Gujarat&#x27;s ratio was 111. The 2011 Census found eastern states of India had birth sex ratios between 103 and 104, lower than normal. In contrast to decadal nationwide census data, small non-random sample surveys report higher child sex ratios in India.

The child sex ratio in India shows a regional pattern. India&#x27;s 2011 census found that all eastern and southern states of India had a child sex ratio between 103 and 107, typically considered as the &quot;natural ratio.&quot; The highest sex ratios were observed in India&#x27;s northern and northwestern states – Haryana (120), Punjab (118) and Jammu &amp; Kashmir (116). The western states of Maharashtra and Rajasthan 2011 census found a child sex ratio of 113, Gujarat at 112 and Uttar Pradesh at 111.

The Indian census data suggests there is a positive correlation between abnormal sex ratio and better socio-economic status and literacy. Urban India has higher child sex ratio than rural India according to 1991, 2001 and 2011 Census data, implying higher prevalence of sex selective abortion in urban India. Similarly, child sex ratio greater than 115 boys per 100 girls is found in regions where the predominant majority is Hindu, Muslim, Sikh or Christian; furthermore &quot;normal&quot; child sex ratio of 104 to 106 boys per 100 girls are also found in regions where the predominant majority is Hindu, Muslim, Sikh or Christian. These data contradict any hypotheses that may suggest that sex selection is an archaic practice which takes place among uneducated, poor sections or particular religion of the Indian society.


Rutherford and Roy, in their 2003 paper, suggest that techniques for determining sex prenatally that were pioneered in the 1970s, gained popularity in India. These techniques, claim Rutherford and Roy, became broadly available in 17 of 29 Indian states by the early 2000s. Such prenatal sex determination techniques, claim Sudha and Rajan in a 1999 report, where available, favored male births.

Arnold, Kishor, and Roy, in their 2002 paper, too hypothesize that modern fetal sex screening techniques have skewed child sex ratios in India. Ganatra et al., in their 2000 paper, use a small survey sample to estimate that of reported abortions followed a sex determination test.

The Indian government and various advocacy groups have continued the debate and discussion about ways to prevent sex selection. The immorality of prenatal sex selection has been questioned, with some arguments in favor of prenatal discrimination as more humane than postnatal discrimination by a family that does not want a female child. Others question whether the morality of sex selective abortion is any different over morality of abortion when there is no risk to the mother nor to the fetus, and abortion is used as a means to end an unwanted pregnancy.

India passed its first abortion-related law, the so-called Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act of 1971, making abortion legal in most states, but specified legally acceptable reasons for abortion such as medical risk to mother and rape. The law also established physicians who can legally provide the procedure and the facilities where abortions can be performed, but did not anticipate sex selective abortion based on technology advances.

With increasing availability of sex screening technologies in India through the 1980s in urban India, and claims of its misuse, the Government of India passed the Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques Act (PNDT) in 1994. This law was further amended into the Pre-Conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) (PCPNDT) Act in 2004 to deter and punish prenatal sex screening and sex selective abortion. The impact of the law and its enforcement is unclear. However, research shows that there was about a 0.7%-1% increase in female births after the PNDT Act was passed in 1994. Unfortunately, this data was not significant. United Nations Population Fund and India&#x27;s National Human Rights Commission, in 2009, asked the Government of India to assess the impact of the law. The Public Health Foundation of India, an activist NGO in its 2010 report, claimed a lack of awareness about the Act in parts of India, inactive role of the Appropriate Authorities, ambiguity among some clinics that offer prenatal care services, and the role of a few medical practitioners in disregarding the law. At the start of passing this act, women were still able to travel across borders to continue having sex-selective abortions. This was until the national PNDT was passed in 1996.

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of India has targeted education and media advertisements to reach clinics and medical professionals to increase awareness. The Indian Medical Association has undertaken efforts to prevent prenatal sex selection by giving its members &quot;Beti Bachao&quot; (save the daughter) badges during its meetings and conferences.

In November 2007, MacPherson estimated that 100,000 abortions every year continue to be performed in India solely because the fetus is female.

===Pakistan===
For Pakistan, the United Nations Population Fund, in its 2012 report estimates the Pakistan birth sex ratio to be 110. In the urban regions, particularly its densely populated region of Punjab, report a sex ratio above 112 (less than 900 females per 1000 males). Hudson and Den Boer estimate the resulting deficit to be about 6 million missing girls in Pakistan than what would normally be expected. 

In 2017, two Pakistani organisations discovered large cases of infanticide in Pakistani cities. This was led by the Edhi Foundation and Chhipa Welfare Foundation. The infanticide victims were almost all were female infants. The reason given by the local authorities were poverty and local customs, where boys are preferred to girls. However, the large discovery in Karachi shows that many of the female infants were killed because of the local clerics, who ordered that out-of-wedlock babies should be disregarded. This is due to the fact that fornication is a major sin in Islam, although it is also &quot;haram&quot; (forbidden) to kill an innocent soul, which babies and children fall under. In fact, Muhammad explicitly banned the killing of female infants, as it was a custom in Pre-Islamic Arabia.

=== South Korea ===
Sex-selective abortion gained popularity in the mid-1980s to early 1990s in South Korea, where selective female abortions were commonplace as male children were preferred. Historically, much of Korea&#x27;s values and traditions were based on Confucianism that dictated the patriarchal system, motivating the heavy preference for sons. Additionally, even though the abortion ban existed, the combination of son preference and availability of sex-selective technology led to an increasing number of sex-selective abortions and boys born. As a result, South Korea experienced drastically high sex ratios around mid-1980s to early 1990s. However, in recent years, with the changes in family policies and modernization, attitudes towards son preference have changed, normalizing the sex ratio and lowering the number of sex-selective abortions. With that being said, there has been no explicit data on the number of induced sex selective abortions reportedly performed due to the abortion ban and controversy surrounding the topic. Therefore, scholars have been continuously analyzing and generating connections among sex-selection, abortion policies, gender discrimination, and other cultural factors.

===Other Asian countries===
Other countries with large populations but high sex ratios include Vietnam. The United Nations Population Fund, in its 2012 report, claims the birth sex ratio of Vietnam at 111 with its densely populated Red River Delta region at 116.

Taiwan has reported a sex ratio at birth between 1.07 and 1.11 every year, across 4 million births, over the 20-year period from 1991 to 2011, with the highest birth sex ratios in the 2000s. Sex-selective abortion is reported to be common in South Korea too, but its incidence has declined in recent years. As of 2015, South Korea&#x27;s sex ratio at birth was 1.07 male/female. In 2015, Hong Kong had a sex ratio at birth of 1.12 male/female. A 2001 study on births in the late 1990s concluded that &quot;sex selection or sex-selective abortion might be practiced among Hong Kong Chinese women&quot;.

Recently, a rise in the sex ratio at birth has been noted in some parts of Nepal, most notably in the Kathmandu Valley, but also in districts such as Kaski. High sex ratios at birth are most notable amongst richer, more educated sections of the population in urban areas.

== Europe ==
Abnormal sex ratios at birth, possibly explained by growing incidence of sex-selective abortion, have also been noted in some other countries outside South and East Asia. According to CIA, the most imbalanced birth sex ratios in Europe (2017) are in Liechtenstein, Armenia, Albania, Azerbaijan, San Marino, Kosovo and Macedonia; with Liechtenstein having the most imbalanced sex ratio in the world.

=== Caucasus ===

The Caucasus has been named a &quot;male-dominated region&quot;, and as families have become smaller in recent years, the pressures to have sons has increased. Before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, the birth sex ratio in Caucasus countries such as Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia was in the 105 to 108 range. After the collapse, the birth sex ratios sharply climbed and have remained high for the last 20 years. Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan have seen strongly imbalanced birth sex ratios in the first decade of the 21st century. In Georgia, the birth sex ratio for the years 2005–2009 was cited by &quot;The Economist&quot; to be about 120, a trend &quot;The Economist&quot; claims suggests that the practice of sex-selective abortion in the Caucasus has been similar to those in East Asia and South Asia in recent decades.

According to an article in &quot;The Economist&quot; the sex ratio in Armenia is seen to be a function of birth order. The article claimed that among first born children, there are 138 boys for every 100 girls. Overall, the birth sex ratio in Armenia exceeded 115 in some years, far higher than India&#x27;s which was cited at 108. While these high birth sex ratios suggest sex-selective abortion, there is no direct evidence of observed large-scale sex-selective abortions in Caucasus.

According to latest CIA data, the 2017 sex ratio in the region is 112 for Armenia, 109 for Azerbaijan, and 107 for Georgia.

=== Southeast Europe ===
An imbalanced birth sex ratio has been present in the 21st century in the Western Balkans, in countries such as Albania, Macedonia, Kosovo and Montenegro. Scholars claim this suggests that sex-selective abortions are common in southeast Europe. As of 2017, according to CIA estimates, Albania&#x27;s birth sex ratio is 109. According to Eurostat and birth record data over 2008–11, the birth sex ratios of Albania and Montenegro for that period were 112 and 110 respectively. In recent years, Montenegrin health authorities have expressed concern with regard to the significant imbalance between the number of male and female births. However the data from CIA in 2017 cites the birth ratio for Montenegro within the normal range, at 106. In recent years, the birth registration data for Macedonia and Kosovo indicate unbalanced birth sex ratios, including a birth rate in 2010 of 112 for Kosovo As 2017, CIA cited both Macedonia and Kosovo at 108.

== Americas ==

=== United States ===
As in other countries, sex-selective abortion is difficult to track in the United States because of lack of data.

While the vast majority of parents in the United States do not practice sex-selective abortion, there is certainly a trend toward male preference. According to a 2011 Gallup poll, if they were only allowed to have one child, 40% of respondents said they would prefer a boy, while only 28% preferred a girl. When told about prenatal sex selection techniques such as sperm sorting and in-vitro-fertilization embryo selection, 40% of Americans surveyed thought that picking embryos by sex was an acceptable manifestation of reproductive rights. These selection techniques are available at about half of American fertility clinics, as of 2006. However, other studies show a larger preference for females. According to the Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology, 80% of American couples who wanted to get gender selection wanted girls over boys.

However, it is notable that minority groups that immigrate into the United States bring their cultural views and mindsets into the country with them. A study carried out at a Massachusetts infertility clinic shows that the majority of couples using these techniques, such as preimplantation genetic diagnosis came from a Chinese or Asian background. This is thought to branch from the social importance of giving birth to male children in China and other Asian countries.

A study of the 2000 United States Census suggests possible male bias in families of Chinese, Korean and Indian immigrants, which was getting increasingly stronger in families where the first one or two children were female. In those families where the first two children were girls, the birth-sex ratio of the third child was 1.51:1.

Because of this movement toward sex preference and selection, many bans on sex-selective abortion have been proposed at the state and federal level. In 2010 and 2011, sex-selective abortions were banned in Oklahoma and Arizona, respectively. Legislators in Georgia, West Virginia, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, and New York have also tried to pass acts banning the procedure.

== Other countries ==
A 2013 study by John Bongaarts based on surveys in 61 major countries calculates the sex ratios that would result if parents had the number of sons and daughters they want. In 35 countries, claims Bongaarts, the desired birth sex ratio in respective countries would be more than 110 boys for every 100 girls if parents in these countries had a child matching their preferred gender (higher than India&#x27;s, which The Economist claims is 108).

== Estimates of missing women ==

Estimates of implied missing girls, considering the &quot;normal&quot; birth sex ratio to be the 103–107 range, vary considerably between researchers and underlying assumptions for expected post-birth mortality rates for men and women. For example, a 2005 study estimated that over 90 million females were &quot;missing&quot; from the expected population in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, China, India, Pakistan, South Korea and Taiwan alone, and suggested that sex-selective abortion plays a role in this deficit. For early 1990s, Sen estimated 107 million missing women, Coale estimated 60 million as missing, while Klasen estimated 89 million missing women in China, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, West Asia and Egypt. Guilmoto, in his 2010 report, uses recent data (except for Pakistan), and estimates a much lower number of missing girls, but notes that the higher sex ratios in numerous countries have created a gender gap – shortage of girls – in the 0–19 age group.

== Disparate gendered access to resources ==
Although there is significant evidence of the prevalence of sex-selective abortions in many nations (especially India and China), there is also evidence to suggest that some of the variation in global sex ratios is due to disparate access to resources. As MacPherson (2007) notes, there can be significant differences in gender violence and access to food, healthcare, immunizations between male and female children. This leads to high infant and childhood mortality among girls, which causes changes in sex ratio.

Disparate, gendered access to resources appears to be strongly linked to socioeconomic status. Specifically, poorer families are sometimes forced to ration food, with daughters typically receiving less priority than sons. However, Klasen&#x27;s 2001 study revealed that this practice is less common in the poorest families, but rises dramatically in the slightly less poor families. Klasen and Wink&#x27;s 2003 study suggests that this is &quot;related to greater female economic independence and fewer cultural strictures among the poorest sections of the population&quot;. In other words, the poorest families are typically less bound by cultural expectations and norms, and women tend to have more freedom to become family breadwinners out of necessity.

Increased sex ratios can be caused by disparities in aspects of life other than vital resources. According to Sen (1990), differences in wages and job advancement also have a dramatic effect on sex ratios. This is why high sex ratios are sometimes seen in nations with little sex-selective abortion. Additionally, high female education rates are correlated with lower sex ratios (World Bank 2011).

Lopez and Ruzikah (1983) found that, when given the same resources, women tend to outlive men at all stages of life after infancy. However, globally, resources are not always allocated equitably. Thus, some scholars argue that disparities in access to resources such as healthcare, education, and nutrition play at least a small role in the high sex ratios seen in some parts of the world. For example, Alderman and Gerter (1997) found that unequal access to healthcare is a primary cause of female death in developing nations, especially in Southeast Asia. Moreover, in India, lack of equal access to healthcare has led to increased disease and higher rates of female mortality in every age group until the late thirties (Sen 1990). This is particularly noteworthy because, in regions of the world where women receive equal resources, women tend to outlive men (Sen 1990). Women outlive men in all but 2 countries.

Economic disadvantage alone may not always lead to increased sex ratio, claimed Sen in 1990. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, one of the most economically disadvantaged regions of the world, there is an excess of women. So, if economic disadvantage is uncorrelated with sex ratio in Africa, some other factor(s) may be at play. More detailed analysis of African demographics, in 2002, suggests that Africa too has wide variation in birth sex ratios (from 1.01 in Bantu populations of East Africa to 1.08 in Nigeria and Ethiopia). Thus economic disadvantage remains a possible unresolved hypothesis for Africa as well.

== Reasons for sex-selective abortion ==
According to the 2012 report of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities on sex imbalances at birth, there are three preconditions for sex-selective abortion. First, the practice should be feasible with the availability of abortion methods and prenatal sex-screening technologies (e.g., obstetric ultrasonography, cell-free fetal DNA, amniocentesis). Second, changing the sex composition of children should be advantageous to the parents and the family. A variety of socioeconomic factors can account for this sex preference such as inherence rules, patronymic transmission, dowry systems, social preference of family composition. Third, sex-selective abortion should be necessary because of low or decreasing fertility. Given the existence of the social benefits associated with sons, the need for having sons while maintaining a limited number of children is intensified by low fertility. Low fertility can be a result of social norms of family size, rising marginal costs of an additional child, or birth control policies.

Some demographers question whether sex-selective abortion or infanticide claims are accurate, because underreporting of female births may also explain high sex ratios. Natural reasons may also explain some of the abnormal sex ratios. In contrast to these possible causes of abnormal sex ratio, Klasen and Wink suggest India and China&#x27;s high sex ratios are primarily the result of sex-selective abortion.

=== Socioeconomic reasons for son preference and daughter aversion ===

==== Cultural preference ====
The reason for intensifying sex-selection abortion in China and India can be seen through history and cultural background. Generally, before the information era, male babies were preferred because they provided manual labor and continuation of the family lineage. Labor is still important in developing nations as China and India, but when it comes to family lineage, it is of great importance.

The selective abortion of female fetuses is most common in areas where cultural norms value male children over female children for a variety of social and economic reasons. A son is often preferred as an &quot;asset&quot; since he can earn and support the family; a daughter is a &quot;liability&quot; since she will be married off to another family, and so will not contribute financially to her parents. Sex selective female abortion is a continuation, in a different form, of a practice of female infanticide or withholding of postnatal health care for girls in certain households. Furthermore, in some cultures sons are expected to take care of their parents in their old age. These factors are complicated by the effect of diseases on child sex ratio, where communicable and noncommunicable diseases affect males and females differently. In parts of India and Pakistan, there are social norms such as purdah, which stipulate that female seclusion and confinement to the home is necessary. Such practices are prevalent among some Muslim and Hindu communities in South Asia. When females interact with men, or are believed to do so, the &quot;family honor&quot; is tarnished.

Historically, in many South Asian populations, women were allocated a very low status, evidenced through practices such as sati, an ancient funeral custom where a widow immolated herself on her husband&#x27;s pyre or committed suicide in another fashion shortly after her husband&#x27;s death. Such societies, in placing almost no value on females, encouraged parents to commit infanticide of girls or to abandon them. The modern practice of sex-selective abortion is therefore a continuation of other historical practices. During the 19th century, in the Northwest British India, one-fourth of the population preserved only half the daughters, while other 3/4th of the population had balanced sex ratio. There were 118 males per 100 females. This is comparable to the contemporary sex ratio in the area, now divided between India and Pakistan.

Chinese culture is deeply patriarchal. Pre-modern Chinese society was predominantly patriarchal and patrilineal from at least the 11th century BC onwards. There has long been a son preference in China, leading to high rates of female infanticide, as well as a strong tradition of restricting the freedom of movement of women, particularly upper-class women, manifested through the practice of foot binding. Although the legal and social standing of women have greatly improved in the 20th century, son preference remains still strong, and the situation was aggravated by the one child policy.

Interpretations of Confucianism have been argued to contribute to the low status of women. The gender roles prescribed in the Three Obediences and Four Virtues became a cornerstone of the family, and thus, societal stability. Starting from the Han period, Confucians began to teach that a virtuous woman was supposed to follow the males in her family: the father before her marriage, the husband after she marries, and her sons in widowhood. In the later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on the virtue of chastity. The Song dynasty Confucian Cheng Yi stated that: &quot;To starve to death is a small matter, but to lose one&#x27;s chastity is a great matter.&quot; The &quot;cult of chastity&quot; accordingly, condemned many widows to poverty and loneliness by placing a social stigma on remarriage.

In modern East Asia, a large part of the pattern of preferences leading to this practice can be condensed simply as a desire to have a male heir. Monica Das Gupta (2005) observes, from 1989 birth data for China, there was no evidence of selective abortion of female fetuses among firstborn children. However, there was a strong preference for a boy if the first born was a girl.

==== Dowry ====

Dowry is the property that parents of a female transfer at her marriage. Dowry is an ancient practice, that has been common in many cultures around the world, and which is today prevalent especially in South Asia. The custom of dowry is most common in cultures that are strongly patrilineal and that expect women to reside with or near their husband&#x27;s family (patrilocality).

Kirti Singh states that dowry is widely considered to be both a cause and a consequence of son preference, and this may lead to girls being unwanted, sex selective abortion, female infanticide or abuse of female children.

The dowry system in India is a major part of Indian culture and refers to the durable goods, cash, and real or movable property that the bride&#x27;s family gives to the bridegroom, his parents, or his relatives as a condition of the marriage. Dowry consists of a payment in cash or some kind of gifts given to the bridegroom&#x27;s family along with the bride and includes cash, jewelry, electrical appliances, furniture, bedding, crockery, utensils and other household items that help the newlyweds set up their home. Disputes regarding dowry sometimes lead to dowry deaths.

==== Trivers–Willard hypothesis ====
The Trivers–Willard hypothesis argues that resource availability affects male reproductive success more than female and that, consequently, parents should prefer males when resources are plentiful and females when resources are scarce. This has been applied to resource differences between individuals in a society and also to resource differences between societies. Empirical evidence is mixed, with higher support in better studies, according to Cronk in a 2007 review. One example: in a 1997 study of a group with a preference for females was Romani in Hungary, a low-status group. They &quot;had a female-biased sex ratio at birth, were more likely to abort a fetus after having had one or more daughters, nursed their daughters longer, and sent their daughters to school for longer.&quot;

=== One-child policy ===

Following the 1949 creation of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the issue of population control came into the national spotlight. In the early years of the Republic, leaders believed that telling citizens to reduce their fertility was enough, repealing laws banning contraception and instead promoting its use. However, the contraceptives were not widely available, both because of lack of supply and because of cultural taboo against discussing sex. Efforts were slowed following the famine of 1959–61 but were resumed shortly thereafter with virtually the same results. Then, in 1964, the Family Planning Office was established to enforce stricter guidelines regarding fertility and it was moderately successful.

In 1979, the government adopted the One-Child Policy, which limited many families to one child, unless specified by provincial regulations. It was instituted as an attempt to boost the Chinese economy. Under it, families who break rules regarding the number of children they are allowed are given various punishments (primarily monetary), dependent upon the province in which they live.

As stated above, the sex ratios of a province are largely determined by the type of restriction placed upon the family, pointing to the conclusion that much of the imbalance in sex ratio in China can be attributed to the policy. Research by Junhong (2001) found that many parents are willing to pay to ensure that their child is male (especially if their first child is female), but will not do the same to ensure their child is female. Likely, fear of the harsh monetary punishments of the One-Child Policy make ensuring a son&#x27;s birth a smart investment. Therefore, son&#x27;s cultural and economic importance to families and the large expenses associated with multiple children are primary factors leading to China&#x27;s disparate sex ratio.

In 2013, China announced plans to formally change the One-Child policy, making it less stringent. The National People&#x27;s Congress has changed the policy to allow couples to have two children, so long as one of the partners is an only child. This change was not sparked by sex ratios, but rather by an aging population that is causing the workforce to become increasingly smaller. It is estimated that this new law will lead to two million more births per year and could cause a baby boom in China. In 2015, China officially relaxed its one child law. Unfortunately, many of China&#x27;s social problems are based on overpopulation. So, it is unclear if this new law will actually lead to women being more valued in Chinese society as the number of citizens increases.

== Societal effects ==

=== Missing women ===

The idea of &quot;missing women&quot; was first suggested by Amartya Sen, one of the first scholars to study high sex ratios and their causes globally, in 1990. In order to illustrate the gravity of the situation, he calculated the number of women that were not alive because of sex-selective abortion or discriminatory practices. He found that there were 11 percent fewer women than there &quot;should&quot; have been, if China had the natural sex ratio. This figure, when combined with statistics from around the world, led to a finding of over 100 million missing women. In other words, by the early 1990s, the number of missing women was &quot;larger than the combined casualties of all famines in the twentieth century&quot; (Sen 1990).

This has led to particular concern due to a critical shortage of wives. In some rural areas, there is already a shortage of women, which is tied to migration into urban areas (Park and Cho 1995). In South Korea and Taiwan, high male sex ratios and declining birth rates over several decades have led to cross-cultural marriage between local men and foreign women from countries such as mainland China, Vietnam and the Philippines. However, sex-selective abortion is not the only cause of this phenomenon; it is also related to migration and declining fertility.

=== Trafficking, forced marriage and sex work ===
Some scholars argue that as the proportion of women to men decreases globally, there will be an increase in trafficking and sex work (both forced and self-elected), as many men will be willing to do more to obtain a sexual partner (Junhong 2001). Already, there are reports of women from Vietnam, Myanmar, and North Korea systematically trafficked to mainland China and Taiwan and sold into forced marriages. Moreover, Ullman and Fidell (1989) suggested that pornography and sex-related crimes of violence (i.e., rape and molestation) would also increase with an increasing sex ratio.

=== Widening of the gender social gap ===
As Park and Cho (1995) note, families in areas with high sex ratios that have mostly sons tend to be smaller than those with mostly daughters (because the families with mostly sons appear to have used sex-selective techniques to achieve their &quot;ideal&quot; composition). Particularly in poor areas, large families tend to have more problems with resource allocation, with daughters often receiving fewer resources than sons. Blake (1989) is credited for noting the relationship between family size and childhood &quot;quality.&quot; Therefore, if families with daughters continue to be predominantly large, it is likely that the social gap between genders will widen due to traditional cultural discrimination and lack of resource availability.

Guttentag and Secord (1983) hypothesized that when the proportion of males throughout the world is greater, there is likely to be more violence and war.

=== Potential positive effects ===
Some scholars believe that when sex ratios are high, women actually become valued more because of their relative shortage. Park and Cho (1995) suggest that as women become more scarce, they may have &quot;increased value for conjugal and reproductive functions&quot; (75). Eventually, this could lead to better social conditions, followed by the birth of more women and sex ratios moving back to natural levels. This claim is supported by the work of demographer Nathan Keifitz. Keifitz (1983) wrote that as women become fewer, their relative position in society will increase. However, to date, no data has supported this claim.

It has been suggested by Belanger (2002) that sex-selective abortion may have positive effects on the mother choosing to abort the female fetus. This is related to the historical duty of mothers to produce a son in order to carry on the family name. As previously mentioned, women gain status in society when they have a male child, but not when they have a female child. Oftentimes, bearing of a son leads to greater legitimacy and agency for the mother. In some regions of the world where son preference is especially strong, sonless women are treated as outcasts. In this way, sex-selective abortion is a way for women to select for male fetuses, helping secure greater family status.

Goodkind (1999) argues that sex-selective abortion should not be banned purely because of its discriminatory nature. Instead, he argues, we must consider the overall lifetime possibilities of discrimination. In fact, it is possible that sex-selective abortion takes away much of the discrimination women would face later in life. Since families have the option of selecting for the fetal sex they desire, if they choose not to abort a female fetus, she is more likely to be valued later in life. In this way, sex-selective abortion may be a more humane alternative to infanticide, abandonment, or neglect. Goodkind (1999) poses an essential philosophical question, &quot;if a ban were enacted against prenatal sex testing (or the use of abortion for sex-selective purposes), how many excess postnatal deaths would a society be willing to tolerate in lieu of whatever sex-selective abortions were avoided?&quot;

===Controversies===
There are many controversies surrounding sex-selective abortion. Just like the practice of sex-selective abortion has been criticized, the solutions proposed or enacted by governments have also been criticized. Eklund &amp; Purewal argued that the response to a patriarchal practice (sex selection) should not be another patriarchal practice (restricting women&#x27;s reproductive rights), as such a situation creates a cycle: women&#x27;s social status is lowered, which in turn leads to more sex-selective abortions. The association of public discourse on sex-selective abortion with the anti-abortion movement also complicates the situation. Furthermore, access to safe abortion is seen by some as important from a public health perspective; in India, although the abortion law is relatively liberal, most efforts are put into preventing sex-selective abortion, rather than adequate access to safe abortion, as a result nearly 78% of all abortions in India take place outside of health facilities, with such unsafe abortions representing the third largest cause of maternal death in India. Another controversy in that of population planning campaigns such as the one child policy in China, and efforts from the governments of several Asian countries, including India and South Korea, from the 1970s onward to limit the number of children a family could have, which have intensified the desire to quickly have a son. An article by Al Jazeera titled &quot;How Western family planners helped curb the birth of girls in developing countries, the effects of which are felt today&quot; claimed that it was such population policies (which included forced sterilization), which were fully supported, even pushed by the West, that contributed to unbalanced sex ratios.

== Sex-selective abortion in the context of abortion ==
MacPherson estimates that 100,000 sex-selective abortions every year continue to be performed in India. For a contrasting perspective, in the United States with a population th of India, over 1.2 million abortions every year were performed between 1990 and 2007. In England and Wales with a population th of India, over 189,000 abortions were performed in 2011, or a yearly rate of 17.5 abortions per 1,000 women aged 15–44. The average for the European Union was 30 abortions per year per 1,000 women.

Many scholars have noted the difficulty in reconciling the discriminatory nature of sex-selective abortion with the right of women to have control over their own bodies. This conflict manifests itself primarily when discussing laws about sex-selective abortion. Weiss (1995:205) writes: &quot;The most obvious challenge sex-selective abortion represents for pro-choice feminists is the difficulty of reconciling a pro-choice position with moral objections one might have to sex selective abortion (especially since it has been used primarily on female fetuses), much less the advocacy of a law banning sex-selective abortion.&quot;
As a result, arguments both for and against sex-selective abortion are typically highly reflective of one&#x27;s own personal beliefs about abortion in general. Warren (1985:104) argues that there is a difference between acting within one&#x27;s rights and acting upon the most morally sound choice, implying that sex-selective abortion might be within rights but not morally sound. Warren also notes that, if we are to ever reverse the trend of sex-selective abortion and high sex ratios, we must work to change the patriarchy-based society which breeds the strong son preference.

Laws against sex-selective abortion, especially those that exist in some U.S. states, are controversial, because it is not clear how they can be enforced, and pro-choice activists argue that such laws are brought by anti-abortion movement forces who are using this as a pretext to restrict women&#x27;s access to safe and legal abortion and to harass doctors who perform abortions: NARAL states that &quot;For many years, anti-choice lawmakers have tried to ban abortion using every possible reason and excuse –including, now, on the grounds of purported concern about race or sex selection.&quot; There is concern that such bans may put women who seek sex-selective abortions in danger because they may seek unsafe abortions, and that these bans do not address the root cause of sex-selective abortion, including the pregnant women&#x27;s fear that they or their future daughters will suffer abuse, violence and stigmatization.

== Laws, campaigns and policies against sex-selective abortion ==
=== International ===
The practice of prenatal sex selection has been condemned internationally. It is often seen as a result of discriminatory social views which consider females inferior to males. In 1994 over 180 states signed the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, agreeing to &quot;eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child&quot;. In 2011 the resolution of PACE&#x27;s Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men condemned the practice of prenatal sex selection.

=== By country ===
Many nations have attempted to address sex-selective abortion rates through a combination of media campaigns and policy initiatives.

;Canada
In Canada, a group of MPs led by Mark Warawa are working on having the Parliament pass a resolution condemning sex-selective pregnancy termination.

;USA
The United States Congress has debated legislation that would outlaw the practice. The legislation ultimately failed to pass in the House of Representatives.

On the state level, laws against sex-selective abortions have been passed in a number of U.S. states; the law passed in Arizona in 2011 prohibits both sex-selective and race-selective abortion.

;United Kingdom
The law on sex-selective abortion is unresolved in the United Kingdom. In order for an abortion to be legal, doctors need to show that continuing the pregnancy could threaten the physical or mental health of the mother. In a recent case, two doctors were caught on camera offering a sex-selective abortion but the Director of Public Prosecution deemed it not in the public interest to proceed with the prosecution. Following this incidence, MPs voted 181 to 1 for a Bill put forward by Tessa Munt and 11 other MPs aiming to end confusion about the legality of this practice. Organisations such as BPAS and Abortion Rights have been lobbying for the decriminalisation of sex-selective abortions.

;China
China&#x27;s government has increasingly recognized its role in a reduction of the national sex ratio. As a result, since 2005, it has sponsored a &quot;boys and girls are equal campaign.&quot; For example, in 2000, the Chinese government began the &quot;Care for Girls&quot; Initiative. Furthermore, several levels of government have been modified to protect the &quot;political, economic, cultural, and social&quot; rights of women. Finally, the Chinese government has enacted policies and interventions to help reduce the sex ratio at birth. In 2005, sex-selective abortion was made illegal in China. This came in response to the ever-increasing sex ratio and a desire to try to detract from it and reach a more normal ratio. The sex ratio among firstborn children in urban areas from 2000 to 2005 did not rise at all, so there is hope that this movement is taking hold across the nation.

UNICEF and UNFPA have partnered with the Chinese government and grassroots-level women&#x27;s groups such as All China Women&#x27;s Federation to promote gender equality in policy and practice, as well engage various social campaigns to help lower birth sex ratio and to reduce excess female child mortality rates.

;India
In India, according to a 2007 study by MacPherson, Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques Act (PCPNDT Act) was highly publicized by NGOs and the government. Many of the ads used depicted abortion as violent, creating fear of abortion itself within the population. The ads focused on the religious and moral shame associated with abortion. MacPherson claims this media campaign was not effective because some perceived this as an attack on their character, leading to many becoming closed off, rather than opening a dialogue about the issue. This emphasis on morality, claims MacPherson, increased fear and shame associated with all abortions, leading to an increase in unsafe abortions in India.

The government of India, in a 2011 report, has begun better educating all stakeholders about its MTP and PCPNDT laws. In its communication campaigns, it is clearing up public misconceptions by emphasizing that sex determination is illegal, but abortion is legal for certain medical conditions in India. The government is also supporting implementation of programs and initiatives that seek to reduce gender discrimination, including media campaign to address the underlying social causes of sex selection.

Other recent policy initiatives adopted by numerous states of India, claims Guilmoto, attempt to address the assumed economic disadvantage of girls by offering support to girls and their parents. These policies provide conditional cash transfer and scholarships only available to girls, where payments to a girl and her parents are linked to each stage of her life, such as when she is born, completion of her childhood immunization, her joining school at grade 1, her completing school grades 6, 9 and 12, her marriage past age 21. Some states are offering higher pension benefits to parents who raise one or two girls. Different states of India have been experimenting with various innovations in their girl-driven welfare policies. For example, the state of Delhi adopted a pro-girl policy initiative (locally called &quot;Laadli scheme&quot;), which initial data suggests may be lowering the birth sex ratio in the state.

== See also ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471757" start="0" end="22" title="Sex-selective abortion" label="Sex-selective abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="124" end="132" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="242" end="251" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="256" end="266" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="302" end="333" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="335" end="340" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="345" end="353" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="374" end="382" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="384" end="399" title="Western Balkans" label="Western Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="424" end="437" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="886" end="897" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="997" end="1012" title="human sex ratio" label="human sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="1105" end="1128" title="List of sovereign states and dependencies by population" label="most populous countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="2400" end="2415" title="human sex ratio" label="human sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="3776" end="3787" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043137" start="4249" end="4323" title="Missing women of Asia" label="&amp;#x27;missing women&amp;#x27; from extra women who would have survived in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="6487" end="6493" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="6495" end="6503" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="6508" end="6515" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q454938" start="6655" end="6666" title="John Graunt" label="John Graunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="9248" end="9261" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="9269" end="9293" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9301" end="9306" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="9314" end="9321" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="9329" end="9345" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9353" end="9358" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="9366" end="9373" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="9381" end="9390" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="9398" end="9405" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="9413" end="9420" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="9428" end="9438" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="9446" end="9456" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="9464" end="9475" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="9483" end="9489" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="9500" end="9509" title="Republic of Macedonia" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="9577" end="9582" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q83900" start="11185" end="11203" title="birth registration" label="birth registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="11411" end="11419" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="11502" end="11515" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544056" start="11745" end="11776" title="1984 Liechtenstein women&amp;#x27;s suffrage referendum" label="women could not vote until 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="11870" end="11877" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="12188" end="12199" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="12476" end="12484" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14225730" start="13992" end="14011" title="cell free fetal DNA" label="cell free fetal DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="14108" end="14111" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402036" start="14223" end="14248" title="Obstetric ultrasonography" label="Obstetric ultrasonography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076497" start="14684" end="14709" title="chorionic villus sampling" label="chorionic villus sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q473768" start="14720" end="14733" title="amniocentesis" label="amniocentesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q901674" start="14809" end="14823" title="amniotic fluid" label="amniotic fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q744962" start="14874" end="14895" title="Chromosome abnormality" label="chromosomal disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239157" start="15405" end="15489" title="Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act" label="Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="16314" end="16326" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="16335" end="16346" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16450" end="16455" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16460" end="16465" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="17085" end="17101" title="one-child policy" label="one-child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231577" start="17281" end="17296" title="forced abortion" label="forced abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="17302" end="17322" title="forced sterilization" label="forced sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="18419" end="18424" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="18426" end="18433" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="18435" end="18442" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="18444" end="18449" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="18454" end="18463" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="18645" end="18660" title="ultrasonography" label="ultrasonography"/>
<link wikidata="Q27952316" start="19323" end="19337" title="son preference" label="son preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="20998" end="21018" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="21177" end="21188" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="21909" end="21928" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="22092" end="22098" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="22136" end="22141" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="22182" end="22189" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="23326" end="23333" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="23341" end="23347" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="23358" end="23377" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu &amp;amp; Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239157" start="26191" end="26233" title="Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques Act, 1994" label="Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques Act (PNDT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="26682" end="26712" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="United Nations Population Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525265" start="27334" end="27371" title="Ministry of Health and Family Welfare" label="Ministry of Health and Family Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="28862" end="28867" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="28959" end="28967" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="29039" end="29057" title="Pre-Islamic Arabia" label="Pre-Islamic Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="29156" end="29167" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="30375" end="30382" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q342451" start="30512" end="30527" title="Red River Delta" label="Red River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="30544" end="30550" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="30786" end="30797" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="30932" end="30941" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="31222" end="31227" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="31249" end="31265" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28436" start="31297" end="31302" title="Kaski District" label="Kaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="31855" end="31863" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="32022" end="32053" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="32124" end="32134" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="32136" end="32143" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="32148" end="32155" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="32484" end="32497" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="33417" end="33432" title="Western Balkans" label="Western Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="33455" end="33462" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="33464" end="33473" title="Republic of Macedonia" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="33475" end="33481" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="33486" end="33496" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="34612" end="34623" title="Gallup poll" label="Gallup poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501356" start="35570" end="35603" title="preimplantation genetic diagnosis" label="preimplantation genetic diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="36309" end="36317" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="36322" end="36329" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="36360" end="36367" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="36369" end="36382" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="36384" end="36392" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="36394" end="36403" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="36405" end="36415" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="36421" end="36429" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251284" start="36521" end="36535" title="John Bongaarts" label="John Bongaarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="37343" end="37354" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="37356" end="37366" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="37368" end="37373" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="37375" end="37380" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="37382" end="37390" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="37392" end="37403" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="37408" end="37414" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="37685" end="37694" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="37699" end="37704" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402036" start="41553" end="41578" title="obstetric ultrasonography" label="obstetric ultrasonography"/>
<link wikidata="Q14225730" start="41580" end="41599" title="cell-free fetal DNA" label="cell-free fetal DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q473768" start="41601" end="41614" title="amniocentesis" label="amniocentesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="42950" end="42965" title="information era" label="information era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517820" start="43060" end="43067" title="Lineage (anthropology)" label="lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113779" start="43694" end="43712" title="female infanticide" label="female infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074672" start="44107" end="44113" title="purdah" label="purdah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433333" start="44347" end="44359" title="family honor" label="family honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208088" start="44504" end="44508" title="Sati (practice)" label="sati"/>
<link wikidata="Q179115" start="44544" end="44549" title="widow" label="widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="44590" end="44594" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="44608" end="44615" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="44759" end="44770" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="44947" end="44960" title="British raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="45227" end="45242" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="45523" end="45542" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q498231" start="45620" end="45632" title="foot binding" label="foot binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="45802" end="45818" title="one child policy" label="one child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="45840" end="45852" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859833" start="45947" end="45980" title="Three Obediences and Four Virtues" label="Three Obediences and Four Virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q558380" start="46366" end="46374" title="Cheng Yi (philosopher)" label="Cheng Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="46596" end="46609" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="47023" end="47028" title="Dowry" label="Dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="47302" end="47313" title="patrilineal" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531930" start="47388" end="47401" title="patrilocality" label="patrilocality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113779" start="47579" end="47597" title="female infanticide" label="female infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052027" start="47632" end="47653" title="dowry system in India" label="dowry system in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q323466" start="47673" end="47687" title="Indian culture" label="Indian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303649" start="48191" end="48202" title="dowry death" label="dowry death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454501" start="48247" end="48273" title="Trivers–Willard hypothesis" label="Trivers–Willard hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q751093" start="48321" end="48341" title="reproductive success" label="reproductive success"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="48789" end="48795" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="48799" end="48806" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="49334" end="49347" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="49820" end="49836" title="One-Child Policy" label="One-Child Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="52685" end="52696" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="52701" end="52707" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="53207" end="53218" title="Human trafficking" label="trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="53387" end="53394" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="53396" end="53403" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="53409" end="53420" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="53459" end="53464" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="53469" end="53475" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="53490" end="53505" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="57508" end="57530" title="anti-abortion movement" label="anti-abortion movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="57636" end="57649" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342132" start="57929" end="57945" title="unsafe abortions" label="unsafe abortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q579873" start="58042" end="58061" title="population planning" label="population planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="58084" end="58100" title="one child policy" label="one child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="58351" end="58361" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="58562" end="58582" title="forced sterilization" label="forced sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="59004" end="59021" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="59183" end="59197" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="59600" end="59610" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="60530" end="60540" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="60616" end="60626" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="60673" end="60695" title="anti-abortion movement" label="anti-abortion movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q779763" start="60727" end="60734" title="pretext" label="pretext"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160931" start="60839" end="60844" title="NARAL" label="NARAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q576920" start="61714" end="61768" title="International Conference on Population and Development" label="International Conference on Population and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q939743" start="61882" end="61886" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe" label="PACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q513969" start="62190" end="62201" title="Mark Warawa" label="Mark Warawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="62228" end="62238" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="62315" end="62337" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="62443" end="62467" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="62590" end="62597" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q578772" start="63167" end="63177" title="Tessa Munt" label="Tessa Munt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970631" start="63278" end="63282" title="BPAS" label="BPAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668428" start="63287" end="63302" title="abortion Rights (Organisation)" label="Abortion Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537504" start="66015" end="66040" title="conditional cash transfer" label="conditional cash transfer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54422" wikidata="Q179975" url="?curid=54422" title="Chinese Civil War">
<text>The Chinese Civil War was fought between the Kuomintang-led government of the Republic of China and the forces of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), with armed conflict continuing intermittently from 1 August 1927 until Communist victory resulted in their total control over mainland China on 7 December 1949.

The war is generally divided into two phases with an interlude: from August 1927 to 1937, the First United Front alliance of the KMT and CCP collapsed during the Northern Expedition, and the Nationalists controlled most of China. From 1937 to 1945, hostilities were mostly put on hold as the Second United Front fought the Japanese invasion of China with eventual help from the Allies of World War II, although armed clashes between the groups remained common. Exacerbating the divisions within China further was the formation of the Wang Jingwei regime, a Japan-sponsored puppet government led by Wang Jingwei, which was established to nominally govern the regions of China that came under Japanese occupation.

The civil war resumed as soon as it became apparent that Japanese defeat was imminent, with the communists gaining the upper hand in the second phase of the war from 1945 to 1949, generally referred to as the Chinese Communist Revolution. The Communists gained control of mainland China and proclaimed the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949, forcing the leadership of the Republic of China to retreat to the island of Taiwan. Starting in the 1950s, a lasting political and military stand-off between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait has ensued, with the ROC in Taiwan and the PRC on the mainland both claiming to be the legitimate government of all China. After the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis, both tacitly ceased to engage in open conflict in 1979; however, no armistice or peace treaty has ever been signed.

== Background ==

Following the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the 1911 Revolution, Sun Yat-sen assumed the presidency of the newly formed Republic of China, and was shortly thereafter succeeded by Yuan Shikai. Yuan failed in a short-lived attempt to declare by himself emperor, and China fell into power struggle after his death in 1916.

The Kuomintang (KMT), led by Sun Yat-sen, created a new government in Guangzhou to rival the warlords who ruled over large swathes of China and prevented the formation of a solid central government. After Sun&#x27;s efforts to obtain aid from Western countries were ignored, he turned to the Soviet Union. In 1923, Sun and Soviet representative Adolph Joffe in Shanghai pledged Soviet assistance to China&#x27;s unification in the Sun–Joffe Manifesto, a declaration of cooperation among the Comintern, KMT, and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Comintern agent Mikhail Borodin arrived in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of both the CCP and the KMT along the lines of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The CCP, which was initially a study group, and the KMT jointly formed the First United Front.

In 1923, Sun sent Chiang Kai-shek, one of his lieutenants, for several months of military and political study in Moscow. Chiang then became the head of the Whampoa Military Academy that trained the next generation of military leaders. The Soviets provided the academy with teaching material, organization, and equipment, including munitions. They also provided education in many of the techniques for mass mobilization. With this aid, Sun raised a dedicated &quot;army of the party&quot;, with which he hoped to defeat the warlords militarily. CCP members were also present in the academy, and many of them became instructors, including Zhou Enlai, who was made a political instructor.

Communist members were allowed to join the KMT on an individual basis. The CCP itself was still small at the time, having a membership of 300 in 1922 and only 1,500 by 1925. As of 1923, the KMT had 50,000 members.

However, after Sun died in 1925, the KMT split into left- and right-wing movements. KMT members worried that the Soviets were trying to destroy the KMT from inside using the CCP. The CCP then began movements in opposition of the Northern Expedition, passing a resolution against it at a party meeting.

Then, in March 1927, the KMT held its second party meeting where the Soviets helped pass resolutions against the Expedition and curbing Chiang&#x27;s power. Soon, the KMT would be clearly divided.

Throughout this time, the Soviet Union sent money and spies to support the CCP. Without their support, the CCP likely would have failed. This is evidenced by documents showing other communist parties in China at the time, one with as many as 10,000 members, which all failed without support from the Soviet Union.

=== Shanghai massacre and Northern Expedition (1927) ===
In early 1927, the KMT–CCP rivalry led to a split in the revolutionary ranks. The CCP and the left wing of the KMT decided to move the seat of the KMT government from Guangzhou to Wuhan, where communist influence was strong. However, Chiang and Li Zongren, whose armies defeated the warlord Sun Chuanfang, moved eastward toward Jiangxi. The leftists rejected Chiang&#x27;s demand to eliminate Communist influence within KMT, and Chiang denounced them for betraying Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s Three Principles of the People by taking orders from the Soviet Union. According to Mao Zedong, Chiang&#x27;s tolerance of the CCP in the KMT camp decreased as his power increased.

On 7 April, Chiang and several other KMT leaders held a meeting, during which they proposed that Communist activities were socially and economically disruptive and had to be undone for the Nationalist revolution to proceed. On 12 April, many communists within the KMT were purged in Shanghai through hundreds of arrests and executions on the orders of General Bai Chongxi. The CCP referred to this as the &quot;12 April Incident&quot;, the White Terror, or the Shanghai massacre. This incident widened the rift between Chiang and Wang Jingwei, the leader of the left wing faction of the KMT. The left wing of the KMT also expelled CCP members from the Wuhan Government, which in turn was toppled by Chiang Kai-shek. The KMT resumed its campaign against warlords and captured Beijing in June 1928. Soon, most of eastern China was under the control of the Nanjing central government, which received prompt international recognition as the sole legitimate government of China. The KMT government announced, in conformity with Sun Yat-sen, the formula for the three stages of revolution: military unification, political tutelage, and constitutional democracy.

== Communist insurgency (1927–1937) ==

On 1 August 1927, the CCP launched an uprising in Nanchang against the Nationalist government in Wuhan. This conflict led to the creation of the Red Army. On 4 August, the main forces of the Red Army left Nanchang and headed southwards for an assault on Guangdong. Nationalist forces quickly reoccupied Nanchang while the remaining members of the CCP in Nanchang went into hiding. A CCP meeting on 7 August confirmed the objective of the party was to seize the political power by force, but the CCP was quickly suppressed the next day by the Nationalist government in Wuhan, led by Wang Jingwei. On 14 August, Chiang Kai-shek announced his temporary retirement, as the Wuhan faction and Nanjing faction of the Kuomintang were allied once again with common goal of suppressing the CCP after the earlier split. Wang Jingwei took the leadership of KMT after Chiang.

Attempts were later made by the CCP to take the cities of Changsha, Shantou and Guangzhou. The Red Army consisting of mutinous former National Revolutionary Army (NRA) soldiers as well as armed peasants established control over several areas in southern China. KMT forces continued to attempt to suppress the rebellions. Then, in September, Wang Jingwei was forced out of Wuhan. September also saw an unsuccessful armed rural insurrection, known as the Autumn Harvest Uprising, led by Mao Zedong. Borodin then returned to the Soviet Union in October via Mongolia. In November, Chiang Kai-shek went to Shanghai and invited Wang to join him. On 11 December, the CCP started the Guangzhou Uprising, establishing a soviet there the next day, but lost the city by 13 December to a counter-attack under the orders of General Zhang Fakui. On 16 December, Wang Jingwei fled to France. There were now three capitals in China: the internationally recognized republic capital in Beijing, the CCP and left-wing KMT at Wuhan and the right-wing KMT regime at Nanjing, which would remain the KMT capital for the next decade.

This marked the beginning of a ten-year armed struggle, known in mainland China as the &quot;Ten-Year Civil War&quot; (十年内战) which ended with the Xi&#x27;an Incident, when Chiang Kai-shek was forced to form the Second United Front against invading forces from the Empire of Japan. In 1930, the Central Plains War broke out as an internal conflict of the KMT; launched by Feng Yuxiang, Yan Xishan, and Wang Jingwei. The attention was turned to root out remaining pockets of CCP activity in a series of five encirclement campaigns. The first and second campaigns failed, and the third was aborted due to the Mukden Incident. The fourth campaign (1932–1933) achieved some early successes, but Chiang&#x27;s armies were badly mauled when they tried to penetrate into the heart of Mao&#x27;s Soviet Chinese Republic. During these campaigns, KMT columns struck swiftly into CCP areas, but were easily engulfed by the vast countryside and were not able to consolidate their foothold.

Finally, in late 1934, Chiang launched a fifth campaign that involved the systematic encirclement of the Jiangxi Soviet region with fortified blockhouses. The blockhouse strategy was devised and implemented in part by newly hired Nazi advisors. Unlike previous campaigns in which they penetrated deeply in a single strike, this time the KMT troops patiently built blockhouses, each separated by about , to surround the Communist areas and cut off their supplies and food sources.

In October 1934, the CCP took advantage of gaps in the ring of blockhouses (manned by the forces of a warlord ally of Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s, rather than regular KMT troops) and broke out of the encirclement. The warlord armies were reluctant to challenge Communist forces for fear of losing their own men and did not pursue the CCP with much fervor. In addition, the main KMT forces were preoccupied with annihilating Zhang Guotao&#x27;s army, which was much larger than Mao&#x27;s. The massive military retreat of Communist forces lasted a year and covered what Mao estimated as 12,500 km (25,000 Li); it became known as the Long March.

This military retreat was undertaken by the Chinese Communist Party, led by Mao Zedong, to evade the pursuit or attack of the Kuomintang army. It consisted of a series of marches, during which numerous Communist armies in the south escaped to the north and west. Over the course of the march from Jiangxi the First Front Army, led by an inexperienced military commission, was on the brink of annihilation by Chiang Kai-Shek&#x27;s troops as their stronghold was in Jiangxi. The Communists, under the command of Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai, &quot;escaped in a circling retreat to the west and north, which reportedly traversed over 9,000 kilometers over 370 days.&quot; The route passed through some of the most difficult terrain of western China by traveling west, and then northwards towards Shaanxi. &quot;In November 1935, shortly after settling in northern Shaanxi, Mao officially took over Zhou Enlai&#x27;s leading position in the Red Army. Following a major reshuffling of official roles, Mao became the chairman of the Military Commission, with Zhou and Deng Xiaoping as vice-chairmen.&quot; This marked Mao&#x27;s position as the pre-eminent leader of the CCP, with Zhou in second position to him.

The march ended when the CCP reached the interior of Shaanxi. Zhang Guotao&#x27;s army (Red 4th Front Army), which took a different route through northwest China, was largely destroyed by the forces of Chiang Kai-shek and his Chinese Muslim allies, the Ma clique. Along the way, the Communist army confiscated property and weapons from local warlords and landlords, while recruiting peasants and the poor, solidifying its appeal to the masses. Of the 90,000–100,000 people who began the Long March from the Soviet Chinese Republic, only around 7,000–8,000 made it to Shaanxi. The remnants of Zhang&#x27;s forces eventually joined Mao in Shaanxi, but with his army destroyed, Zhang, even as a founding member of the CCP, was never able to challenge Mao&#x27;s authority. Essentially, the great retreat made Mao the undisputed leader of the Chinese Communist Party.

The Kuomintang used Khampa troopswho were former banditsto battle the Communist Red Army as it advanced and to undermine local warlords who often refused to fight Communist forces to conserve their own strength. The KMT enlisted 300 &quot;Khampa bandits&quot; into its Consolatory Commission military in Sichuan, where they were part of the effort of the central government to penetrate and destabilize local Han warlords such as Liu Wenhui. The government was seeking to exert full control over frontier areas against the warlords. Liu had refused to battle the Communists in order to conserve his army. The Consolatory Commission forces were used to battle the Red Army, but they were defeated when their religious leader was captured by the Communists.

In 1936, Zhou Enlai and Zhang Xueliang grew closer, with Zhou even suggesting that he join the CCP. However, this was turned down by the Comintern in the USSR. Later on, Zhou persuaded Zhang and Yang Hucheng, another warlord, to instigate the Xi&#x27;an Incident. Chiang was placed under house arrest and forced to stop his attacks on the Red Army, instead focusing on the Japanese threat.

== Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) ==

During Japan&#x27;s invasion and occupation of Manchuria, Chiang Kai-shek saw the CCP as the greater threat. Chiang refused to ally with the CCP, preferring to unite China by eliminating the warlord and CCP forces first. He believed his forces were too weak to face the Japanese Imperial Army; only after unification could the KMT mobilize against Japan. He ignored the Chinese people&#x27;s discontent and anger at the KMT policy of compromise with the Japanese, instead ordering KMT generals Zhang Xueliang and Yang Hucheng to suppress the CCP. However, their provincial forces suffered significant casualties in battles against the Red Army.

On 12 December 1936, the disgruntled Zhang and Yang conspired to kidnap Chiang and force him into a truce with the CCP. The incident became known as the Xi&#x27;an Incident. Both parties suspended fighting to form a Second United Front to focus their energies and fight the Japanese. In 1937, Japan launched its full-scale invasion of China and its well-equipped troops overran KMT defenders in northern and coastal China.

The alliance of CCP and KMT was in name only. Unlike the KMT forces, CCP troops shunned conventional warfare and instead waged guerrilla warfare against the Japanese. The level of actual cooperation and coordination between the CCP and KMT during World War II was minimal. In the midst of the Second United Front, the CCP and the KMT were still vying for territorial advantage in &quot;Free China&quot; (i.e., areas not occupied by the Japanese or ruled by Japanese puppet governments such as Manchukuo and the Reorganized National Government of China).

The situation came to a head in late 1940 and early 1941 when clashes between Communist and KMT forces intensified. Chiang demanded in December 1940 that the CCP&#x27;s New Fourth Army evacuate Anhui and Jiangsu Provinces, due to its provocation and harassment of KMT forces in this area. Under intense pressure, the New Fourth Army commanders complied. The following year they were ambushed by KMT forces during their evacuation, which led to several thousand deaths. It also ended the Second United Front, formed earlier to fight the Japanese.

As clashes between the CCP and KMT intensified, countries such as the United States and the Soviet Union attempted to prevent a disastrous civil war. After the New Fourth Army incident, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt sent special envoy Lauchlin Currie to talk with Chiang Kai-shek and KMT party leaders to express their concern regarding the hostility between the two parties, with Currie stating that the only ones to benefit from a civil war would be the Japanese. The Soviet Union, allied more closely with the CCP, sent an imperative telegram to Mao in 1941, warning that civil war would also make the situation easier for the Japanese military. Due to the international community&#x27;s efforts, there was a temporary and superficial peace. Chiang criticized the CCP in 1943 with the propaganda piece &quot;China&#x27;s Destiny&quot;, which questioned the CCP&#x27;s power after the war, while the CCP strongly opposed Chiang&#x27;s leadership and referred to his regime as fascist in an attempt to generate a negative public image. Both leaders knew that a deadly battle had begun between themselves.

In general, developments in the Second Sino-Japanese War were to the advantage of the CCP, as its guerrilla war tactics had won them popular support within the Japanese-occupied areas. In occupied areas, the Communists established military and political bases from which it carried out guerilla warfare. The Communists built popular support in these areas, returning land to poor peasants, reducing peasant&#x27;s rent, and arming the people. By Spring 1945, there were 19 Communist-governed areas in China in which 95 million people lived. In Fall 1945, the Communist armies had 1.27 million men and were supported by 2.68 million militia members. The KMT had to defend the country against the main Japanese campaigns, since it was the legal Chinese government, a factor which proved costly to Chiang Kai-shek and his troops. Japan launched its last major offensive against the KMT, Operation Ichi-Go, in 1944, which resulted in the severe weakening of Chiang&#x27;s forces. The CCP also suffered fewer losses through its guerrilla tactics.
== Immediate post-war clashes (1945–1946) ==
Under the terms of the Japanese unconditional surrender dictated by the Allies, Japanese troops were to surrender to KMT troops but not to the CCP, which was present in some of the occupied areas. In Manchuria, however, where the KMT had no forces, the Japanese surrendered to the Soviet Union. Chiang Kai-shek reminded Japanese troops to remain at their posts to receive the KMT, but Communist forces soon began taking surrenders from the Japanese and fighting those who resisted. General Wedemeyer of the United States Army became alarmed at these developments and wanted seven American divisions to be sent to China, but General Marshall replied that it should not be given priority over Japan and Korea.

The first post-war peace negotiation, attended by both Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong, was in Chongqing from 28 August to 10 October 1945. Chiang entered the meeting at an advantage because he had recently signed a friendly treaty with the Soviet Union while the Communists were still forcing the Japanese to surrender in some places. Mao was accompanied by American ambassador Patrick J. Hurley, who was devoted to Chiang but also wanted to ensure Mao&#x27;s safety in light of the past history between the two Chinese leaders. It concluded with the signing of the Double Tenth Agreement. Both sides stressed the importance of a peaceful reconstruction, but the conference did not produce any concrete results. Battles between the two sides continued even as peace negotiations were in progress, until the agreement was reached in January 1946. However, large campaigns and full-scale confrontations between the CCP and Chiang&#x27;s troops were temporarily avoided. On 26 November 1945, Hurley resigned, viewing Chiang as having gone against his agreement with the Communists. In December 1945, Hurley&#x27;s former position was filled by Marshall.

In the last month of World War II in East Asia, Soviet forces launched the huge Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation against the Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria and along the Chinese-Mongolian border. This operation destroyed the Kwantung Army in just three weeks and left the USSR occupying all of Manchuria by the end of the war in a total power vacuum of local Chinese forces. Consequently, the 700,000 Japanese troops stationed in the region surrendered. Later in the year Chiang Kai-shek realized that he lacked the resources to prevent a CCP takeover of Manchuria following the scheduled Soviet departure. He therefore made a deal with the Soviets to delay their withdrawal until he had moved enough of his best-trained men and modern materiel into the region. However, the Soviets refused permission for the Nationalist troops to traverse its territory and spent the extra time systematically dismantling the extensive Manchurian industrial base (worth up to $2 billion) and shipping it back to their war-ravaged country. KMT troops were then airlifted by the US to occupy key cities in North China, while the countryside was already dominated by the CCP. On 15 November 1945, the KMT began a campaign to prevent the CCP from strengthening its already strong base. At the same time, however, the return of the KMT also brought widespread graft and corruption, with an OSS officer remarking that the only winners were the Communists.

In the winter of 1945–1946, Joseph Stalin commanded Marshal Rodion Malinovsky to give Mao Zedong most Imperial Japanese Army weapons that were captured.

Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s forces pushed as far as Jinzhou by 26 November 1945, meeting with little resistance. This was followed by a Communist offensive on the Shandong Peninsula that was largely successful, as all of the peninsula, except what was controlled by the US, fell to the Communists. The truce fell apart in June 1946 when full-scale war between CCP and KMT forces broke out on 26 June 1946. China then entered a state of civil war that lasted more than three years.

== Resumed fighting (1946–1949) ==
=== Background and disposition of forces ===
By the end of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the power of the Chinese Communist Party grew considerably. Their main force grew to 1.2 million troops, backed with additional militia of 2 million, totalling 3.2 million troops. Their &quot;Liberated Zone&quot; in 1945 contained 19 base areas, including one-quarter of the country&#x27;s territory and one-third of its population; this included many important towns and cities. Moreover, the Soviet Union turned over all of its captured Japanese weapons and a substantial amount of their own supplies to the Communists, who received Northeastern China from the Soviets as well.

In March 1946, despite repeated requests from Chiang, the Soviet Red Army under the command of Marshal Rodion Malinovsky continued to delay pulling out of Manchuria, while Malinovsky secretly told the CCP forces to move in behind them, which led to full-scale war for the control of the Northeast. These favorable conditions also facilitated many changes inside the Communist leadership: the more radical hard-line faction who wanted a complete military take-over of China finally gained the upper hand and defeated the careful opportunists. Before giving control to Communist leaders, on 27 March, Soviet diplomats requested a joint venture of industrial development with the Nationalist Party in Manchuria.

Although General Marshall stated that he knew of no evidence that the CCP was being supplied by the Soviet Union, the CCP was able to utilize a large number of weapons abandoned by the Japanese, including some tanks. When large numbers of well-trained KMT troops began to defect to the Communist forces, the CCP was finally able to achieve material superiority. The CCP&#x27;s most effective political reform was its land reform policy. This drew the massive number of landless and starving peasants in the countryside into the Communist cause. This strategy enabled the CCP to access an extensive supply of manpower for both combat and logistical purposes; despite suffering heavy casualties throughout many of the war&#x27;s campaigns, manpower continued to grow. For example, during the Huaihai Campaign alone the CCP was able to mobilize 5,430,000 peasants to fight against the KMT forces.

After the war with the Japanese ended, Chiang Kai-shek quickly moved KMT troops to newly liberated areas to prevent Communist forces from receiving the Japanese surrender. The US airlifted many KMT troops from central China to the Northeast (Manchuria). President Harry S. Truman was very clear about what he described as &quot;using the Japanese to hold off the Communists&quot;. In his memoirs he writes:

Using the pretext of &quot;receiving the Japanese surrender&quot;, business interests within the KMT government occupied most of the banks, factories and commercial properties, which had previously been seized by the Imperial Japanese Army. They also conscripted troops at an accelerated pace from the civilian population and hoarded supplies, preparing for a resumption of war with the Communists. These hasty and harsh preparations caused great hardship for the residents of cities such as Shanghai, where the unemployment rate rose dramatically to 37.5%.

Hyperinflation meant those employed in the Kuomintang forces lost the purchasing power of their pay. This resulted in corruption and the embezzlement of supplies which disappeared into the barter economy. Ordinary Kuomintang soldiers were often malnourished and desertion was common.

The US strongly supported the Kuomintang forces. About 50,000 US soldiers were sent to guard strategic sites in Hebei and Shandong in Operation Beleaguer. The US equipped and trained KMT troops, and transported Japanese and Koreans back to help KMT forces to occupy liberated zones as well as to contain Communist-controlled areas. According to William Blum, American aid included substantial amounts of mostly surplus military supplies, and loans were made to the KMT. Within less than two years after the Sino-Japanese War, the KMT had received $4.43 billion from the USmost of which was military aid. Highlighting the aid provided by the US to the KMT, the Communists&#x27; position was that the US was stirring domestic warfare and characterized the civil war as both a national revolution against the KMT and a revolution against US colonization and aggression.

=== Outbreak of war ===
As postwar negotiations between the Nationalist government and the CCP failed, the civil war between these two parties resumed. This stage of war is referred to in mainland China and Communist historiography as the &quot;War of Liberation&quot; (). On 20 July 1946, Chiang Kai-shek launched a large-scale assault on Communist territory in North China with 113 brigades (a total of 1.6 million troops).

Knowing their disadvantages in manpower and equipment, the CCP executed a &quot;passive defense&quot; strategy. It avoided the strong points of the KMT army and was prepared to abandon territory in order to preserve its forces. In most cases the surrounding countryside and small towns had come under Communist influence long before the cities. The CCP also attempted to wear out the KMT forces as much as possible. This tactic seemed to be successful; after a year, the power balance became more favorable to the CCP. They wiped out 1.12 million KMT troops, while their strength grew to about two million men.

In March 1947, the KMT achieved a symbolic victory by seizing Yan&#x27;an, the capital of the Yan&#x27;an Soviet. The Communists counterattacked soon afterwards. With KMT efforts for an all-out offensive failing, the Nationalists changed strategy from broad assaults to concentrating on key targets, including Communist-controlled areas in Shandong and Shaanxi. This approach also failed.

From June to September 1947, the Communists launched offensives and Nationalist-controlled areas became the primary battlefields. On 30 June 1947, CCP troops crossed the Yellow River and moved to the Dabie Mountains area, restored and developed the Central Plain. At the same time, Communist forces also began to counterattack in Northeastern China, North China and East China.

The period of August 1948 through October 1949 included the three most significant Communist military campaigns of the civil war: the Liaoshen Campaign (northeast China), Huaihai Campaign (east China), and Pingjin Campaign (Beijing-Tianjin).

The Liaoshen campaign was launched on 12 September 1948 and led by Lin Biao. The main focus of the campaign was Jinzhou. On 14 October, the Communists launched an all-out assault and captured the city in 24 hours. Most of the 90,000 Nationalists casualties in this battle were incorporated into the Communist ranks. The siege of Changchun ended on 19 October when the Nationalist garrison surrendered. On 1 November, the Communists captured Shenyang. By late 1948, the CCP had taken control of the Northeast through the decisive Liaoshen Campaign. 
The capture of large KMT units provided the CCP with the tanks, heavy artillery and other combined-arms assets needed to execute offensive operations south of the Great Wall. By April 1948, the city of Luoyang fell, cutting the KMT army off from Xi&#x27;an. Following a fierce battle, the CCP captured Jinan and Shandong province on 24 September 1948. During this period, Battle of Weixian took place, which was an important battle for the CCP to liberate Shandong. Through the Weixian Campaign, the CCP controlled the Jiaoji Railway and cut off the connection between Jinan and Qingdao. 

The Huaihai Campaign of late 1948 and early 1949 secured east-central China for the CCP. It was the largest military operation of the civil war. A large number of KMT troops deserted and changed sides in these conflicts. The outcome of these encounters were decisive for the military outcome of the civil war.

The Pingjin campaign lasted 64 days, from 21 November 1948 to 31 January 1949. The PLA suffered heavy casualties while securing Zhangjiakou, Tianjin along with its port and garrison at Dagu and Beiping. The CCP brought 890,000 troops from the northeast to oppose some 600,000 KMT troops. There were 40,000 CCP casualties at Zhangjiakou alone. They in turn killed, wounded or captured some 520,000 KMT during the campaign. The KMT&#x27;s defeat in the Pingjin campaign ended its ability to be an effective fighting force on the mainland.

After achieving decisive victory through the Liaoshen, Huaihai, and Pingjin campaigns, the CCP destroyed 144 regular and 29 irregular KMT divisions, including 1.54 million veteran KMT troops. 

Stalin initially favored a coalition government in postwar China, and tried to persuade Mao to stop the CCP from crossing the Yangtze and attacking the KMT positions south of the river. Mao rejected Stalin&#x27;s position and on 21 April, began the Yangtze River Crossing Campaign. On 23 April, they captured the KMT&#x27;s capital, Nanjing. The KMT government retreated to Canton (Guangzhou) until 15 October, Chongqing until 25 November, and then Chengdu before retreating to Taiwan on 7 December. By late 1949, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army was pursuing remnants of KMT forces southwards in southern China, and only Tibet was left. A Chinese Muslim Hui cavalry regiment, the 14th Tungan Cavalry, was sent by the Kuomintang to attack Mongol and Soviet positions along the border during the Pei-ta-shan Incident.

The Kuomintang made several last-ditch attempts to use Khampa troops against the Communists in southwest China. The Kuomintang formulated a plan in which three Khampa divisions would be assisted by the Panchen Lama to oppose the Communists. Kuomintang intelligence reported that some Tibetan tusi chiefs and the Khampa Su Yonghe controlled 80,000 troops in Sichuan, Qinghai and Tibet. They hoped to use them against the Communist army.

=== Pushing south ===
On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong officially proclaimed the People&#x27;s Republic of China with its capital at Beiping, which was returned to the former name Beijing. Chiang Kai-shek and approximately two million Nationalist soldiers retreated from mainland China to the island of Taiwan in December after the PLA advanced into Sichuan province. Isolated Nationalist pockets of resistance remained in the area, but the majority of the resistance collapsed after the fall of Chengdu on 10 December 1949, with some resistance continuing in the far south.

A PRC attempt to take the ROC-controlled island of Quemoy was thwarted in the Battle of Kuningtou, halting the PLA advance towards Taiwan. In December 1949, Chiang proclaimed Taipei the temporary capital of the Republic of China and continued to assert his government as the sole legitimate authority in China.

The Communists&#x27; other amphibious operations of 1950 were more successful: they led to the Communist conquest of Hainan Island in April 1950, the Wanshan Islands off the Guangdong coast (May–August 1950), and Zhoushan Island off Zhejiang (May 1950).

== Aftermath ==


Most observers expected Chiang&#x27;s government to eventually fall to the imminent invasion of Taiwan by the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, and the US was initially reluctant in offering full support for Chiang in their final stand. US President Harry S. Truman announced on 5 January 1950 that the United States would not engage in any dispute involving the Taiwan Strait, and that he would not intervene in the event of an attack by the PRC. Truman, seeking to exploit the possibility of a Titoist-style Sino-Soviet split, announced in his United States Policy toward Formosa that the US would obey the Cairo Declaration&#x27;s designation of Taiwan as Chinese territory and would not assist the Nationalists. However, the Communist leadership was not aware of this change of policy, instead becoming increasingly hostile to the US. The situation quickly changed after the sudden onset of the Korean War in June 1950. This led to changing political climate in the US, and President Truman ordered the United States Seventh Fleet to sail to the Taiwan Strait as part of the containment policy against potential Communist advance.

In June 1949, the ROC declared a &quot;closure&quot; of all mainland China ports and its navy attempted to intercept all foreign ships. The closure was from a point north of the mouth of Min River in Fujian to the mouth of the Liao River in Liaoning. Since mainland China&#x27;s railroad network was underdeveloped, north–south trade depended heavily on sea lanes. ROC naval activity also caused severe hardship for mainland China fishermen.

During the retreat of the Republic of China to Taiwan, KMT troops, who could not retreat to Taiwan, were left behind to fight a guerrilla war against the Communists. These KMT remnants were eliminated in what the PRC called the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries and the Campaigns to Suppress Bandits. According to official statistics from the CCP in 1954, during the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries, at least 2.6 million people were arrested, some 1.29 million people were imprisoned, and 712,000 people were executed. Most of those killed were former Kuomintang officials, businessmen, former employees of Western companies and intellectuals whose loyalty was suspect.

Winning China proper in 1950, also after annexation of Tibet, the CCP controlled the entire mainland in late 1951 (excluding Kinmen and Matsu Islands). But a group of approximately 3,000 KMT Central soldiers retreated to Burma and continued launching guerrilla attacks into south China during the Kuomintang Islamic Insurgency in China (1950–1958) and Campaign at the China–Burma Border. Their leader, Li Mi, was paid a salary by the ROC government and given the nominal title of Governor of Yunnan. Initially, the US-supported these remnants and the Central Intelligence Agency provided them with military aid. After the Burmese government appealed to the United Nations in 1953, the US began pressuring the ROC to withdraw its loyalists. By the end of 1954 nearly 6,000 soldiers had left Burma and Li declared his army disbanded. However, thousands remained, and the ROC continued to supply and command them, even secretly supplying reinforcements at times to maintain a base close to China.

After the ROC complained to the United Nations against the Soviet Union for violating the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance to support the CCP, the UN General Assembly Resolution 505 was adopted on 1 February 1952, condemning the Soviet Union.

In the end, the Communist military forces suffered 1.3 million combat casualties in the 1945–1949 phase of the war: 260,000 killed, 190,000 missing, and 850,000 wounded, discounting irregulars. Nationalist casualties in the same phase were recorded after the war by the PRC 5,452,700 regulars and 2,258,800 irregulars.

After the formation of the PRC, the PRC government named the Western nations, led by the U.S., as the biggest threat to its national security. Basing this judgment on multiple factors, including the idea of a Chinese century of humiliation at the hands of Western powers beginning in the mid-19th century, U.S. support for the Nationalists during the Chinese Civil War, and the ideological struggles between revolutionaries and reactionaries, the PRC leadership believed that China would become a critical battleground in the U.S.&#x27;s crusade against Communism. As a countermeasure and to elevate China&#x27;s standing among the worldwide Communist movements, the PRC leadership adopted a foreign policy that actively promoted Communist revolutions throughout territories on China&#x27;s periphery.

===Taiwan Strait tensions===
Though viewed as a military liability by the US, the ROC viewed its remaining islands in Fujian as vital for any future campaign to defeat the PRC and retake mainland China. On 3 September 1954, the First Taiwan Strait Crisis started with the PRC shelling Kinmen. The PRC captured the Yijiangshan Islands on 19 January 1955, leading to the ROC abandoning the Dachen Islands the following month. On 24 January 1955, the United States Congress passed the Formosa Resolution authorizing the President to defend the ROC&#x27;s offshore islands. The First Taiwan Straits crisis ended in March 1955 when the PLA ceased its bombardment. The crisis ended during the Bandung conference.

The Second Taiwan Strait Crisis began on 23 August 1958 with air and naval engagements between PRC and ROC forces, leading to intense artillery bombardment of Kinmen by the PRC and Xiamen by the ROC, and ended on November of the same year. PLA patrol boats blockaded the islands from ROC supply ships. Though the US rejected Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s proposal to bomb mainland China artillery batteries, it quickly moved to supply fighter jets and anti-aircraft missiles to the ROC. It also provided amphibious assault ships to land supplies, as a sunken ROC naval vessel was blocking the harbor. On 7 September, the US escorted a convoy of ROC supply ships and the PRC refrained from firing.

The third crisis occurred in 1995–96. The PRC responded to Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui&#x27;s visit to the United States, and the U.S. recognition of Lee as a representative of Taiwan, with military exercises. The exercises were also meant to deter Taiwanese voters from supporting Lee in the 1996 election; Lee won the election. Two U.S. aircraft carriers were deployed during the crisis; they were not attacked and deescalation followed.

US Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi&#x27;s visit to Taiwan in August 2022 triggered PRC military exercises across the Taiwan Strait. She originally intended to travel to Taiwan in April 2022, but was delayed due to COVID-19. She rescheduled the trip to August as part of a wider Asian trip. The White House was reported to have been initially divided over the appropriateness of the trip but later affirmed Pelosi&#x27;s right to visit Taiwan. As a result, the PLA announced four days of unprecedented military live-fire drills, in six zones that encircle the island on the busiest international waterways and aviation routes. In response to the announcement, ROC officials complained that the PRC&#x27;s live-fire drills were an invasion of Taiwan&#x27;s territorial space and a direct challenge to free air and sea navigation.

=== Political fallout ===
On 25 October 1971, the United Nations General Assembly admitted the PRC and expelled the ROC, which had been a founding member of the United Nations and was one of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Representatives of Chiang Kai-shek refused to recognise their accreditations as representatives of China and left the assembly. Recognition for the People&#x27;s Republic of China soon followed from most other member nations, including the United States.

By 1984, PRC and ROC began to de-escalate their hostilities through diplomatic relations with each other, and cross-straits trade and investment has been growing ever since. The state of war was officially declared over by the ROC in 1991. Despite the end of the hostilities, the two sides have never signed any agreement or treaty to officially end the war. According to Mao Zedong, there were three ways of &quot;staving off imperialist intervention in the short term&quot; during the continuation of the Chinese Revolution. The first was through a rapid completion of the military takeover of the country, and through showing determination and strength against &quot;foreign attempts at challenging the new regime along its borders&quot;. The second was by &quot;formalising a comprehensive military alliance with the Soviet Union&quot;, which would dedicate Soviet power to directly defending China against its enemies; this aspect became extensively significant given the backdrop of the start of the Cold War. And finally, the regime had to &quot;root out its domestic opponents: the heads of secret societies, religious sects, independent unions, or tribal and ethnic organisations&quot;. By destroying the basis of domestic reaction, Mao believed a safer world for the Chinese revolution to spread in would come into existence.

Under the new ROC president Lee Teng-hui, the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion was renounced in May 1991, thus ending the chances of the Kuomintang&#x27;s quest to retake the mainland. In July 1999, Lee announced a &quot;special diplomatic relationship&quot;. China was furious again, but the military drills were stopped by the 921 earthquakes. It was the last tense moment of this civil war.

With the election in 2000 of Democratic Progressive Party candidate Chen Shui-bian, a party other than the KMT gained the presidency for the first time in Taiwan. The new president did not share the Chinese nationalist ideology of the KMT and CCP. This led to tension between the two sides, although trade and other ties such as the 2005 Pan-Blue visit continued to increase.

With the election of pro-mainland President Ma Ying-jeou (KMT) in 2008, significant warming of relations resumed between Taipei and Beijing, with high-level exchanges between the semi-official diplomatic organizations of both states such as the Chen-Chiang summit series. Although the Taiwan Strait remains a potential flash point, regular direct air links were established in 2009.

== Analysis ==
The Communist victory over the Nationalists is regarded as one of the most impressive twentieth century insurgent victories. Historians and political scientists cite a number of factors, including the CCP&#x27;s success at mobilizing mass support and the shortcomings of the Nationalist government.

=== Poor governance by Nationalists ===

Almost all studies of the failure of the Nationalist government identify hyperinflation as a major factor in the government&#x27;s collapse. The Nationalist military and the government&#x27;s civilian employees were most impacted by hyperinflation which in turn prompted widespread corruption and pilfering. Little funding reached enlisted soldiers, who were typically malnourished and poorly equipped. Desertion was common.

The historian Rana Mitter writes that a lack of trust in the Nationalist government developed, as it was increasingly seen as &quot;corrupt, vindictive, and with no overall vision of what China under its rule should look like&quot;. Chiang wrote in his diary in June 1948: &quot;After the fall of Kaifeng our conditions worsened and became more serious. I now realized that the main reason our nation has collapsed, time after time throughout our history, was not because of superior power used by our external enemies, but because of disintegration and rot from within.&quot;

Historian Odd Arne Westad says the Communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang Kai-shek and also because in his search for a powerful centralized government, Chiang antagonized too many interest groups in China. Furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against the Japanese. Meanwhile, the Communists targeted different groups, such as peasants, and brought them to their side. After 1945, the economy in the ROC areas collapsed because of hyperinflation and the failure of price controls by the ROC government and financial reforms; the Gold Yuan depreciated sharply in late 1948 and resulted in the ROC government losing the support of the cities&#x27; middle classes.

United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson described the Nationalists as &quot;corrupt, reactionary, and inefficient&quot;. He believed that the Nationalists had displayed both political inadequacy as well as &quot;the grossest incompetence ever experienced by any military command,&quot; and that the Communists &quot;did not create this condition&quot;, but skillfully exploited the opportunity it provided.

=== Popular support for Communists and cohesion ===
In the meantime, the Communists continued their land reform programs, winning the support of the population in the countryside. This was a decisive factor in the Communists&#x27; success. Millions of peasants who obtained land through the movement joined the People&#x27;s Liberation Army or assisted in its logistical networks. According to historian Brian DeMare, land redistribution was a critical factor because it linked the interests of peasants in the north and northeast to the Communists&#x27; success. Ultimately, the Communists obtained the greatest popular support of any insurgency in modern history.

An important advantage of the Communists was the &quot;extraordinary cohesion&quot; within its top leadership. This cohesion not only secured it from defections during difficult times but also facilitated &quot;communications and top level debates over tactics&quot;. The charismatic style of leadership of Mao Zedong created a &quot;unity of purpose&quot; and a &quot;unity of command&quot; which the KMT lacked. Apart from that, the CCP had mastered the manipulation of local politics to their benefit; this was also derived from their propaganda skills that had also been decentralised successfully by portraying their opponents as &quot;enemies of all groups of Chinese&quot; and itself as &quot;defenders of the nation&quot; and people (given the backdrop of the war with Japan).

=== International factors ===
After the Second Sino-Japanese War ended, the United States government provided economic and military support exclusively to the Nationalists. As the United States increased aid to the Nationalists in 1947 and 1948, the Communists incorporated United States involvement into its political discourse and framed the conflict not as one between two Chinese sides, but between the Communists and &quot;US imperialists and their puppets&quot;. Mao contended that the United States had provided US$5.9 billion to the Nationalists from 1945 to 1949 &quot;to help Chiang Kai-shek slaughter several million Chinese&quot;.

Strong American support for the Nationalists was hedged with the failure of the Marshall Mission, and then stopped completely mainly because of KMT corruption (such as the notorious Yangtze Development Corporation controlled by H. H. Kung and T. V. Soong&#x27;s family) and KMT&#x27;s military setback in Northeast China. Historians such as Jay Taylor, Robert Cowley, and Anne W. Carroll argue that the Nationalists&#x27; failure was largely caused by external reasons outside of the KMT&#x27;s control, most notably the refusal of the Truman administration to support Chiang with the withdrawal of aid, the US armed embargo, the failed pursuit of a détente between the Nationalists and the communists, and the USSR&#x27;s consistent support of the CCP in the Chinese Civil War. The better-trained Communist army&#x27;s support from the USSR helped counter the American aid that the Nationalists received. Chen Yun said: &quot;They did their best to help us, we were backed by the Soviet Union and North Korea.&quot;

== Atrocities ==
During the war, both the Nationalists and Communists carried out mass atrocities, with millions of non-combatants deliberately killed by both sides. 

=== Nationalist atrocities ===
Over several years after the 1927 Shanghai massacre, the Kuomintang killed between 300,000 and one million people, primarily peasants, in anti-communist campaigns as part of the White Terror. During the White Terror, the Nationalists specifically targeted women with short hair who had not been subjected to foot binding, on the presumption that such &quot;non-traditional&quot; women were radicals. Nationalist forces cut off their breasts, shaved their heads, and displayed their mutilated bodies to intimidate the populace.

Torture, rape, and collective punishment were common Nationalist practices during its counter-insurgency campaigns. The Nationalists uprooted and moved entire communities in an effort to more easily monitor Communist activities.

From 1946 to 1949, the Nationalists arrested, tortured, and killed political dissidents via the Sino-American Cooperative Organization.

===Communist atrocities===

During the December 1930 Futian incident, the communists executed 2,000 to 3,000 members of the Futian battalion after its leaders had mutinied against Mao Zedong.

Between 1931 and 1934 in the Jiangxi–Fujian Soviet, the communist authorities engaged in a widespread campaign of violence against civilians to ensure compliance with its policies and to stop defection to the advancing KMT, including mass executions, land confiscation and forced labor. According to Li Weihan, a high-ranking communist in Jiangxi at the time, in response to mass flight of civilians to KMT held areas, the local authorities would &quot;usually to send armed squads after those attempting to flee and kill them on the spot, producing numerous mass graves throughout the CSR [Chinese Soviet Republic in Jiangxi] that would later be uncovered by the KMT and its allies.&quot; Zhang Wentian, another high-ranking communist, reported that &quot;the policy of annihilating landlords as an exploiting class had degenerated into a massacre&quot; The population of the communist controlled area fell by 700,000 from 1931 and 1935, of which a large proportion were murdered as &quot;class enemies&quot;, worked to death, committed suicide, or died in other circumstances attributable to the communists.

During the Siege of Changchun, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army implemented a military blockade on the KMT-held city of Changchun and prevented civilians from leaving the city during the blockade; this blockade caused the starvation of tens to 150 thousand civilians. The PLA continued to use siege tactics throughout Northeast China.

At the outbreak of the Chinese Civil War in 1946, Mao Zedong began to push for a return to radical policies to mobilize China against the landlord class, but protected the rights of middle peasants and specified that rich peasants were not landlords. The 7 July Directive of 1946 set off eighteen months of fierce conflict in which all rich peasant and landlord property of all types was to be confiscated and redistributed to poor peasants. CCP work teams went quickly from village to village and divided the population into landlords, rich, middle, poor, and landless peasants. Because the work teams did not involve villagers in the process, however, rich and middle peasants quickly returned to power. The Outline Land Law of October 1947 increased the pressure. Those condemned as landlords were buried alive, dismembered, strangled and shot.
In response to the aforementioned land reform campaign, the Kuomintang helped establish the &quot;Huanxiang Tuan&quot; (), or Homecoming Legion, which was composed of landlords who sought the return of their redistributed land and property from peasants and CCP guerrillas, as well as forcibly conscripted peasants and communist POWs. The Homecoming legion conducted its guerrilla warfare campaign against CCP forces and purported collaborators up until the end of the civil war in 1949.

== See also ==

* Outline of the Chinese Civil War
* Timeline of the Chinese Civil War
* List of wars involving the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Campaign to suppress bandits in northeast China
* Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Wuping
* Campaign to suppress bandits in southwestern China
* Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Eastern China

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Summary of Chinese Civil War 1946–1949
* Topographic maps of China Series L500, U.S. Army Map Service, 1954–
* Operational Art in the Chinese PLA&#x27;s Huai Hai Campaign
* Postal Stamps of the Chinese Post-Civil War Era</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="4" end="21" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="45" end="55" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="60" end="70" title="Nationalist government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="78" end="95" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="118" end="141" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="275" end="289" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q588287" start="405" end="423" title="First United Front" label="First United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="473" end="492" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="603" end="622" title="Second United Front" label="Second United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="634" end="660" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Japanese invasion of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="689" end="711" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q696242" start="845" end="864" title="Wang Jingwei regime" label="Wang Jingwei regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="909" end="921" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="1081" end="1096" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="1233" end="1261" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="1315" end="1361" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="proclaimed the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1401" end="1418" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="1422" end="1453" title="Republic of China retreat to Taiwan" label="retreat to the island of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="1550" end="1563" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="1627" end="1640" title="One-China policy" label="both claiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q700442" start="1697" end="1724" title="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="1794" end="1803" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="1807" end="1819" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1891" end="1903" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="1912" end="1927" title="1911 Revolution" label="1911 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="1929" end="1940" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="1953" end="1963" title="President of the Republic of China" label="presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="2043" end="2054" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345258" start="2073" end="2092" title="National Protection War" label="short-lived attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q175379" start="2096" end="2122" title="Empire of China (1915–1916)" label="declare by himself emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="2144" end="2158" title="Warlord Era" label="power struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="2189" end="2199" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="2255" end="2264" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2477" end="2489" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q318330" start="2530" end="2542" title="Adolph Joffe" label="Adolph Joffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2546" end="2554" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641793" start="2616" end="2635" title="Sun–Joffe Manifesto" label="Sun–Joffe Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="2676" end="2685" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2700" end="2723" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q176578" start="2747" end="2762" title="Mikhail Borodin" label="Mikhail Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="2877" end="2912" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q588287" start="2989" end="3007" title="First United Front" label="First United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="3028" end="3043" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242140" start="3166" end="3190" title="Whampoa Military Academy" label="Whampoa Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="3647" end="3657" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="4141" end="4160" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="4965" end="4970" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20297" start="5030" end="5040" title="Li Zongren" label="Li Zongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q700554" start="5076" end="5089" title="Sun Chuanfang" label="Sun Chuanfang"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="5113" end="5120" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="5269" end="5299" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5353" end="5363" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q706491" start="5811" end="5822" title="Bai Chongxi" label="Bai Chongxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="5912" end="5929" title="Shanghai massacre of 1927" label="Shanghai massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="5981" end="5993" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11546052" start="6103" end="6119" title="Wuhan Nationalist Government" label="Wuhan Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062525" start="6262" end="6275" title="East China" label="eastern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q476634" start="6686" end="6706" title="Nanchang uprising" label="uprising in Nanchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="6793" end="6801" title="Chinese Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="7570" end="7578" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q59100" start="7580" end="7587" title="Shantou" label="Shantou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="7757" end="7771" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q992318" start="7965" end="7988" title="Autumn Harvest Uprising" label="Autumn Harvest Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038900" start="8188" end="8206" title="Guangzhou Uprising" label="Guangzhou Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q697372" start="8331" end="8342" title="Zhang Fakui" label="Zhang Fakui"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="8480" end="8487" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="8501" end="8510" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="8557" end="8564" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="8769" end="8788" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="8834" end="8853" title="Second United Front (China)" label="Second United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="8887" end="8902" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="8917" end="8935" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q365894" start="8994" end="9006" title="Feng Yuxiang" label="Feng Yuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="9008" end="9018" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375464" start="9129" end="9151" title="Encirclement Campaigns" label="encirclement campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452957" start="9157" end="9162" title="First encirclement campaign against the Jiangxi Soviet" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443272" start="9167" end="9173" title="Second encirclement campaign against the Jiangxi Soviet" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784838" start="9200" end="9205" title="Third encirclement campaign against the Jiangxi Soviet" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="9229" end="9244" title="Mukden Incident" label="Mukden Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565149" start="9250" end="9265" title="Fourth encirclement campaign against the Jiangxi Soviet" label="fourth campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060072" start="9410" end="9433" title="Soviet Chinese Republic" label="Soviet Chinese Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447509" start="9642" end="9656" title="Fifth Encirclement Campaign against Hubei-Henan-Anhui Soviet" label="fifth campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q10875136" start="9706" end="9720" title="Jiangxi–Fujian Soviet" label="Jiangxi Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="9743" end="9753" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="9831" end="9835" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q532973" start="10501" end="10513" title="Zhang Guotao" label="Zhang Guotao"/>
<link wikidata="Q654875" start="10681" end="10683" title="Li (unit)" label="Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="10709" end="10719" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="11981" end="11988" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q532973" start="11990" end="12002" title="Zhang Guotao" label="Zhang Guotao"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="12154" end="12168" title="Hui people" label="Chinese Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975260" start="12181" end="12190" title="Ma clique" label="Ma clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q125990" start="12813" end="12817" title="Kham" label="Kham"/>
<link wikidata="Q702244" start="13223" end="13233" title="Liu Wenhui" label="Liu Wenhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="13574" end="13588" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q715841" start="13745" end="13757" title="Yang Hucheng" label="Yang Hucheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="14255" end="14277" title="Japanese Imperial Army" label="Japanese Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="15143" end="15163" title="conventional warfare" label="conventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="15182" end="15199" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15302" end="15314" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499765" start="15441" end="15451" title="Free China (Second Sino-Japanese War)" label="Free China"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="15521" end="15539" title="Puppet state" label="puppet governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q696242" start="15566" end="15606" title="Reorganized National Government of China" label="Reorganized National Government of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="15779" end="15794" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="15804" end="15809" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="15814" end="15821" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q909396" start="15993" end="16001" title="New Fourth Army incident" label="ambushed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="16356" end="16377" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q303618" start="16383" end="16396" title="special envoy" label="special envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751320" start="16397" end="16412" title="Lauchlin Currie" label="Lauchlin Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="17301" end="17325" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q696448" start="18153" end="18170" title="Operation Ichi-Go" label="Operation Ichi-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q813919" start="18388" end="18411" title="unconditional surrender" label="unconditional surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="18556" end="18565" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q644730" start="18838" end="18855" title="Albert Coady Wedemeyer" label="General Wedemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="18980" end="18996" title="George C. Marshall" label="General Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="19159" end="19168" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844551" start="19280" end="19295" title="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance" label="friendly treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q708797" start="19443" end="19460" title="Patrick J. Hurley" label="Patrick J. Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299900" start="19631" end="19653" title="Double Tenth Agreement" label="Double Tenth Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="20297" end="20337" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="20359" end="20372" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="20966" end="20974" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="21600" end="21603" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="21694" end="21707" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204338" start="21726" end="21743" title="Rodion Malinovsky" label="Rodion Malinovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="21768" end="21790" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q28996" start="21867" end="21874" title="Jinzhou" label="Jinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q858306" start="21978" end="21996" title="Shandong Peninsula" label="Shandong Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="23060" end="23075" title="Soviet Red Army" label="Soviet Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="23721" end="23737" title="George Marshall" label="General Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q372153" start="24502" end="24518" title="Huaihai Campaign" label="Huaihai Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="24838" end="24847" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="24871" end="24886" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="25574" end="25588" title="Hyperinflation" label="Hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203620" start="25993" end="26012" title="Operation Beleaguer" label="Operation Beleaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142448" start="26204" end="26216" title="William Blum" label="William Blum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="26915" end="26929" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046848" start="27090" end="27101" title="North China" label="North China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970542" start="27860" end="27878" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an Soviet" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156557" start="28356" end="28371" title="Dabie Mountains" label="Dabie Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="28405" end="28418" title="Central Plain (China)" label="Central Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272689" start="28669" end="28686" title="Liaoshen campaign" label="Liaoshen Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q372153" start="28706" end="28722" title="Huaihai campaign" label="Huaihai Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348111" start="28741" end="28757" title="Pingjin campaign" label="Pingjin Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="28845" end="28853" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q837376" start="29098" end="29116" title="siege of Changchun" label="siege of Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="29219" end="29227" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q170247" start="29629" end="29634" title="Jinan" label="Jinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897552" start="29699" end="29716" title="Battle of Weixian" label="Battle of Weixian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348111" start="30232" end="30248" title="Pingjin Campaign" label="Pingjin campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q58650" start="30356" end="30367" title="Zhangjiakou" label="Zhangjiakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q548289" start="30413" end="30417" title="Taku Forts" label="Dagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="30422" end="30429" title="Beijing" label="Beiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="30938" end="30945" title="veteran" label="veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="30987" end="31007" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q15896860" start="31209" end="31240" title="Yangtze River Crossing Campaign" label="Yangtze River Crossing Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="31371" end="31380" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="31424" end="31444" title="Chinese Nationalist Party retreat to Taiwan" label="retreating to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="31583" end="31588" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="31616" end="31619" title="Hui people" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="31647" end="31653" title="Dungan people" label="Tungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231829" start="31756" end="31776" title="Pei-ta-shan Incident" label="Pei-ta-shan Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q125990" start="31834" end="31838" title="Kham" label="Kham"/>
<link wikidata="Q83312" start="31981" end="31993" title="Choekyi Gyaltsen, 10th Panchen Lama" label="Panchen Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="32268" end="32325" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="officially proclaimed the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="32469" end="32498" title="Chinese Nationalist Party retreat to Taiwan" label="retreated from mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="32506" end="32522" title="Geography of Taiwan" label="island of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924353" start="32701" end="32716" title="Chengdu Campaign" label="fall of Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="32840" end="32846" title="Kinmen" label="Quemoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q699096" start="32867" end="32886" title="Battle of Guningtou" label="Battle of Kuningtou"/>
<link wikidata="Q377283" start="32975" end="32992" title="temporary capital" label="temporary capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="33000" end="33017" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484605" start="33196" end="33231" title="Landing Operation on Hainan Island" label="Communist conquest of Hainan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968089" start="33251" end="33266" title="Wanshan Archipelago Campaign" label="Wanshan Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774076" start="33314" end="33329" title="Zhoushan Island" label="Zhoushan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="33621" end="33636" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="33881" end="33898" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q702120" start="33980" end="34004" title="1943 Cairo Declaration" label="Cairo Declaration&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="34270" end="34280" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q484950" start="34378" end="34405" title="United States Seventh Fleet" label="United States Seventh Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="34421" end="34434" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="34450" end="34461" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q976458" start="34694" end="34703" title="Min River (Fujian)" label="Min River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="34707" end="34713" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q559661" start="34734" end="34744" title="Liao River" label="Liao River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="34748" end="34756" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="34957" end="35003" title="Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan" label="the retreat of the Republic of China to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="35078" end="35091" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="35122" end="35134" title="Kuomintang" label="KMT remnants"/>
<link wikidata="Q985716" start="35178" end="35221" title="Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries" label="Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35230" end="35260" title=":Category:Campaigns to Suppress Bandits" label="Campaigns to Suppress Bandits."/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="35445" end="35455" title="Imprisonment" label="imprisoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557549" start="35684" end="35703" title="Annexation of Tibet by the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="annexation of Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="35768" end="35774" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q609255" start="35779" end="35792" title="Matsu Islands" label="Matsu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="35864" end="35869" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445249" start="35940" end="35990" title="Kuomintang Islamic insurgency in China (1950–1958)" label="Kuomintang Islamic Insurgency in China (1950–1958)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027771" start="35995" end="36029" title="1960–61 campaign at the China–Burma border" label="Campaign at the China–Burma Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q699361" start="36045" end="36050" title="Li Mi (ROC general)" label="Li Mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="36135" end="36141" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="36194" end="36221" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="36300" end="36314" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q844551" start="36728" end="36773" title="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance" label="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658215" start="36798" end="36832" title="UN General Assembly Resolution 505" label="UN General Assembly Resolution 505"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909446" start="37432" end="37454" title="century of humiliation" label="century of humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q63698" start="38136" end="38142" title="Fujian Province, Republic of China" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421268" start="38246" end="38272" title="First Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="First Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="38303" end="38309" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890719" start="38319" end="38351" title="Battle of Yijiangshan Islands" label="captured the Yijiangshan Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753346" start="38406" end="38420" title="Dachen Islands" label="Dachen Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="38466" end="38488" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470230" start="38500" end="38518" title="Formosa Resolution of 1955" label="Formosa Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208191" start="38705" end="38723" title="Asian–African Conference" label="Bandung conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q700442" start="38730" end="38757" title="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="38907" end="38913" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="39223" end="39241" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="39887" end="39899" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113375803" start="39907" end="39922" title="2022 United States congressional delegation visit to Taiwan" label="visit to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113435201" start="39948" end="39970" title="2022 Chinese military exercises around Taiwan" label="PRC military exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="40079" end="40087" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="40744" end="40775" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="40797" end="40813" title="China and the United Nations" label="expelled the ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="40855" end="40869" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="42558" end="42570" title="Lee Teng-hui" label="Lee Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q708927" start="42576" end="42647" title="Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion" label="Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q714320" start="42898" end="42913" title="1999 Jiji earthquake" label="921 earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="42993" end="43021" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="43032" end="43046" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604747" start="43297" end="43316" title="2005 Pan-Blue visits to mainland China" label="2005 Pan-Blue visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19216" start="43385" end="43397" title="Ma Ying-jeou" label="Ma Ying-jeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090695" start="43586" end="43604" title="Chen-Chiang summit" label="Chen-Chiang summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="43626" end="43639" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874776" start="44154" end="44168" title="Chinese hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911063" start="44521" end="44532" title="Rana Mitter" label="Rana Mitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077309" start="45095" end="45110" title="Odd Arne Westad" label="Odd Arne Westad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="45604" end="45618" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="45785" end="45797" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q214758" start="45835" end="45847" title="Dean Acheson" label="Dean Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063251" start="47155" end="47186" title="Charismatic authority" label="charismatic style of leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q846808" start="47421" end="47431" title="Propaganda in China" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773715" start="48393" end="48409" title="Marshall Mission" label="Marshall Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q631416" start="48541" end="48551" title="H. H. Kung" label="H. H. Kung"/>
<link wikidata="Q716051" start="48556" end="48567" title="T. V. Soong" label="T. V. Soong"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="49219" end="49227" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="49564" end="49581" title="Shanghai massacre" label="Shanghai massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q498231" start="49838" end="49850" title="foot binding" label="foot binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510518" start="50478" end="50493" title="Futian incident" label="Futian incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q10875136" start="50647" end="50668" title="Jiangxi–Fujian Soviet" label="Jiangxi–Fujian Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q711421" start="50918" end="50927" title="Li Weihan" label="Li Weihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734271" start="51177" end="51187" title="mass grave" label="mass grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q700939" start="51308" end="51321" title="Zhang Wentian" label="Zhang Wentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q837376" start="51740" end="51758" title="Siege of Changchun" label="Siege of Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="51764" end="51793" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688960" start="53421" end="53453" title="Outline of the Chinese Civil War" label="Outline of the Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q125804167" start="53456" end="53489" title="Timeline of the Chinese Civil War" label="Timeline of the Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645019" start="53492" end="53550" title="List of wars involving the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of wars involving the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027858" start="53553" end="53600" title="Campaign to suppress bandits in northeast China" label="Campaign to suppress bandits in northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027866" start="53603" end="53641" title="Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Wuping" label="Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Wuping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027863" start="53644" end="53694" title="Campaign to suppress bandits in southwestern China" label="Campaign to suppress bandits in southwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027855" start="53697" end="53742" title="Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Eastern China" label="Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Eastern China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54423" wikidata="Q185357" url="?curid=54423" title="Phase transition">
<text>In physics, chemistry, and other related fields like biology, a phase transition (or phase change) is the physical process of transition between one state of a medium and another. Commonly the term is used to refer to changes among the basic states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas, and in rare cases, plasma. A phase of a thermodynamic system and the states of matter have uniform physical properties. During a phase transition of a given medium, certain properties of the medium change as a result of the change of external conditions, such as temperature or pressure. This can be a discontinuous change; for example, a liquid may become gas upon heating to its boiling point, resulting in an abrupt change in volume. The identification of the external conditions at which a transformation occurs defines the phase transition point.

==Types of phase transition==

===States of matter===

Phase transitions commonly refer to when a substance transforms between one of the four states of matter to another. At the phase transition point for a substance, for instance the boiling point, the two phases involved - liquid and vapor, have identical free energies and therefore are equally likely to exist. Below the boiling point, the liquid is the more stable state of the two, whereas above the boiling point the gaseous form is the more stable. 

Common transitions between the solid, liquid, and gaseous phases of a single component, due to the effects of temperature and/or pressure are identified in the following table:
For a single component, the most stable phase at different temperatures and pressures can be shown on a phase diagram. Such a diagram usually depicts states in equilibrium. A phase transition usually occurs when the pressure or temperature changes and the system crosses from one region to another, like water turning from liquid to solid as soon as the temperature drops below the freezing point. In exception to the usual case, it is sometimes possible to change the state of a system diabatically (as opposed to adiabatically) in such a way that it can be brought past a phase transition point without undergoing a phase transition. The resulting state is metastable, i.e., less stable than the phase to which the transition would have occurred, but not unstable either. This occurs in superheating and supercooling, for example. Metastable states do not appear on usual phase diagrams.

===Structural===

Phase transitions can also occur when a solid changes to a different structure without changing its chemical makeup. In elements, this is known as allotropy, whereas in compounds it is known as polymorphism. The change from one crystal structure to another, from a crystalline solid to an amorphous solid, or from one amorphous structure to another () are all examples of solid to solid phase transitions.

The martensitic transformation occurs as one of the many phase transformations in carbon steel and stands as a model for displacive phase transformations. Order-disorder transitions such as in alpha-titanium aluminides. As with states of matter, there is also a metastable to equilibrium phase transformation for structural phase transitions. A metastable polymorph which forms rapidly due to lower surface energy will transform to an equilibrium phase given sufficient thermal input to overcome an energetic barrier.

===Magnetic===

Phase transitions can also describe the change between different kinds of magnetic ordering. The most well-known is the transition between the ferromagnetic and paramagnetic phases of magnetic materials, which occurs at what is called the Curie point. Another example is the transition between differently ordered, commensurate or incommensurate, magnetic structures, such as in cerium antimonide. A simplified but highly useful model of magnetic phase transitions is provided by the Ising Model

===Mixtures===
Phase transitions involving solutions and mixtures are more complicated than transitions involving a single compound. While chemically pure compounds exhibit a single temperature melting point between solid and liquid phases, mixtures can either have a single melting point, known as congruent melting, or they have different liquidus and solidus temperatures resulting in a temperature span where solid and liquid coexist in equilibrium. This is often the case in solid solutions, where the two components are isostructural.

There are also a number of phase transitions involving three phases: a eutectic transformation, in which a two-component single-phase liquid is cooled and transforms into two solid phases. The same process, but beginning with a solid instead of a liquid is called a eutectoid transformation. A peritectic transformation, in which a two-component single-phase solid is heated and transforms into a solid phase and a liquid phase. A peritectoid reaction is a peritectoid reaction, except involving only solid phases. A monotectic reaction consists of change from a liquid and to a combination of a solid and a second liquid, where the two liquids display a miscibility gap.

Separation into multiple phases can occur via spinodal decomposition, in which a single phase is cooled and separates into two different compositions.

Non-equilibrium mixtures can occur, such as in supersaturation.

===Other examples===

Other phase changes include:

* Transition to a mesophase between solid and liquid, such as one of the &quot;liquid crystal&quot; phases.
* The dependence of the adsorption geometry on coverage and temperature, such as for hydrogen on iron (110).
* The emergence of superconductivity in certain metals and ceramics when cooled below a critical temperature.
* The emergence of metamaterial properties in artificial photonic media as their parameters are varied.
* Quantum condensation of bosonic fluids (Bose–Einstein condensation). The superfluid transition in liquid helium is an example of this.
* The breaking of symmetries in the laws of physics during the early history of the universe as its temperature cooled.
* Isotope fractionation occurs during a phase transition, the ratio of light to heavy isotopes in the involved molecules changes. When water vapor condenses (an equilibrium fractionation), the heavier water isotopes (18O and 2H) become enriched in the liquid phase while the lighter isotopes (16O and 1H) tend toward the vapor phase.

Phase transitions occur when the thermodynamic free energy of a system is non-analytic for some choice of thermodynamic variables (cf. phases). This condition generally stems from the interactions of a large number of particles in a system, and does not appear in systems that are small. Phase transitions can occur for non-thermodynamic systems, where temperature is not a parameter. Examples include: quantum phase transitions, dynamic phase transitions, and topological (structural) phase transitions. In these types of systems other parameters take the place of temperature. For instance, connection probability replaces temperature for percolating networks.
==Classifications==

===Ehrenfest classification===
Paul Ehrenfest classified phase transitions based on the behavior of the thermodynamic free energy as a function of other thermodynamic variables. Under this scheme, phase transitions were labeled by the lowest derivative of the free energy that is discontinuous at the transition. &quot;First-order phase transitions&quot; exhibit a discontinuity in the first derivative of the free energy with respect to some thermodynamic variable. The various solid/liquid/gas transitions are classified as first-order transitions because they involve a discontinuous change in density, which is the (inverse of the) first derivative of the free energy with respect to pressure. &quot;Second-order phase transitions&quot; are continuous in the first derivative (the order parameter, which is the first derivative of the free energy with respect to the external field, is continuous across the transition) but exhibit discontinuity in a second derivative of the free energy. These include the ferromagnetic phase transition in materials such as iron, where the magnetization, which is the first derivative of the free energy with respect to the applied magnetic field strength, increases continuously from zero as the temperature is lowered below the Curie temperature. The magnetic susceptibility, the second derivative of the free energy with the field, changes discontinuously. Under the Ehrenfest classification scheme, there could in principle be third, fourth, and higher-order phase transitions. For example, the Gross–Witten–Wadia phase transition in 2-d lattice quantum chromodynamics is a third-order phase transition, and the Tracy–Widom distribution can be interpreted as a third-order transition. The Curie points of many ferromagnetics is also a third-order transition, as shown by their specific heat having a sudden change in slope.

In practice, only the first- and second-order phase transitions are typically observed. The second-order phase transition was for a while controversial, as it seems to require two sheets of the Gibbs free energy to osculate exactly, which is so unlikely as to never occur in practice. Cornelis Gorter replied the criticism by pointing out that the Gibbs free energy surface might have two sheets on one side, but only one sheet on the other side, creating a forked appearance. ( pp. 146--150)

The Ehrenfest classification implicitly allows for continuous phase transformations, where the bonding character of a material changes, but there is no discontinuity in any free energy derivative. An example of this occurs at the supercritical liquid–gas boundaries.

The first example of a phase transition which did not fit into the Ehrenfest classification was the exact solution of the Ising model, discovered in 1944 by Lars Onsager. The exact specific heat differed from the earlier mean-field approximations, which had predicted that it has a simple discontinuity at critical temperature. Instead, the exact specific heat had a logarithmic divergence at the critical temperature. In the following decades, the Ehrenfest classification was replaced by a simplified classification scheme that is able to incorporate such transitions.

===Modern classifications===
In the modern classification scheme, phase transitions are divided into two broad categories, named similarly to the Ehrenfest classes:

First-order phase transitions are those that involve a latent heat. During such a transition, a system either absorbs or releases a fixed (and typically large) amount of energy per volume. During this process, the temperature of the system will stay constant as heat is added: the system is in a &quot;mixed-phase regime&quot; in which some parts of the system have completed the transition and others have not. 

Familiar examples are the melting of ice or the boiling of water (the water does not instantly turn into vapor, but forms a turbulent mixture of liquid water and vapor bubbles). Yoseph Imry and Michael Wortis showed that quenched disorder can broaden a first-order transition. That is, the transformation is completed over a finite range of temperatures, but phenomena like supercooling and superheating survive and hysteresis is observed on thermal cycling.

s are also called &quot;continuous phase transitions&quot;. They are characterized by a divergent susceptibility, an infinite correlation length, and a power law decay of correlations near criticality. Examples of second-order phase transitions are the ferromagnetic transition, superconducting transition (for a Type-I superconductor the phase transition is second-order at zero external field and for a Type-II superconductor the phase transition is second-order for both normal-state–mixed-state and mixed-state–superconducting-state transitions) and the superfluid transition. In contrast to viscosity, thermal expansion and heat capacity of amorphous materials show a relatively sudden change at the glass transition temperature which enables accurate detection using differential scanning calorimetry measurements. Lev Landau gave a phenomenological theory of second-order phase transitions.

Apart from isolated, simple phase transitions, there exist transition lines as well as multicritical points, when varying external parameters like the magnetic field or composition.

Several transitions are known as &quot;infinite-order phase transitions&quot;.
They are continuous but break no symmetries. The most famous example is the Kosterlitz–Thouless transition in the two-dimensional XY model. Many quantum phase transitions, e.g., in two-dimensional electron gases, belong to this class.

The liquid–glass transition is observed in many polymers and other liquids that can be supercooled far below the melting point of the crystalline phase. This is atypical in several respects. It is not a transition between thermodynamic ground states: it is widely believed that the true ground state is always crystalline. Glass is a &quot;quenched disorder&quot; state, and its entropy, density, and so on, depend on the thermal history. Therefore, the glass transition is primarily a dynamic phenomenon: on cooling a liquid, internal degrees of freedom successively fall out of equilibrium. Some theoretical methods predict an underlying phase transition in the hypothetical limit of infinitely long relaxation times. No direct experimental evidence supports the existence of these transitions.

==Characteristic properties==

===Phase coexistence===
A disorder-broadened first-order transition occurs over a finite range of temperatures where the fraction of the low-temperature equilibrium phase grows from zero to one (100%) as the temperature is lowered. This continuous variation of the coexisting fractions with temperature raised interesting possibilities. On cooling, some liquids vitrify into a glass rather than transform to the equilibrium crystal phase. This happens if the cooling rate is faster than a critical cooling rate, and is attributed to the molecular motions becoming so slow that the molecules cannot rearrange into the crystal positions. This slowing down happens below a glass-formation temperature &quot;T&quot;g, which may depend on the applied pressure. If the first-order freezing transition occurs over a range of temperatures, and &quot;T&quot;g falls within this range, then there is an interesting possibility that the transition is arrested when it is partial and incomplete. Extending these ideas to first-order magnetic transitions being arrested at low temperatures, resulted in the observation of incomplete magnetic transitions, with two magnetic phases coexisting, down to the lowest temperature. First reported in the case of a ferromagnetic to anti-ferromagnetic transition, such persistent phase coexistence has now been reported across a variety of first-order magnetic transitions. These include colossal-magnetoresistance manganite materials, magnetocaloric materials, magnetic shape memory materials, and other materials.
The interesting feature of these observations of &quot;T&quot;g falling within the temperature range over which the transition occurs is that the first-order magnetic transition is influenced by magnetic field, just like the structural transition is influenced by pressure. The relative ease with which magnetic fields can be controlled, in contrast to pressure, raises the possibility that one can study the interplay between &quot;T&quot;g and &quot;T&quot;c in an exhaustive way. Phase coexistence across first-order magnetic transitions will then enable the resolution of outstanding issues in understanding glasses.

===Critical points===
In any system containing liquid and gaseous phases, there exists a special combination of pressure and temperature, known as the critical point, at which the transition between liquid and gas becomes a second-order transition. Near the critical point, the fluid is sufficiently hot and compressed that the distinction between the liquid and gaseous phases is almost non-existent. This is associated with the phenomenon of critical opalescence, a milky appearance of the liquid due to density fluctuations at all possible wavelengths (including those of visible light).

===Symmetry===
Phase transitions often involve a symmetry breaking process. For instance, the cooling of a fluid into a crystalline solid breaks continuous translation symmetry: each point in the fluid has the same properties, but each point in a crystal does not have the same properties (unless the points are chosen from the lattice points of the crystal lattice). Typically, the high-temperature phase contains more symmetries than the low-temperature phase due to spontaneous symmetry breaking, with the exception of certain accidental symmetries (e.g. the formation of heavy virtual particles, which only occurs at low temperatures).

===Order parameters===
An order parameter is a measure of the degree of order across the boundaries in a phase transition system; it normally ranges between zero in one phase (usually above the critical point) and nonzero in the other. At the critical point, the order parameter susceptibility will usually diverge.

An example of an order parameter is the net magnetization in a ferromagnetic system undergoing a phase transition. For liquid/gas transitions, the order parameter is the difference of the densities.

From a theoretical perspective, order parameters arise from symmetry breaking. When this happens, one needs to introduce one or more extra variables to describe the state of the system. For example, in the ferromagnetic phase, one must provide the net magnetization, whose direction was spontaneously chosen when the system cooled below the Curie point. However, note that order parameters can also be defined for non-symmetry-breaking transitions.

Some phase transitions, such as superconducting and ferromagnetic, can have order parameters for more than one degree of freedom. In such phases, the order parameter may take the form of a complex number, a vector, or even a tensor, the magnitude of which goes to zero at the phase transition.

There also exist dual descriptions of phase transitions in terms of disorder parameters. These indicate the presence of line-like excitations such as vortex- or defect lines.

===Relevance in cosmology===
Symmetry-breaking phase transitions play an important role in cosmology. As the universe expanded and cooled, the vacuum underwent a series of symmetry-breaking phase transitions. For example, the electroweak transition broke the SU(2)×U(1) symmetry of the electroweak field into the U(1) symmetry of the present-day electromagnetic field. This transition is important to explain the asymmetry between the amount of matter and antimatter in the present-day universe, according to electroweak baryogenesis theory.

Progressive phase transitions in an expanding universe are implicated in the development of order in the universe, as is illustrated by the work of Eric Chaisson and David Layzer.

See also relational order theories and order and disorder.

===Critical exponents and universality classes===

Continuous phase transitions are easier to study than first-order transitions due to the absence of latent heat, and they have been discovered to have many interesting properties. The phenomena associated with continuous phase transitions are called critical phenomena, due to their association with critical points.

Continuous phase transitions can be characterized by parameters known as critical exponents. The most important one is perhaps the exponent describing the divergence of the thermal correlation length by approaching the transition. For instance, let us examine the behavior of the heat capacity near such a transition. We vary the temperature &quot;T&quot; of the system while keeping all the other thermodynamic variables fixed and find that the transition occurs at some critical temperature &quot;T&quot;c. When &quot;T&quot; is near &quot;T&quot;c, the heat capacity &quot;C&quot; typically has a power law behavior:
: formula_1

The heat capacity of amorphous materials has such a behaviour near the glass transition temperature where the universal critical exponent &quot;α&quot; = 0.59 A similar behavior, but with the exponent &quot;ν&quot; instead of &quot;α&quot;, applies for the correlation length.

The exponent &quot;ν&quot; is positive. This is different with &quot;α&quot;. Its actual value depends on the type of phase transition we are considering.

The critical exponents are not necessarily the same above and below the critical temperature. When a continuous symmetry is explicitly broken down to a discrete symmetry by irrelevant (in the renormalization group sense) anisotropies, then some exponents (such as formula_2, the exponent of the susceptibility) are not identical.

For −1 &lt; &quot;α&quot; &lt; 0, the heat capacity has a &quot;kink&quot; at the transition temperature. This is the behavior of liquid helium at the lambda transition from a normal state to the superfluid state, for which experiments have found &quot;α&quot; = −0.013 ± 0.003.
At least one experiment was performed in the zero-gravity conditions of an orbiting satellite to minimize pressure differences in the sample. This experimental value of α agrees with theoretical predictions based on variational perturbation theory.

For 0 &lt; &quot;α&quot; &lt; 1, the heat capacity diverges at the transition temperature (though, since &quot;α&quot; &lt; 1, the enthalpy stays finite). An example of such behavior is the 3D ferromagnetic phase transition. In the three-dimensional Ising model for uniaxial magnets, detailed theoretical studies have yielded the exponent &quot;α&quot; ≈ +0.110.

Some model systems do not obey a power-law behavior. For example, mean field theory predicts a finite discontinuity of the heat capacity at the transition temperature, and the two-dimensional Ising model has a logarithmic divergence. However, these systems are limiting cases and an exception to the rule. Real phase transitions exhibit power-law behavior.

Several other critical exponents, &quot;β&quot;, &quot;γ&quot;, &quot;δ&quot;, &quot;ν&quot;, and &quot;η&quot;, are defined, examining the power law behavior of a measurable physical quantity near the phase transition. Exponents are related by scaling relations, such as
: formula_3
It can be shown that there are only two independent exponents, e.g. &quot;ν&quot; and &quot;η&quot;.

It is a remarkable fact that phase transitions arising in different systems often possess the same set of critical exponents. This phenomenon is known as &quot;universality&quot;. For example, the critical exponents at the liquid–gas critical point have been found to be independent of the chemical composition of the fluid.

More impressively, but understandably from above, they are an exact match for the critical exponents of the ferromagnetic phase transition in uniaxial magnets. Such systems are said to be in the same universality class. Universality is a prediction of the renormalization group theory of phase transitions, which states that the thermodynamic properties of a system near a phase transition depend only on a small number of features, such as dimensionality and symmetry, and are insensitive to the underlying microscopic properties of the system. Again, the divergence of the correlation length is the essential point.

===Critical phenomena===
There are also other critical phenomena; e.g., besides &quot;static functions&quot; there is also &quot;critical dynamics&quot;. As a consequence, at a phase transition one may observe &quot;critical slowing down&quot; or &quot;speeding up&quot;. Connected to the previous phenomenon is also the phenomenon of &quot;enhanced fluctuations&quot; before the phase transition, as a consequence of lower degree of stability of the initial phase of the system. The large &quot;static universality classes&quot; of a continuous phase transition split into smaller &quot;dynamic universality&quot; classes. In addition to the critical exponents, there are also universal relations for certain static or dynamic functions of the magnetic fields and temperature differences from the critical value.

==Experimental==
A variety of methods are applied for studying the various effects. Selected examples are:

* Hall effect (measurement of magnetic transitions)
* Mössbauer spectroscopy (simultaneous measurement of magnetic and non-magnetic transitions. Limited up to about 800–1000 °C)
* Neutron diffraction
* Perturbed angular correlation (simultaneous measurement of magnetic and non-magnetic transitions. No temperature limits. Over 2000 °C already performed, theoretical possible up to the highest crystal material, such as tantalum hafnium carbide 4215 °C.)
* Raman Spectroscopy
* SQUID (measurement of magnetic transitions)
* Thermogravimetry (very common)
* X-ray diffraction 

== In other systems ==

===Phase transitions in biology===
Phase transitions play many important roles in biological systems. Examples include the lipid bilayer formation, the coil-globule transition in the process of protein folding and DNA melting, liquid crystal-like transitions in the process of DNA condensation, and cooperative ligand binding to DNA and proteins with the character of phase transition.

In &quot;biological membranes&quot;, gel to liquid crystalline phase transitions play a critical role in physiological functioning of biomembranes. In gel phase, due to low fluidity of membrane lipid fatty-acyl chains, membrane proteins have restricted movement and thus are restrained in exercise of their physiological role. Plants depend critically on photosynthesis by chloroplast thylakoid membranes which are exposed cold environmental temperatures. Thylakoid membranes retain innate fluidity even at relatively low temperatures because of high degree of fatty-acyl disorder allowed by their high content of linolenic acid, 18-carbon chain with 3-double bonds. Gel-to-liquid crystalline phase transition temperature of biological membranes can be determined by many techniques including calorimetry, fluorescence, spin label electron paramagnetic resonance and NMR by recording measurements of the concerned parameter by at series of sample temperatures. A simple method for its determination from 13-C NMR line intensities has also been proposed.

It has been proposed that some biological systems might lie near critical points. Examples include neural networks in the salamander retina, bird flocks
gene expression networks in Drosophila, and protein folding. However, it is not clear whether or not alternative reasons could explain some of the phenomena supporting arguments for criticality. It has also been suggested that biological organisms share two key properties of phase transitions: the change of macroscopic behavior and the coherence of a system at a critical point. Phase transitions are prominent feature of motor behavior in biological systems. Spontaneous gait transitions, as well as fatigue-induced motor task disengagements, show typical critical behavior as an intimation of the sudden qualitative change of the previously stable motor behavioral pattern.

The characteristic feature of second order phase transitions is the appearance of fractals in some scale-free properties. It has long been known that protein globules are shaped by interactions with water. There are 20 amino acids that form side groups on protein peptide chains range from hydrophilic to hydrophobic, causing the former to lie near the globular surface, while the latter lie closer to the globular center. Twenty fractals were discovered in solvent associated surface areas of &gt; 5000 protein segments. The existence of these fractals proves that proteins function near critical points of second-order phase transitions. 
In groups of organisms in stress (when approaching critical transitions), correlations tend to increase, while at the same time, fluctuations also increase. This effect is supported by many experiments and observations of groups of people, mice, trees, and grassy plants.

===Phase transitions in social systems===
Phase transitions have been hypothesised to occur in social systems viewed as dynamical systems. A hypothesis proposed in the 1990s and 2000s in the context of peace and armed conflict is that when a conflict that is non-violent shifts to a phase of armed conflict, this is a phase transition from latent to manifest phases within the dynamical system.

==See also==
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* of second order phase transitions
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
==Further reading==
* Anderson, P.W., &quot;Basic Notions of Condensed Matter Physics&quot;, Perseus Publishing (1997).
* Faghri, A., and Zhang, Y., Fundamentals of Multiphase Heat Transfer and Flow, Springer Nature Switzerland AG, 2020.
* Goldenfeld, N., &quot;Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization Group&quot;, Perseus Publishing (1992).
* M.R. Khoshbin-e-Khoshnazar, &quot;Ice Phase Transition as a sample of finite system phase transition&quot;, (Physics Education (India) Volume 32. No. 2, Apr - Jun 2016) 
* Kleinert, H., &quot;Gauge Fields in Condensed Matter&quot;, Vol. I, &quot;Superfluidity and Vortex lines; Disorder Fields, Phase Transitions&quot;, pp. 1–742, World Scientific (Singapore, 1989); Paperback (physik.fu-berlin.de readable online)
* (readable online).
* Krieger, Martin H., &quot;Constitutions of matter : mathematically modelling the most everyday of physical phenomena&quot;, University of Chicago Press, 1996. Contains a detailed pedagogical discussion of Onsager&#x27;s solution of the 2-D Ising Model.
* Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., &quot;Statistical Physics Part 1&quot;, vol. 5 of &quot;Course of Theoretical Physics&quot;, Pergamon Press, 3rd Ed. (1994).
* Mussardo G., &quot;Statistical Field Theory. An Introduction to Exactly Solved Models of Statistical Physics&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2010.
*Schroeder, Manfred R., &quot;Fractals, chaos, power laws : minutes from an infinite paradise&quot;, New York: W. H. Freeman, 1991. Very well-written book in &quot;semi-popular&quot; style—not a textbook—aimed at an audience with some training in mathematics and the physical sciences. Explains what scaling in phase transitions is all about, among other things.
* H. E. Stanley, &quot;Introduction to Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena&quot; (Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York 1971).
* Yeomans J. M., &quot;Statistical Mechanics of Phase Transitions&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1992.

==External links==

*Interactive Phase Transitions on lattices with Java applets
*Universality classes from Sklogwiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="12" end="21" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="64" end="80" title="Phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="85" end="97" title="Phase transition" label="phase change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240978" start="106" end="122" title="physical process" label="physical process"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="242" end="258" title="State of matter" label="states of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="260" end="265" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="267" end="273" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="279" end="282" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="303" end="309" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q503327" start="324" end="344" title="thermodynamic system" label="thermodynamic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373292" start="383" end="402" title="physical property" label="physical properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="547" end="558" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="562" end="570" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="665" end="678" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="980" end="996" title="state of matter" label="states of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="1073" end="1086" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="1125" end="1130" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="1477" end="1485" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="1629" end="1642" title="phase diagram" label="phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="1907" end="1921" title="freezing point" label="freezing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="2012" end="2020" title="Adiabatic" label="diabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632009" start="2040" end="2049" title="adiabatic invariant" label="adiabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="2184" end="2194" title="metastable" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q644139" start="2314" end="2326" title="superheating" label="superheating"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="2331" end="2343" title="supercooling" label="supercooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81915" start="2581" end="2590" title="allotropy" label="allotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="2628" end="2640" title="polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="2662" end="2679" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="2723" end="2738" title="amorphous solid" label="amorphous solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395484" start="2784" end="2784" title="polyamorphism" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1977001" start="2845" end="2871" title="martensitic transformation" label="martensitic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977001" start="2962" end="2994" title="displacive phase transformations" label="displacive phase transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q408746" start="3040" end="3058" title="titanium aluminide" label="titanium aluminide"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="3103" end="3113" title="metastable" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="3450" end="3467" title="magnetic ordering" label="magnetic ordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="3519" end="3532" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="3537" end="3549" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="3560" end="3566" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="3615" end="3626" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q295734" start="3691" end="3703" title="ANNNI model" label="commensurate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091134" start="3707" end="3721" title="commensurability (mathematics)" label="incommensurate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243177" start="3762" end="3772" title="antimonide" label="antimonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076349" start="3860" end="3871" title="Ising Model" label="Ising Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="3916" end="3924" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169336" start="3930" end="3937" title="mixture" label="mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="4067" end="4080" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230455" start="4172" end="4189" title="congruent melting" label="congruent melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663030" start="4214" end="4247" title="liquidus and solidus" label="liquidus and solidus temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="4353" end="4367" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="4486" end="4494" title="eutectic" label="eutectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="4681" end="4690" title="eutectoid" label="eutectoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="4709" end="4719" title="peritectic" label="peritectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="4846" end="4857" title="peritectoid" label="peritectoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4932" end="4942" title="monotectic" label="monotectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938712" start="5070" end="5085" title="miscibility gap" label="miscibility gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666979" start="5134" end="5156" title="spinodal decomposition" label="spinodal decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q334104" start="5287" end="5302" title="supersaturation" label="supersaturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333391" start="5375" end="5384" title="mesophase" label="mesophase"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="5436" end="5450" title="liquid crystal" label="liquid crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="5489" end="5499" title="adsorption" label="adsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="5550" end="5558" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="5593" end="5610" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q497166" start="5703" end="5715" title="metamaterial" label="metamaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="5814" end="5819" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="5830" end="5856" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="5863" end="5873" title="superfluidity" label="superfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="5895" end="5901" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q903282" start="5931" end="5953" title="Symmetry breaking" label="breaking of symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080293" start="6047" end="6068" title="Isotope fractionation" label="Isotope fractionation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="6180" end="6191" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384484" start="6206" end="6231" title="equilibrium fractionation" label="equilibrium fractionation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146448" start="6413" end="6438" title="thermodynamic free energy" label="thermodynamic free energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="6454" end="6466" title="analytic function" label="non-analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="6515" end="6521" title="phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118253" start="6783" end="6807" title="quantum phase transition" label="quantum phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q84227" start="7095" end="7109" title="Paul Ehrenfest" label="Paul Ehrenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146448" start="7168" end="7193" title="thermodynamic free energy" label="thermodynamic free energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7849" end="7864" title="#Order parameters" label="order parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="8143" end="8156" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="8333" end="8350" title="Curie temperature" label="Curie temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q691463" start="8356" end="8379" title="magnetic susceptibility" label="magnetic susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8602" end="8637" title="Gross–Witten–Wadia phase transition" label="Gross–Witten–Wadia phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831889" start="8719" end="8743" title="Tracy–Widom distribution" label="Tracy–Widom distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133570" start="9217" end="9232" title="Cornelis Jacobus Gorter" label="Cornelis Gorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303753" start="9656" end="9691" title="supercritical liquid–gas boundaries" label="supercritical liquid–gas boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076349" start="9816" end="9827" title="Ising model" label="Ising model"/>
<link wikidata="Q107405" start="9851" end="9863" title="Lars Onsager" label="Lars Onsager"/>
<link wikidata="Q626011" start="9915" end="9925" title="mean-field theory" label="mean-field"/>
<link wikidata="Q207721" start="10487" end="10498" title="latent heat" label="latent heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="10951" end="10956" title="water vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="10970" end="10979" title="turbulence" label="turbulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055953" start="11024" end="11035" title="Yoseph Imry" label="Yoseph Imry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142196" start="11067" end="11084" title="quenched disorder" label="quenched disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172856" start="11432" end="11450" title="Correlation function (statistical mechanics)" label="correlation length"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="11458" end="11467" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="11495" end="11506" title="Critical point (thermodynamics)" label="criticality"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="11559" end="11572" title="Ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922372" start="11619" end="11640" title="Type-I superconductor" label="Type-I superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919231" start="11711" end="11733" title="Type-II superconductor" label="Type-II superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="11864" end="11874" title="superfluid" label="superfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q904893" start="12079" end="12112" title="differential scanning calorimetry" label="differential scanning calorimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="12127" end="12137" title="Lev Landau" label="Lev Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993342" start="12145" end="12161" title="Phenomenology (particle physics)" label="phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626812" start="12162" end="12168" title="Landau theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934620" start="12292" end="12311" title="multicritical point" label="multicritical point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12500" end="12510" title="#Symmetry" label="symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q898780" start="12543" end="12573" title="Kosterlitz–Thouless transition" label="Kosterlitz–Thouless transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q469596" start="12597" end="12605" title="XY model" label="XY model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118253" start="12612" end="12636" title="quantum phase transition" label="quantum phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q232381" start="12648" end="12676" title="two-dimensional electron gas" label="two-dimensional electron gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q825643" start="12707" end="12730" title="glass transition" label="liquid–glass transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="12751" end="12759" title="polymers" label="polymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="12790" end="12801" title="supercooling" label="supercooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142196" start="13043" end="13060" title="quenched disorder" label="quenched disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="15848" end="15862" title="Critical point (thermodynamics)" label="critical point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353043" start="16141" end="16161" title="critical opalescence" label="critical opalescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q903282" start="16338" end="16355" title="symmetry breaking" label="symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="16409" end="16426" title="crystalline solid" label="crystalline solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116709" start="16445" end="16465" title="translation symmetry" label="translation symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q736716" start="16758" end="16787" title="spontaneous symmetry breaking" label="spontaneous symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672605" start="16819" end="16840" title="accidental symmetry" label="accidental symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q849940" start="16870" end="16887" title="virtual particles" label="virtual particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q265645" start="17209" end="17223" title="susceptibility (disambiguation)" label="susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="17291" end="17304" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="17310" end="17323" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="17653" end="17666" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="17699" end="17712" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="17788" end="17799" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="17929" end="17944" title="superconductivity" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q844778" start="18342" end="18348" title="Quantum vortex" label="vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770567" start="18353" end="18359" title="Topological defect" label="defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="18459" end="18468" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q466416" start="18654" end="18671" title="electroweak force" label="electroweak field"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="18714" end="18735" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q790454" start="18877" end="18901" title="electroweak baryogenesis" label="electroweak baryogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386253" start="19059" end="19072" title="Eric Chaisson" label="Eric Chaisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47204257" start="19077" end="19089" title="David Layzer" label="David Layzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142479" start="19101" end="19126" title="relational order theories" label="relational order theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142196" start="19131" end="19149" title="order and disorder" label="order and disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q207721" start="19303" end="19314" title="latent heat" label="latent heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q901927" start="19594" end="19611" title="critical exponent" label="critical exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276790" start="19702" end="19720" title="correlation length" label="correlation length"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="19801" end="19814" title="heat capacity" label="heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="20121" end="20130" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481169" start="21070" end="21087" title="lambda transition" label="lambda transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="21115" end="21125" title="superfluid" label="superfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915801" start="21414" end="21445" title="variational perturbation theory" label="variational perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076349" start="21698" end="21709" title="Ising model" label="Ising model"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="22022" end="22031" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="23138" end="23159" title="renormalization group" label="renormalization group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656" start="24426" end="24437" title="Hall effect" label="Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="24478" end="24500" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="24604" end="24623" title="Neutron diffraction" label="Neutron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q76416136" start="24626" end="24655" title="Perturbed angular correlation" label="Perturbed angular correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q424268" start="24844" end="24868" title="tantalum hafnium carbide" label="tantalum hafnium carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="24881" end="24899" title="Raman Spectroscopy" label="Raman Spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q746502" start="24902" end="24907" title="SQUID" label="SQUID"/>
<link wikidata="Q902806" start="24948" end="24964" title="Thermogravimetry" label="Thermogravimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="24981" end="24998" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="25148" end="25161" title="lipid bilayer" label="lipid bilayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141453" start="25177" end="25200" title="Coil–globule transition" label="coil-globule transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="25219" end="25234" title="protein folding" label="protein folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074275" start="25239" end="25250" title="DNA melting" label="DNA melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646716" start="25302" end="25318" title="DNA condensation" label="DNA condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="25785" end="25796" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q337889" start="25797" end="25815" title="thylakoid membrane" label="thylakoid membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q418650" start="26026" end="26040" title="linolenic acid" label="linolenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379429" start="26232" end="26242" title="spin label" label="spin label"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="26243" end="26274" title="electron paramagnetic resonance" label="electron paramagnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="26279" end="26282" title="NMR" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619446" start="26566" end="26581" title="neural network (biology)" label="neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="27381" end="27388" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071058" start="27398" end="27408" title="Scale-free network" label="scale-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="27589" end="27600" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28415" end="28439" title="complex system approach to peace and armed conflict#Phase transitions" label="peace and armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q190770" start="28723" end="28737" title="Philip Warren Anderson" label="Anderson, P.W."/>
<link wikidata="Q4046698" start="28794" end="28812" title="Perseus Publishing" label="Perseus Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746542" start="28823" end="28833" title="Amir Faghri" label="Faghri, A."/>
<link wikidata="Q8062183" start="28839" end="28848" title="Yuwen Zhang" label="Zhang, Y."/>
<link wikidata="Q21096327" start="28901" end="28916" title="Springer Nature" label="Springer Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q76757" start="29231" end="29243" title="Hagen Kleinert" label="Kleinert, H."/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="29305" end="29318" title="Superfluidity" label="Superfluidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q732722" start="29323" end="29335" title="vortex" label="Vortex lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="29354" end="29370" title="Phase Transition" label="Phase Transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q109249940" start="29497" end="29515" title="Martin H. Krieger" label="Krieger, Martin H."/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="29621" end="29648" title="University of Chicago Press" label="University of Chicago Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q107405" start="29702" end="29709" title="Lars Onsager" label="Onsager"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="29752" end="29764" title="Lev Davidovich Landau" label="Landau, L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q931452" start="29769" end="29783" title="Evgeny Mikhailovich Lifshitz" label="Lifshitz, E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1965801" start="29841" end="29870" title="Course of Theoretical Physics" label="Course of Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q108262" start="30060" end="30081" title="Manfred R. Schroeder" label="Schroeder, Manfred R."/>
<link wikidata="Q10392775" start="30170" end="30183" title="W. H. Freeman" label="W. H. Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q870027" start="30424" end="30437" title="H. Eugene Stanley" label="H. E. Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057763" start="30563" end="30576" title="Julia Yeomans" label="Yeomans J. M."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54424" wikidata="Q285788" url="?curid=54424" title="Etemenanki">
<text>Etemenanki () was a ziggurat dedicated to the Mesopotamian god Marduk in the ancient city of Babylon. It now exists only in ruins, located about south of Baghdad, Iraq. Many scholars have identified Etemenanki as the ziggurat for the biblical account of the Tower of Babel.

==Construction==
It is unclear when Etemenanki was originally constructed. Andrew R. George says that it was constructed sometime between the 14th and the 9th century BCE. He argues as follows:

The reference to a ziggurrat at Babylon in the Creation Epic (Enûma Eliš· VI 63: George 1992: 301–2) is more solid evidence, ... for a Middle Assyrian piece of this poem survives to prove the long-held theory that it existed already in the second millennium BC. There is no reason to doubt that this ziqqurrat, described as &quot;ziqqurrat apsî elite&quot;, &quot;the upper ziqqurrat of the Apsû&quot;, was [Etemenanki].
Babylon was destroyed in 689 BCE by Sennacherib, who claims to have destroyed the Etemenanki. It took 88 years to restore the city; work was started by the Assyrian king Esarhaddon, and continued under Nabopolassar followed by his son Nebuchadnezzar II who rebuilt the ziggurat. The city&#x27;s central feature was the temple of Marduk (Esagila), with which the Etemenanki ziggurat was associated.

Fenollós et al. note that, &quot;The &#x27;Tower of Babel&#x27; was not built in a single moment, but rather was the result of a complex history of successive constructions, destruction and reconstruction. Its origin dates back to the reign of Hammurabi and continues to this day with its inevitable and definitive destruction.&quot; (Translated from the Italian). The &quot;Tower&quot; as discussed in ancient sources refers to the monument as it appeared in the Neo-Babylonian period.

==Descriptions==
A Neo-Babylonian royal inscription of Nebuchadnezzar II on a stele from Babylon, claimed to have been found in the 1917 excavation by Robert Koldewey, and of uncertain authenticity, reads: &quot;Etemenanki Zikkurat Babibli [Ziggurat of Babylon] I made it, the wonder of the people of the world, I raised its top to heaven, made doors for the gates, and I covered it with bitumen and bricks.&quot; The building is depicted in shallow relief, showing its high first stages with paired flights of steps, five further stepped stages and the temple that surmounted the structure. A floor plan is also shown, depicting the buttressed outer walls and the inner chambers surrounding the central &quot;cella&quot;.

Foundation cylinders with inscriptions from Nabopolassar were found in the 1880s, two survive, one of which reads:
In 2003 scholars discovered in the Schøyen Collection the oldest known representation of the Etemenanki. Carved on a black stone, the &quot;Tower of Babel Stele&quot;, as it is known, dates to 604–562 BCE, the time of Nebuchadnezzar II.
The Etemenanki is described in a cuneiform tablet from Uruk from 229 BCE, a copy of an older text (now in the Louvre, Paris and referred to as the &quot;Esagila&quot; tablet). Translated in 1876 by Assyriologist George Smith, it gives the height of the tower as seven stocks (91 meters) with a square base of 91 meters on each side. This mudbrick structure was confirmed by excavations conducted by Robert Koldewey after 1913. Large stairs were discovered at the south side of the building, where a triple gate connected it with the Esagila. A larger gate to the east connected the Etemenanki with the sacred procession road (now reconstructed in the Pergamon Museum, Berlin).

Until the first translation of the &quot;Esagila&quot; tablet, details of Babylon&#x27;s ziggurat were known only from the ancient Greek historian Herodotus, who wrote in the mid-5th century BCE:

This &quot;Tower of Jupiter Belus&quot; is believed to refer to the Akkadian god Bel, whose name has been Hellenised by Herodotus to &quot;Zeus Belus&quot;. It is likely that it corresponds to Etemenanki. Herodotus does not say that he visited Babylon or the ziggurat, however; the account contains multiple inaccuracies and is most likely second hand.

==Final demolition==
In 331 BCE, Alexander the Great captured Babylon and ordered repairs to the Etemenanki. When Alexander returned to the ancient city in 323 BCE, he noted that no progress had been made, and ordered his army to demolish the entire building in order to prepare a final rebuilding. His death, however, prevented the reconstruction. The Babylonian Chronicles and Astronomical Diaries record several attempts to rebuild the Etemenanki, which were always preceded by removing the last debris of the original ziggurat. The &quot;Ruin of Esagila Chronicle&quot; mentions that the Seleucid crown prince Antiochus I decided to rebuild it and made a sacrifice in preparation. However, while there, he stumbled on the rubble and fell. He then angrily ordered his elephant drivers to destroy the last of the remains. There are no later references to the Etemenanki from antiquity.

==Modern hypotheses regarding height==
Modern scholars dispute the claim by the ancient Babylonian source (the &quot;Esagila&quot; tablet) that the Etemenanki was 91 meters tall. [The modern] interpretation of Esagil&#x27;s text raises a serious technical problem: the excessive height of the first two terraces of the ziggurat and the total height of the building defy the laws of statics and compressive strength of a material such as raw earth brick.” (Translated from the Italian). Even allowing variation in the design of a six-level terraced structure, at that height, the compression stress on the structure would be somewhere around two to three times as much as comparable structures of the same time period. Fenollós et al. propose that, assuming the structure did indeed use a six-level terrace design as depicted in the Tower of Babel stele, the ziggurat was probably closer to 54 meters tall. The temple at the top contributed another 12 meters in height, for a total height of 66 meters.
==In popular culture==
In the Portugal Pack of the video game &quot;Civilization VI&quot;, Etemenanki was introduced as one of the wonders in the game.

In the Lucasarts PC video game &quot;Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine&quot;, Etemenanki is a key location, eventually revealed to have been both the biblical Tower of Babel and a temple to the god Marduk.

==Image gallery==
==See also==
* List of tallest structures built before the 20th century

==Notes==

==References==

*A. R. George, &quot;E-sangil and E-temen-anki, the Archetypal Cult-centre?&quot; in: J. Renger, &quot;Babylon: Focus mesopotamischer Geschichte, Wiege früher Gelehrsamkeit, Mythos in der Moderne&quot; (1999 Saarbrücken)
*Hans-Jörg Schmid, &quot;Der Tempelturm Etemenanki in Babylon&quot; (1995 Mainz) 
*The Tower of Babel Stele, Schoyen Collection
*Fenollós, Juan Luis &amp; Vegas, Fernando &amp; Mileto, Camilla. (2005). Etemenanki: nuova ipotesi di ricostruzione dello ziggurat di Nabucodonosor II nella cittá di Babilonia. ISIMU: Revista sobre Oriente Próximo y Egipto en la antigüedad 8 (2005): 201-216.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285788" start="0" end="10" title="Etemenanki" label="Etemenanki"/>
<link wikidata="Q170153" start="20" end="28" title="ziggurat" label="ziggurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="46" end="57" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="63" end="69" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="93" end="100" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="154" end="167" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad, Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q41213" start="258" end="272" title="Tower of Babel" label="Tower of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758343" start="350" end="366" title="Andrew R. George" label="Andrew R. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q206063" start="532" end="542" title="Enûma Eliš" label="Enûma Eliš"/>
<link wikidata="Q207140" start="927" end="938" title="Sennacherib" label="Sennacherib"/>
<link wikidata="Q193912" start="1061" end="1071" title="Esarhaddon" label="Esarhaddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q273514" start="1093" end="1105" title="Nabopolassar" label="Nabopolassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="1126" end="1143" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="1220" end="1226" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q928707" start="1228" end="1235" title="Esagila" label="Esagila"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="1534" end="1543" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="1754" end="1768" title="Neo-Babylonian" label="Neo-Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="1833" end="1850" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="1856" end="1861" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="1867" end="1874" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60700" start="1929" end="1944" title="Robert Koldewey" label="Robert Koldewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q827125" start="2488" end="2493" title="cella" label="cella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380144" start="2652" end="2670" title="Schøyen Collection" label="Schøyen Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="2887" end="2896" title="cuneiform (script)" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="2909" end="2913" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="2964" end="2970" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009506" start="3066" end="3078" title="George Smith (Assyriologist)" label="George Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q928707" start="3387" end="3394" title="Esagila" label="Esagila"/>
<link wikidata="Q157298" start="3505" end="3520" title="Pergamon Museum" label="Pergamon Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3679" end="3688" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894617" start="3810" end="3813" title="Bel (god)" label="Bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="3835" end="3845" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenised"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884837" start="3868" end="3878" title="Belus (Babylonian)" label="Zeus Belus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4116" end="4135" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061346" start="4436" end="4457" title="Babylonian Chronicles" label="Babylonian Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q751861" start="4462" end="4482" title="Astronomical Diaries" label="Astronomical Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="4675" end="4683" title="Seleucids" label="Seleucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211488" start="4697" end="4708" title="Antiochus I" label="Antiochus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q169019" start="5354" end="5361" title="statics" label="statics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186191" start="5366" end="5386" title="compressive strength" label="compressive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q24050047" start="6042" end="6057" title="Civilization VI" label="Civilization VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="6134" end="6143" title="Lucasarts" label="Lucasarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527683" start="6164" end="6202" title="Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine" label="Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="6330" end="6336" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178424" start="6372" end="6428" title="List of tallest structures built before the 20th century" label="List of tallest structures built before the 20th century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54426" wikidata="Q642598" url="?curid=54426" title="Factitious disorder imposed on self">
<text>Factitious disorder imposed on self (FDIS), sometimes referred to as Munchausen syndrome, is a complex mental disorder where individuals play the role of a sick patient to receive some form of psychological validation, such as attention, sympathy, or physical care. Patients with FDIS intentionally falsify or induce signs and symptoms of illness, trauma, or abuse to assume this role. These actions are performed consciously, though the patient may be unaware of the motivations driving their behaviors. There are several risk factors and signs associated with this illness and treatment is usually in the form of psychotherapy but may depend on the specific situation, which is further discussed in the sections below. Diagnosis is usually determined by meeting specific DSM-5 criteria after ruling out true illness as described below.

Factitious disorder imposed on self is related to factitious disorder imposed on another, which refers to the abuse of another person in order to seek attention or sympathy for the abuser. This is considered &quot;Munchausen by proxy&quot;, and the drive to create symptoms for the victim can result in unnecessary and costly diagnostic or corrective procedures. Other similar and often confused syndromes/diagnoses are discussed in the &quot;Related Diagnoses&quot; section.

== Terminology ==

The name &quot;Munchausen syndrome&quot; derives from Baron Munchausen, a literary character loosely based on the German nobleman Hieronymus Karl Friedrich Freiherr von Münchhausen (1720–1797). The historical baron became a well-known storyteller in the late 18th century for entertaining dinner guests with tales about his adventures during the Russo-Turkish War. In 1785, German-born writer and con artist Rudolf Erich Raspe anonymously published a book in which a heavily fictionalized version of &quot;Baron Munchausen&quot; tells many fantastic and impossible stories about himself. Raspe&#x27;s Munchausen became a sensation, establishing a literary exemplar of a bombastic liar or exaggerator.

That patients can exaggerate or inflict symptoms on themselves has been recognized since antiquity, with the second century manuscript attributed to Galen titled &quot;On Feigned Diseases and the Detection of Them&quot;. In 1843, Scots physician Hector Gavin invented the term &quot;factitious disease&quot; to describe persons who faked medical symptoms for sympathy, attention or &quot;some inexplicable cause”. In the 1930s, psychiatrist Karl Menninger noted some patients compulsively insisted on medically unnecessary surgeries, often seeking out a physician with a powerful or dynamic personality. 

In 1951, Richard Asher coined the term &quot;Munchausen syndrome&quot; to describe a pattern of self-harm, wherein individuals fabricated histories, signs, and symptoms of illness. Remembering Baron Munchausen, Asher&#x27;s article was published in &quot;The Lancet&quot; in February 1951. Asher&#x27;s nomenclature sparked some controversy, with medical authorities debating the appropriateness of the name for about fifty years. While Asher was praised for bringing cases of factitious disorder to light, participants in the debate objected variously that a literary allusion was inappropriate given the seriousness of the disease; and that the name&#x27;s connection to works of humor and fantasy, and to the essentially ridiculous character of the fictional Baron Munchausen, was disrespectful to patients with the disorder. Some healthcare providers avoid this term because it downplays the complexity of the illness and devalues the patient experience. The term &quot;factitious disorder imposed on self&quot; provides a more accurate and encompassing description of this mental disorder; however, both terms may still be used interchangeably in practice.

== Risk factors ==
The exact cause of this illness is unknown due to limited research but is likely the result of multiple psychosocial factors. Specific risk factors have been associated with developing FDIS, specifically a history of childhood trauma, abandonment, having a serious childhood illness, and certain personality disorders. Patients are more likely to be female, middle aged, and work in the healthcare industry. Individuals with this disorder may also have a history of recurrent hospitalizations and frequent visits to multiple different physicians (i.e. doctor shopping). They are also more likely to have underlying depression, though it is unclear if it is a cause or symptom of this illness.

==Signs and symptoms==
In factitious disorder imposed on self, the affected person exaggerates or creates physical or psychological symptoms of illnesses in themselves to gain examination, treatment, attention, sympathy or comfort from medical personnel. Because these symptoms can vary depending on how patients induce these symptoms, there is no consistent symptom specific for this illness. However, there are several common themes that may raise suspicion for FDIS. Some of these common themes include:

* Prolonged, repeated hospital stays
* Frequent visits to multiple different physicians
* Opting for unnecessary operations or procedures where the results are generally normal or inconclusive
* Inconsistencies in past medical history, where illness/procedural history stated by patient is different than their documented history
* Vague, nonspecific pain unresponsive to normal treatment options

Common examples of commonly induced physical symptoms include intentionally infecting a wound with debris or unsanitary material, taking laxatives to induce diarrhea, and ingesting thyroid hormone replacement medication to simulate a hyperactive thyroid or hyperthyroidism.

== Diagnosis ==
Due to the behaviors involved, diagnosing factitious disorder is very difficult. Because induced symptoms may mimic those of a real disease or disorder, physicians must first rule out genuine disease. Therefore, FDIS is usually a diagnosis of exclusion. To rule out genuine illness, lab tests may be required, including complete blood count (CBC), urine toxicology, drug tests, blood cultures to rule out infection, coagulation tests, assays for thyroid function, or DNA typing, depending on the mimicked disease. In some cases CT scan, magnetic resonance imaging, psychological testing, electroencephalography, or electrocardiography may be required. A more extensive list of how organic illness is differentiated from FDIS is provided below.

If the healthcare provider finds no physical reason for the symptoms, they may refer the person to a psychiatrist or psychologist (mental health professionals who are specially trained to diagnose and treat mental illnesses). Psychiatrists and psychologists use thorough history, physical examinations, laboratory tests, imagery, and psychological testing to evaluate a person for physical and mental conditions and to distinguish between feinged versus real illness. Once the person&#x27;s history has been thoroughly evaluated, diagnosing factitious disorder imposed on self requires a clinical assessment, typically performed by a psychiatrist.

For a person to be diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on self, they must meet the following criteria:

# The patient presents as sick or injured motivated by a primary gain, or internal reward of validation/attention as opposed to a secondary gain, which usually involves external benefits.
# There is evidence that the patient is inducing or falsifying their symptoms
# There is no alternative explanation, mental disorder, or illness to explain the patient&#x27;s symptoms

== Common Manifestations ==
There are common methods for inducing certain symptoms and mimicking specific diseases. As mentioned earlier, it is important to first rule out true disease. Physicians usually must have a high suspicion for FDIS to pursue it as a likely diagnosis based on abnormal patient behaviors and medical history. Some examples of these are listed in the table below, along with how to differentiate them from real versus mimicked disease using medical laboratory tests or imaging.

Munchausen by Internet is a term describing the pattern of behavior in factitious disorder imposed on self, wherein those affected feign illnesses in online venues to gain sympathy from online supporters. It has been described in medical literature as a manifestation of factitious disorder imposed on self. Reports of users who deceive internet forum participants by portraying themselves as gravely ill or as victims of violence first appeared in the 1990s due to the relative newness of Internet communications. The specific internet pattern was named &quot;Münchausen by Internet&quot; in 1998 by psychiatrist Marc Feldman. &quot;New Zealand PC World Magazine&quot; called Munchausen by Internet &quot;cybermunch&quot;, and those who posed online &quot;cybermunchers&quot;. More recently, online forums such as snark subreddits have labelled these individuals as &quot;illness fakers&quot;, or &quot;munchies&quot;.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, an increasing amount of TikTok users, primarily teenage girls, began to present with tics and vocalizations similar to those associated with Tourette syndrome. However, lack of congruent family history and other diagnostic criteria led some experts to interpret this phenomenon as mass psychogenic illness facilitated by social media. Mass psychogenic illness is described as requiring physical proximity to spread, hence technologically-facilitated conversion is differentiated under the label &quot;Mass Social Media-Induced Illness&quot; (MSMI). Other conditions feigned as a result of MSMI include autism spectrum disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorders, dissociative identity disorder, and bipolar disorders.

==Treatment==
When confronted with this diagnosis, patients often refuse to accept it and will continue their behaviors seeking healthcare at different institutions or physicians. Those who accept the diagnosis benefit most from psychotherapy delivered by a skilled therapist or psychiatrist. In doing so, patients can learn the underlying subconscious motivations that drive their conscious behaviors in order to develop a sense of awareness the prevents them from continuing these harmful behaviors. If a person is considered to be at risk of harming themself or others, psychiatric hospitalization may be initiated.

Specific forms of therapy may be tailored to underlying personality disorders contributing to their behaviors. For example, dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) can be used to treat borderline personality disorder. Medications may be necessary to treat an underlying mood disorder or anxiety disorder, as many patients with this disorder may have underlying depression. Patients with underlying depression and/or anxiety are typically responsive to antidepressants with or without cognitive behavioral therapy, a form of psychotherapy.

== Related Diagnoses ==
This disorder can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from several related diagnoses, but they differ in their motivational gains and control over symptoms. &quot;Gain&quot; is a Freudian psychoanalytic term that is used to describe the psychological benefits that drive certain illnesses and their behaviors. A primary gain refers to internal benefits from a symptom or illness, like feeling a decrease in emotional or psychological stress. A secondary gain refers to the external benefits from a symptom or illness, like receiving financial benefits or avoiding a stressful activity.

Factitious disorder is distinct from malingering in that people with factitious disorder do not fabricate symptoms for material gain such as financial compensation, absence from work, or access to drugs. Somatiform disorders include a range of illnesses where physical symptoms result from psychological stressors. Perhaps the most common subtype, Functional Neurologic Disorder is characterized by psychological distress resulting from neurologic symptoms (e.g. paralysis, seizures, loss of vision) that typically coincide with periods of psychological stress and are not due to an underlying neurologic condition. Below is a table outlining the differences between these related diagnoses.

Factitious disorder imposed on another, also referred to as Munchausen&#x27;s by proxy, occurs when an individual induces symptoms or feigns illness in someone else to receive some form of psychological satisfaction for themselves. This has been documented in the parent or guardian of a child or the owner of a pet animal. The adult ensures that their child will experience some medical condition, therefore compelling the child to suffer through treatments and spend a significant portion during youth in hospitals. Furthermore, a disease may actually be initiated in the child by the parent or guardian. This condition is considered distinct from Munchausen syndrome. There is growing consensus in the pediatric community that this disorder should be renamed &quot;medical abuse&quot; to highlight the harm caused by the deception and to make it less likely that the sufferer can use a psychiatric defense when harm is done.

==See also==

* List of Munchausen by proxy cases
* Hypochondriasis
* Psychosomatic illness

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q642598" start="0" end="35" title="Factitious disorder imposed on self" label="Factitious disorder imposed on self"/>
<link wikidata="Q642598" start="69" end="88" title="Factitious disorder imposed on self" label="Munchausen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="103" end="118" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="348" end="354" title="Psychological trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="615" end="628" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="773" end="778" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414765" start="889" end="927" title="factitious disorder imposed on another" label="factitious disorder imposed on another"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827132" start="949" end="954" title="Physical abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q77066" start="1389" end="1405" title="Baron Munchausen" label="Baron Munchausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q638587" start="1681" end="1698" title="Austro-Russian–Turkish War (1735–39)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q213543" start="1743" end="1761" title="Rudolf Erich Raspe" label="Rudolf Erich Raspe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="2186" end="2191" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534171" start="2283" end="2295" title="Hector Gavin" label="Hector Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080926" start="2478" end="2492" title="Karl Menninger" label="Karl Menninger"/>
<link wikidata="Q719691" start="2652" end="2665" title="Richard Asher" label="Richard Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="2739" end="2748" title="self-harm" label="self-harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="2898" end="2908" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="4121" end="4141" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q256592" start="4377" end="4392" title="doctor shopping" label="doctor shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q113883828" start="4602" end="4613" title="exaggerates" label="exaggerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="4651" end="4658" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="4663" end="4670" title="illness" label="illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="5682" end="5697" title="hyperthyroidism" label="hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q780017" start="5946" end="5968" title="diagnosis of exclusion" label="diagnosis of exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="6045" end="6056" title="blood count" label="blood count"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="6070" end="6080" title="toxicology" label="toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q886695" start="6100" end="6108" title="Blood culture" label="cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="6162" end="6169" title="thyroid" label="thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="6244" end="6251" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="6253" end="6279" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="6304" end="6326" title="electroencephalography" label="electroencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="6331" end="6350" title="electrocardiography" label="electrocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495775" start="7278" end="7290" title="Primary and secondary gain" label="primary gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495775" start="7351" end="7365" title="Primary and secondary gain" label="secondary gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q128996471" start="8911" end="8927" title="snark subreddits" label="snark subreddits"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="9028" end="9045" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="9071" end="9077" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q738538" start="9132" end="9136" title="Tic" label="tics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="9188" end="9205" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="9328" end="9352" title="mass psychogenic illness" label="mass psychogenic illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="9368" end="9380" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="9649" end="9674" title="Autism" label="autism spectrum disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="9676" end="9717" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="9719" end="9749" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="9755" end="9772" title="Bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="10004" end="10017" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419397" start="10041" end="10050" title="therapist" label="therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="10348" end="10368" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="10519" end="10553" title="Dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="10575" end="10606" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="10660" end="10673" title="mood disorder" label="mood disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="10677" end="10693" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="10842" end="10856" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="10874" end="10902" title="cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495775" start="11268" end="11280" title="primary gain" label="primary gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495775" start="11400" end="11414" title="Primary and secondary gain" label="secondary gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q488231" start="11580" end="11591" title="malingering" label="malingering"/>
<link wikidata="Q936549" start="11747" end="11767" title="Somatic symptom disorder" label="Somatiform disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146697" start="11891" end="11921" title="Functional neurologic disorder" label="Functional Neurologic Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="12006" end="12015" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="12017" end="12024" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414765" start="12236" end="12274" title="Factitious disorder imposed on another" label="Factitious disorder imposed on another"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="12941" end="12950" title="pediatric" label="pediatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944293" start="13181" end="13214" title="List of Munchausen by proxy cases" label="List of Munchausen by proxy cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q105434" start="13217" end="13232" title="Hypochondriasis" label="Hypochondriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q936549" start="13235" end="13256" title="Psychosomatic illness" label="Psychosomatic illness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54427" wikidata="Q830340" url="?curid=54427" title="Computer algebra system">
<text>A computer algebra system (CAS) or symbolic algebra system (SAS) is any mathematical software with the ability to manipulate mathematical expressions in a way similar to the traditional manual computations of mathematicians and scientists. The development of the computer algebra systems in the second half of the 20th century is part of the discipline of &quot;computer algebra&quot; or &quot;symbolic computation&quot;, which has spurred work in algorithms over mathematical objects such as polynomials.

Computer algebra systems may be divided into two classes: specialized and general-purpose. The specialized ones are devoted to a specific part of mathematics, such as number theory, group theory, or teaching of elementary mathematics.

General-purpose computer algebra systems aim to be useful to a user working in any scientific field that requires manipulation of mathematical expressions. To be useful, a general-purpose computer algebra system must include various features such as:
*a user interface allowing a user to enter and display mathematical formulas, typically from a keyboard, menu selections, mouse or stylus.
*a programming language and an interpreter (the result of a computation commonly has an unpredictable form and an unpredictable size; therefore user intervention is frequently needed),
*a simplifier, which is a rewrite system for simplifying mathematics formulas,
*a memory manager, including a garbage collector, needed by the huge size of the intermediate data, which may appear during a computation,
*an arbitrary-precision arithmetic, needed by the huge size of the integers that may occur,
*a large library of mathematical algorithms and special functions.

The library must not only provide for the needs of the users, but also the needs of the simplifier. For example, the computation of polynomial greatest common divisors is systematically used for the simplification of expressions involving fractions.

This large amount of required computer capabilities explains the small number of general-purpose computer algebra systems. Significant systems include Axiom, GAP, Maxima, Magma, Maple, Mathematica, and SageMath.

== History ==

In the 1950s, while computers were mainly used for numerical computations, there were some research projects into using them for symbolic manipulation. Computer algebra systems began to appear in the 1960s and evolved out of two quite different sources—the requirements of theoretical physicists and research into artificial intelligence.

A prime example for the first development was the pioneering work conducted by the later Nobel Prize laureate in physics Martinus Veltman, who designed a program for symbolic mathematics, especially high-energy physics, called Schoonschip (Dutch for &quot;clean ship&quot;) in 1963. Other early systems include FORMAC.

Using Lisp as the programming basis, Carl Engelman created MATHLAB in 1964 at MITRE within an artificial-intelligence research environment. Later MATHLAB was made available to users on PDP-6 and PDP-10 systems running TOPS-10 or TENEX in universities. Today it can still be used on SIMH emulations of the PDP-10. MATHLAB (&quot;mathematical laboratory&quot;) should not be confused with MATLAB (&quot;matrix laboratory&quot;), which is a system for numerical computation built 15 years later at the University of New Mexico.

In 1987, Hewlett-Packard introduced the first hand-held calculator CAS with the HP-28 series. Other early handheld calculators with symbolic algebra capabilities included the Texas Instruments TI-89 series and TI-92 calculator, and the Casio CFX-9970G.

The first popular computer algebra systems were muMATH, Reduce, Derive (based on muMATH), and Macsyma; a copyleft version of Macsyma is called Maxima. Reduce became free software in 2008. Commercial systems include Mathematica and Maple, which are commonly used by research mathematicians, scientists, and engineers. Freely available alternatives include SageMath (which can act as a front-end to several other free and nonfree CAS). Other significant systems include Axiom, GAP, Maxima and Magma.

The movement to web-based applications in the early 2000s saw the release of WolframAlpha, an online search engine and CAS which includes the capabilities of Mathematica.

More recently, computer algebra systems have been implemented using artificial neural networks, though as of 2020 they are not commercially available.

==Symbolic manipulations==
The symbolic manipulations supported typically include:
*simplification to a smaller expression or some standard form, including automatic simplification with assumptions and simplification with constraints
*substitution of symbols or numeric values for certain expressions
*change of form of expressions: expanding products and powers, partial and full factorization, rewriting as partial fractions, constraint satisfaction, rewriting trigonometric functions as exponentials, transforming logic expressions, etc.
*partial and total differentiation
*some indefinite and definite integration (see symbolic integration), including multidimensional integrals
*symbolic constrained and unconstrained global optimization
*solution of linear and some non-linear equations over various domains
*solution of some differential and difference equations
*taking some limits
*integral transforms
*series operations such as expansion, summation and products
*matrix operations including products, inverses, etc.
*statistical computation
*theorem proving and verification which is very useful in the area of experimental mathematics
*optimized code generation

In the above, the word &quot;some&quot; indicates that the operation cannot always be performed.

==Additional capabilities==
Many also include:
*a programming language, allowing users to implement their own algorithms
*arbitrary-precision numeric operations
*exact integer arithmetic and number theory functionality
*Editing of mathematical expressions in two-dimensional form
*plotting graphs and parametric plots of functions in two and three dimensions, and animating them
*drawing charts and diagrams
*APIs for linking it on an external program such as a database, or using in a programming language to use the computer algebra system
*string manipulation such as matching and searching
*add-ons for use in applied mathematics such as physics, bioinformatics, computational chemistry and packages for physical computation
*solvers for differential equations

Some include:
*graphic production and editing such as computer-generated imagery and signal processing as image processing
*sound synthesis

Some computer algebra systems focus on specialized disciplines; these are typically developed in academia and are free. They can be inefficient for numeric operations as compared to numeric systems.

==Types of expressions==
The expressions manipulated by the CAS typically include polynomials in multiple variables; standard functions of expressions (sine, exponential, etc.); various special functions (Γ, ζ, erf, Bessel functions, etc.); arbitrary functions of expressions; optimization; derivatives, integrals, simplifications, sums, and products of expressions; truncated series with expressions as coefficients, matrices of expressions, and so on. Numeric domains supported typically include floating-point representation of real numbers, integers (of unbounded size), complex (floating-point representation), interval representation of reals, rational number (exact representation) and algebraic numbers.

==Use in education==
There have been many advocates for increasing the use of computer algebra systems in primary and secondary-school classrooms. The primary reason for such advocacy is that computer algebra systems represent real-world math more than do paper-and-pencil or hand calculator based mathematics.
This push for increasing computer usage in mathematics classrooms has been supported by some boards of education. It has even been mandated in the curriculum of some regions.

Computer algebra systems have been extensively used in higher education. Many universities offer either specific courses on developing their use, or they implicitly expect students to use them for their course work. The companies that develop computer algebra systems have pushed to increase their prevalence among university and college programs.

CAS-equipped calculators are not permitted on the ACT, the PLAN, and in some classrooms though it may be permitted on all of College Board&#x27;s calculator-permitted tests, including the SAT, some SAT Subject Tests and the AP Calculus, Chemistry, Physics, and Statistics exams.

== Mathematics used in computer algebra systems ==
* Knuth–Bendix completion algorithm
* Root-finding algorithms
* Symbolic integration via e.g. Risch algorithm or Risch–Norman algorithm
* Hypergeometric summation via e.g. Gosper&#x27;s algorithm
* Limit computation via e.g. Gruntz&#x27;s algorithm
* Polynomial factorization via e.g., over finite fields, Berlekamp&#x27;s algorithm or Cantor–Zassenhaus algorithm.
* Greatest common divisor via e.g. Euclidean algorithm
* Gaussian elimination
* Gröbner basis via e.g. Buchberger&#x27;s algorithm; generalization of Euclidean algorithm and Gaussian elimination
* Padé approximant
* Schwartz–Zippel lemma and testing polynomial identities
* Chinese remainder theorem
* Diophantine equations
* Landau&#x27;s algorithm (nested radicals)
* Derivatives of elementary functions and special functions. (e.g. See derivatives of the incomplete gamma function.)
* Cylindrical algebraic decomposition
* Quantifier elimination over real numbers via cylindrical algebraic decomposition

==See also==

* List of computer algebra systems
* Scientific computation
* Statistical package
* Automated theorem proving
* Algebraic modeling language
* Constraint-logic programming
* Satisfiability modulo theories

== References ==

==External links==
*Curriculum and Assessment in an Age of Computer Algebra Systems - From the Education Resources Information Center Clearinghouse for Science, Mathematics, and Environmental Education, Columbus, Ohio.
*Richard J. Fateman. &quot;Essays in algebraic simplification.&quot; Technical report MIT-LCS-TR-095, 1972. &quot;(Of historical interest in showing the direction of research in computer algebra. At the MIT LCS website: )&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="2" end="25" title="Computer algebra system" label="computer algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="27" end="30" title="Computer algebra system" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="35" end="58" title="Computer algebra system" label="symbolic algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="60" end="63" title="Computer algebra system" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639024" start="72" end="93" title="mathematical software" label="mathematical software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498784" start="125" end="149" title="mathematical expressions" label="mathematical expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="209" end="222" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="228" end="237" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670846" start="362" end="378" title="computer algebra" label="computer algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="448" end="457" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q246672" start="464" end="483" title="mathematical object" label="mathematical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="493" end="503" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="674" end="687" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="689" end="701" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284266" start="718" end="740" title="elementary mathematics" label="elementary mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="997" end="1011" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="1136" end="1156" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="1164" end="1175" title="interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1321" end="1331" title="Symbolic computation#Simplification" label="simplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="1344" end="1358" title="rewrite system" label="rewrite system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="1400" end="1414" title="memory management" label="memory manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="1428" end="1445" title="garbage collector (computing)" label="garbage collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q527381" start="1540" end="1570" title="arbitrary-precision arithmetic" label="arbitrary-precision arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1661" end="1670" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="1676" end="1693" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226640" start="1828" end="1862" title="polynomial greatest common divisor" label="polynomial greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q509474" start="2098" end="2103" title="axiom (computer algebra system)" label="Axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q677161" start="2105" end="2108" title="GAP_(computer_algebra_system)" label="GAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q938304" start="2110" end="2116" title="Maxima (software)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032255" start="2118" end="2123" title="Magma (computer algebra system)" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q139380" start="2125" end="2130" title="Maple (software)" label="Maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="2132" end="2143" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165184" start="2149" end="2157" title="SageMath" label="SageMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="2489" end="2512" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q202149" start="2636" end="2652" title="Martinus Veltman" label="Martinus Veltman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248896" start="2742" end="2753" title="Schoonschip" label="Schoonschip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426889" start="2826" end="2832" title="FORMAC (programming language)" label="FORMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="2841" end="2845" title="Lisp (programming_language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q107502057" start="2872" end="2885" title="Carl Engelman" label="Carl Engelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943842" start="2894" end="2901" title="MATHLAB" label="MATHLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q627039" start="2913" end="2918" title="MITRE" label="MITRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004809" start="3117" end="3121" title="SIMH" label="SIMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="3222" end="3228" title="MATLAB" label="MATLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="3334" end="3358" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="3370" end="3385" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127766" start="3441" end="3453" title="HP-28 series" label="HP-28 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="3536" end="3553" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295981" start="3554" end="3566" title="TI-89 series" label="TI-89 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524568" start="3571" end="3576" title="TI-92" label="TI-92"/>
<link wikidata="Q217338" start="3597" end="3602" title="Casio" label="Casio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048939" start="3603" end="3612" title="CFX-9970G" label="CFX-9970G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711123" start="3663" end="3669" title="muMATH" label="muMATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857633" start="3671" end="3677" title="Reduce computer algebra system" label="Reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200212" start="3679" end="3685" title="Derive (computer algebra system)" label="Derive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883071" start="3709" end="3716" title="Macsyma" label="Macsyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q133475" start="3720" end="3728" title="copyleft" label="copyleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q938304" start="3758" end="3764" title="Maxima (software)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857633" start="3766" end="3772" title="Reduce (computer algebra system)" label="Reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="3830" end="3841" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q139380" start="3846" end="3851" title="Maple (software)" label="Maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165184" start="3970" end="3978" title="SageMath" label="SageMath"/>
<link wikidata="Q620167" start="3999" end="4008" title="Front and back ends" label="front-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q509474" start="4083" end="4088" title="Axiom (computer algebra system)" label="Axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q677161" start="4090" end="4093" title="GAP_(computer_algebra_system)" label="GAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q938304" start="4095" end="4101" title="Maxima (software)" label="Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032255" start="4106" end="4111" title="Magma (computer algebra system)" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207006" start="4191" end="4203" title="WolframAlpha" label="WolframAlpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="4272" end="4283" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="4354" end="4380" title="artificial neural networks" label="artificial neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152398" start="4569" end="4582" title="Canonical form" label="standard form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522579" start="4673" end="4685" title="substitution (algebra)" label="substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="4819" end="4832" title="factorization" label="factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q431617" start="4847" end="4863" title="partial fraction" label="partial fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30158686" start="4866" end="4889" title="constraint satisfaction" label="constraint satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="4901" end="4924" title="trigonometric functions" label="trigonometric functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="4980" end="4987" title="partial differentiation" label="partial"/>
<link wikidata="Q636889" start="4992" end="5013" title="total differentiation" label="total differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114326" start="5020" end="5030" title="antidifferentiation" label="indefinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="5035" end="5055" title="integral" label="definite integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q353176" start="5061" end="5081" title="symbolic integration" label="symbolic integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="5182" end="5190" title="Closed-form solution" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="5270" end="5282" title="differential equation" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="5287" end="5306" title="difference equation" label="difference equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="5321" end="5326" title="limit of a function" label="limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="5350" end="5356" title="mathematical series" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="5439" end="5447" title="Direct product (Matrix)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q242188" start="5449" end="5457" title="matrix inversion" label="inverses"/>
<link wikidata="Q494735" start="5465" end="5488" title="List of statistical packages" label="statistical computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q431667" start="5490" end="5505" title="theorem proving" label="theorem proving"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="5510" end="5522" title="proof verification" label="verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q923592" start="5559" end="5583" title="experimental mathematics" label="experimental mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5585" end="5610" title="Automatic programming#Implementations" label="optimized code generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="5760" end="5780" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q527381" start="5832" end="5851" title="arbitrary-precision" label="arbitrary-precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345429" start="5930" end="5965" title="Formula editor" label="Editing of mathematical expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="6000" end="6027" title="graph of a function" label="graphs and parametric plots"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="6119" end="6123" title="Application programming interface" label="APIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="6253" end="6272" title="string manipulation" label="string manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q374040" start="6281" end="6289" title="string matching" label="matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q374040" start="6294" end="6303" title="string searching" label="searching"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="6324" end="6343" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="6361" end="6375" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q369472" start="6377" end="6400" title="computational chemistry" label="computational chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q909554" start="6418" end="6438" title="computational physics" label="physical computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="6452" end="6473" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="6491" end="6498" title="computer graphics" label="graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="6530" end="6556" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="6561" end="6578" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="6582" end="6598" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="6600" end="6615" title="sound synthesis" label="sound synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155931" start="6799" end="6814" title="Comparison of numerical-analysis software" label="numeric systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="6899" end="6909" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="6969" end="6973" title="Trigonometric functions" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="6975" end="6986" title="exponential function" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="7022" end="7023" title="gamma function" label="Γ"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="7025" end="7026" title="Riemann zeta function" label="ζ"/>
<link wikidata="Q579262" start="7028" end="7031" title="error function" label="erf"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="7033" end="7048" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="7194" end="7200" title="series (mathematics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="7235" end="7243" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="7315" end="7360" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point representation of real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="7362" end="7369" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="7392" end="7399" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671453" start="7433" end="7465" title="interval arithmetic" label="interval representation of reals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="7467" end="7482" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="7510" end="7526" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="8416" end="8419" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119585" start="8425" end="8429" title="PLAN (test)" label="PLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109023" start="8491" end="8504" title="College Board" label="College Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="8554" end="8557" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388865" start="8564" end="8581" title="SAT Subject Tests" label="SAT Subject Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410440" start="8590" end="8601" title="AP Calculus" label="AP Calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13412119" start="8603" end="8612" title="AP Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653483" start="8614" end="8621" title="AP Physics" label="Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415707" start="8627" end="8637" title="AP Statistics" label="Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835803" start="8699" end="8732" title="Knuth–Bendix completion algorithm" label="Knuth–Bendix completion algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085860" start="8735" end="8757" title="Root-finding algorithm" label="Root-finding algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q353176" start="8761" end="8781" title="Symbolic integration" label="Symbolic integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382512" start="8791" end="8806" title="Risch algorithm" label="Risch algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382512" start="8810" end="8832" title="Risch–Norman algorithm" label="Risch–Norman algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147828" start="8835" end="8859" title="Hypergeometric summation" label="Hypergeometric summation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587427" start="8869" end="8892" title="Gosper&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Gosper&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q177239" start="8895" end="8912" title="Limit (mathematics)" label="Limit computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392477" start="8948" end="8972" title="Polynomial factorization" label="Polynomial factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q821001" start="9003" end="9029" title="Berlekamp&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Berlekamp&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835780" start="9033" end="9060" title="Cantor–Zassenhaus algorithm" label="Cantor–Zassenhaus algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="9064" end="9087" title="Greatest common divisor" label="Greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="9097" end="9116" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="9119" end="9139" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551631" start="9142" end="9155" title="Gröbner basis" label="Gröbner basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q997962" start="9165" end="9192" title="Buchberger&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Buchberger&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452504" start="9259" end="9275" title="Padé approximant" label="Padé approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433182" start="9278" end="9299" title="Schwartz–Zippel lemma" label="Schwartz–Zippel lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193878" start="9336" end="9361" title="Chinese remainder theorem" label="Chinese remainder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q905896" start="9364" end="9384" title="Diophantine equation" label="Diophantine equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670069" start="9388" end="9411" title="Landau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Landau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q824282" start="9447" end="9466" title="elementary function" label="elementary function"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="9472" end="9489" title="special functions" label="special functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319246" start="9501" end="9545" title="derivatives of the incomplete gamma function" label="derivatives of the incomplete gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199280" start="9550" end="9585" title="Cylindrical algebraic decomposition" label="Cylindrical algebraic decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849020" start="9588" end="9610" title="Quantifier elimination" label="Quantifier elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388223" start="9686" end="9718" title="List of computer algebra systems" label="List of computer algebra systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q117801" start="9721" end="9743" title="Scientific computation" label="Scientific computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494735" start="9746" end="9765" title="Statistical package" label="Statistical package"/>
<link wikidata="Q431667" start="9768" end="9793" title="Automated theorem proving" label="Automated theorem proving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724010" start="9796" end="9823" title="Algebraic modeling language" label="Algebraic modeling language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164378" start="9826" end="9854" title="Constraint-logic programming" label="Constraint-logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067766" start="9857" end="9887" title="Satisfiability modulo theories" label="Satisfiability modulo theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915193" start="10002" end="10040" title="Education Resources Information Center" label="Education Resources Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="10110" end="10124" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54432" wikidata="Q609057" url="?curid=54432" title="Unification (computer science)">
<text>In logic and computer science, specifically automated reasoning, unification is an algorithmic process of solving equations between symbolic expressions, each of the form &quot;Left-hand side = Right-hand side&quot;. For example, using &quot;x&quot;,&quot;y&quot;,&quot;z&quot; as variables, and taking &quot;f&quot; to be an uninterpreted function, the singleton equation set { &quot;f&quot;(1,&quot;y&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,2) } is a syntactic first-order unification problem that has the substitution { &quot;x&quot; ↦ 1, &quot;y&quot; ↦ 2 } as its only solution.

Conventions differ on what values variables may assume and which expressions are considered equivalent. In first-order syntactic unification, variables range over first-order terms and equivalence is syntactic. This version of unification has a unique &quot;best&quot; answer and is used in logic programming and programming language type system implementation, especially in Hindley–Milner based type inference algorithms. In higher-order unification, possibly restricted to higher-order pattern unification, terms may include lambda expressions, and equivalence is up to beta-reduction. This version is used in proof assistants and higher-order logic programming, for example Isabelle, Twelf, and lambdaProlog. Finally, in semantic unification or E-unification, equality is subject to background knowledge and variables range over a variety of domains. This version is used in SMT solvers, term rewriting algorithms, and cryptographic protocol analysis.

==Formal definition==

A &quot;unification problem&quot; is a finite set of equations to solve, where are in the set formula_1 of &quot;terms&quot; or &quot;expressions&quot;. Depending on which expressions or terms are allowed to occur in an equation set or unification problem, and which expressions are considered equal, several frameworks of unification are distinguished. If higher-order variables, that is, variables representing functions, are allowed in an expression, the process is called higher-order unification, otherwise &quot;first-order unification&quot;. If a solution is required to make both sides of each equation literally equal, the process is called syntactic or &quot;free&quot; unification, otherwise &quot;semantic&quot; or &quot;equational unification&quot;, or E-unification, or &quot;unification modulo theory&quot;.

If the right side of each equation is closed (no free variables), the problem is called (pattern) &quot;matching&quot;. The left side (with variables) of each equation is called the &quot;pattern&quot;.

===Prerequisites===
Formally, a unification approach presupposes
* An infinite set formula_2 of &quot;variables&quot;. For higher-order unification, it is convenient to choose formula_2 disjoint from the set of lambda-term bound variables.
* A set formula_1 of &quot;terms&quot; such that formula_5. For first-order unification, formula_1 is usually the set of first-order terms (terms built from variable and function symbols). For higher-order unification formula_1 consists of first-order terms and lambda terms (terms containing some higher-order variables).
* A mapping formula_8 formula_9formula_10, assigning to each term formula_11 the set formula_12 of &quot;free variables&quot; occurring in formula_11.
* A theory or equivalence relation formula_14 on formula_1, indicating which terms are considered equal. For first-order E-unification, formula_14 reflects the background knowledge about certain function symbols; for example, if formula_17 is considered commutative, formula_18 if formula_19 results from formula_11 by swapping the arguments of formula_17 at some (possibly all) occurrences. In the most typical case that there is no background knowledge at all, then only literally, or syntactically, identical terms are considered equal. In this case, ≡ is called the &quot;free theory&quot; (because it is a free object), the &quot;empty theory&quot; (because the set of equational sentences, or the background knowledge, is empty), the &quot;theory of uninterpreted functions&quot; (because unification is done on uninterpreted terms), or the &quot;theory of constructors&quot; (because all function symbols just build up data terms, rather than operating on them). For higher-order unification, usually formula_18 if formula_11 and formula_19 are alpha equivalent.

As an example of how the set of terms and theory affects the set of solutions, the syntactic first-order unification problem { &quot;y&quot; = &quot;cons&quot;(2,&quot;y&quot;) } has no solution over the set of finite terms. However, it has the single solution { &quot;y&quot; ↦ &quot;cons&quot;(2,&quot;cons&quot;(2,&quot;cons&quot;(2...))) } over the set of infinite tree terms. Similarly, the semantic first-order unification problem { &quot;a&quot;⋅&quot;x&quot; = &quot;x&quot;⋅&quot;a&quot; } has each substitution of the form { &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot;⋅...⋅&quot;a&quot; } as a solution in a semigroup, i.e. if (⋅) is considered associative. But the same problem, viewed in an abelian group, where (⋅) is considered also commutative, has any substitution at all as a solution.

As an example of higher-order unification, the singleton set { &quot;a&quot; = &quot;y&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) } is a syntactic second-order unification problem, since &quot;y&quot; is a function variable. One solution is { &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot;, &quot;y&quot; ↦ (identity function) }; another one is { &quot;y&quot; ↦ (constant function mapping each value to &quot;a&quot;), &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;(any value)&quot; }.

===Substitution===

A &quot;substitution&quot; is a mapping formula_25 from variables to terms; the notation formula_26 refers to a substitution mapping each variable formula_27 to the term formula_28, for formula_29, and every other variable to itself; the formula_27 must be pairwise distinct. &quot;Applying&quot; that substitution to a term formula_11 is written in postfix notation as formula_32; it means to (simultaneously) replace every occurrence of each variable formula_27 in the term formula_11 by formula_28. The result formula_36 of applying a substitution formula_37 to a term formula_11 is called an &quot;instance&quot; of that term formula_11.
As a first-order example, applying the substitution to the term 
===Generalization, specialization===
If a term formula_11 has an instance equivalent to a term formula_19, that is, if formula_42 for some substitution formula_43, then formula_11 is called &quot;more general&quot; than formula_19, and formula_19 is called &quot;more special&quot; than, or &quot;subsumed&quot; by, formula_11. For example, formula_48 is more general than formula_49 if ⊕ is commutative, since then formula_50.

If ≡ is literal (syntactic) identity of terms, a term may be both more general and more special than another one only if both terms differ just in their variable names, not in their syntactic structure; such terms are called &quot;variants&quot;, or &quot;renamings&quot; of each other.
For example, 
formula_51
is a variant of 
formula_52,
since
formula_53
and
formula_54
However, formula_51 is &quot;not&quot; a variant of formula_56, since no substitution can transform the latter term into the former one.
The latter term is therefore properly more special than the former one.

For arbitrary formula_14, a term may be both more general and more special than a structurally different term.
For example, if ⊕ is idempotent, that is, if always formula_58, then the term formula_59 is more general than formula_60, and vice versa, although formula_59 and formula_60 are of different structure.

A substitution formula_43 is &quot;more special&quot; than, or &quot;subsumed&quot; by, a substitution formula_37 if formula_65 is subsumed by formula_36 for each term formula_11. We also say that formula_37 is more general than formula_43. More formally, take a nonempty infinite set formula_2 of auxiliary variables such that no equation formula_71 in the unification problem contains variables from formula_2. Then a substitution formula_43 is subsumed by another substitution formula_37 if there is a substitution formula_75 such that for all terms formula_76, formula_77.
For instance formula_78 is subsumed by formula_79, using formula_80, but 
formula_81 is not subsumed by formula_79, as formula_83 is not an instance of
formula_84.

===Solution set===

A substitution σ is a &quot;solution&quot; of the unification problem &quot;E&quot; if for formula_85. Such a substitution is also called a &quot;unifier&quot; of &quot;E&quot;.
For example, if ⊕ is associative, the unification problem { &quot;x&quot; ⊕ &quot;a&quot; ≐ &quot;a&quot; ⊕ &quot;x&quot; } has the solutions {&quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot;}, {&quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot; ⊕ &quot;a&quot;}, {&quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot; ⊕ &quot;a&quot; ⊕ &quot;a&quot;}, etc., while the problem { &quot;x&quot; ⊕ &quot;a&quot; ≐ &quot;a&quot; } has no solution.

For a given unification problem &quot;E&quot;, a set &quot;S&quot; of unifiers is called &quot;complete&quot; if each solution substitution is subsumed by some substitution in &quot;S&quot;. A complete substitution set always exists (e.g. the set of all solutions), but in some frameworks (such as unrestricted higher-order unification) the problem of determining whether any solution exists (i.e., whether the complete substitution set is nonempty) is undecidable.

The set &quot;S&quot; is called &quot;minimal&quot; if none of its members subsumes another one. Depending on the framework, a complete and minimal substitution set may have zero, one, finitely many, or infinitely many members, or may not exist at all due to an infinite chain of redundant members. Thus, in general, unification algorithms compute a finite approximation of the complete set, which may or may not be minimal, although most algorithms avoid redundant unifiers when possible. For first-order syntactical unification, Martelli and Montanari gave an algorithm that reports unsolvability or computes a single unifier that by itself forms a complete and minimal substitution set, called the most general unifier.

==Syntactic unification of first-order terms==

&quot;Syntactic unification of first-order terms&quot; is the most widely used unification framework.
It is based on &quot;T&quot; being the set of &quot;first-order terms&quot; (over some given set &quot;V&quot; of variables, &quot;C&quot; of constants and &quot;F&quot;&quot;n&quot; of &quot;n&quot;-ary function symbols) and on ≡ being &quot;syntactic equality&quot;.
In this framework, each solvable unification problem has a complete, and obviously minimal, singleton solution set .
Its member is called the most general unifier (&quot;mgu&quot;) of the problem.
The terms on the left and the right hand side of each potential equation become syntactically equal when the mgu is applied i.e. .
Any unifier of the problem is subsumed by the mgu .
The mgu is unique up to variants: if &quot;S&quot;1 and &quot;S&quot;2 are both complete and minimal solution sets of the same syntactical unification problem, then &quot;S&quot;1 = { &quot;σ&quot;1 } and &quot;S&quot;2 = { &quot;σ&quot;2 } for some substitutions and and is a variant of for each variable &quot;x&quot; occurring in the problem.

For example, the unification problem { &quot;x&quot; ≐ &quot;z&quot;, &quot;y&quot; ≐ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) } has a unifier { &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;z&quot;, &quot;y&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;z&quot;) }, because

This is also the most general unifier.
Other unifiers for the same problem are e.g. { &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;1), &quot;y&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;1)), &quot;z&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;1) }, { &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;1)), &quot;y&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;1))), &quot;z&quot; ↦ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;1)) }, and so on; there are infinitely many similar unifiers.

As another example, the problem &quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;x&quot;) ≐ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;) has no solution with respect to ≡ being literal identity, since any substitution applied to the left and right hand side will keep the outermost &quot;g&quot; and &quot;f&quot;, respectively, and terms with different outermost function symbols are syntactically different.

===Unification algorithms===

Jacques Herbrand discussed the basic concepts of unification and sketched an algorithm in 1930. But most authors attribute the first unification algorithm to John Alan Robinson (cf. box). Robinson&#x27;s algorithm had worst-case exponential behavior in both time and space. Numerous authors have proposed more efficient unification algorithms. Algorithms with worst-case linear-time behavior were discovered independently by and uses a similar technique as Paterson-Wegman, hence is linear, but like most linear-time unification algorithms is slower than the Robinson version on small sized inputs due to the overhead of preprocessing the inputs and postprocessing of the output, such as construction of a DAG representation. is also of linear complexity in the input size but is competitive with the Robinson algorithm on small size inputs. The speedup is obtained by using an object-oriented representation of the predicate calculus that avoids the need for pre- and post-processing, instead making variable objects responsible for creating a substitution and for dealing with aliasing. de Champeaux claims that the ability to add functionality to predicate calculus represented as programmatic objects provides opportunities for optimizing other logic operations as well.

The following algorithm is commonly presented and originates from . Given a finite set formula_86 of potential equations,
the algorithm applies rules to transform it to an equivalent set of equations of the form
{ &quot;x&quot;1 ≐ &quot;u&quot;1, ..., &quot;x&quot;&quot;m&quot; ≐ &quot;u&quot;&quot;m&quot; }
where &quot;x&quot;1, ..., &quot;x&quot;&quot;m&quot; are distinct variables and &quot;u&quot;1, ..., &quot;u&quot;&quot;m&quot; are terms containing none of the &quot;x&quot;&quot;i&quot;.
A set of this form can be read as a substitution.
If there is no solution the algorithm terminates with ⊥; other authors use &quot;Ω&quot;, or &quot;fail&quot; in that case.
The operation of substituting all occurrences of variable &quot;x&quot; in problem &quot;G&quot; with term &quot;t&quot; is denoted &quot;G&quot; {&quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;t&quot;}.
For simplicity, constant symbols are regarded as function symbols having zero arguments.

====Occurs check====

An attempt to unify a variable &quot;x&quot; with a term containing &quot;x&quot; as a strict subterm &quot;x&quot; ≐ &quot;f&quot;(..., &quot;x&quot;, ...) would lead to an infinite term as solution for &quot;x&quot;, since &quot;x&quot; would occur as a subterm of itself.
In the set of (finite) first-order terms as defined above, the equation &quot;x&quot; ≐ &quot;f&quot;(..., &quot;x&quot;, ...) has no solution; hence the &quot;eliminate&quot; rule may only be applied if &quot;x&quot; ∉ &quot;vars&quot;(&quot;t&quot;).
Since that additional check, called &quot;occurs check&quot;, slows down the algorithm, it is omitted e.g. in most Prolog systems.
From a theoretical point of view, omitting the check amounts to solving equations over infinite trees, see #Unification of infinite terms below.

====Proof of termination====
For the proof of termination of the algorithm consider a triple formula_87
where is the number of variables that occur more than once in the equation set, is the number of function symbols and constants
on the left hand sides of potential equations, and is the number of equations.
When rule &quot;eliminate&quot; is applied, decreases, since &quot;x&quot; is eliminated from &quot;G&quot; and kept only in { &quot;x&quot; ≐ &quot;t&quot; }.
Applying any other rule can never increase again.
When rule &quot;decompose&quot;, &quot;conflict&quot;, or &quot;swap&quot; is applied, decreases, since at least the left hand side&#x27;s outermost &quot;f&quot; disappears.
Applying any of the remaining rules &quot;delete&quot; or &quot;check&quot; can&#x27;t increase , but decreases .
Hence, any rule application decreases the triple formula_87 with respect to the lexicographical order, which is possible only a finite number of times.

Conor McBride observes that &quot;by expressing the structure which unification exploits&quot; in a dependently typed language such as Epigram, Robinson&#x27;s unification algorithm can be made recursive on the number of variables, in which case a separate termination proof becomes unnecessary.

===Examples of syntactic unification of first-order terms===
In the Prolog syntactical convention a symbol starting with an upper case letter is a variable name; a symbol that starts with a lowercase letter is a function symbol; the comma is used as the logical &quot;and&quot; operator.
For mathematical notation, &quot;x,y,z&quot; are used as variables, &quot;f,g&quot; as function symbols, and &quot;a,b&quot; as constants.

The most general unifier of a syntactic first-order unification problem of size may have a size of . For example, the problem has the most general unifier , cf. picture. In order to avoid exponential time complexity caused by such blow-up, advanced unification algorithms work on directed acyclic graphs (dags) rather than trees.

===Application: unification in logic programming===
The concept of unification is one of the main ideas behind logic programming. Specifically, unification is a basic building block of resolution, a rule of inference for determining formula satisfiability. In Prolog, the equality symbol codice_1 implies first-order syntactic unification. It represents the mechanism of binding the contents of variables and can be viewed as a kind of one-time assignment.

In Prolog:
# A variable can be unified with a constant, a term, or another variable, thus effectively becoming its alias. In many modern Prolog dialects and in first-order logic, a variable cannot be unified with a term that contains it; this is the so-called &quot;occurs check&quot;.
# Two constants can be unified only if they are identical.
# Similarly, a term can be unified with another term if the top function symbols and arities of the terms are identical and if the parameters can be unified simultaneously. Note that this is a recursive behavior.
# Most operations, including codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, are not evaluated by codice_1. So for example codice_7 is not satisfiable because they are syntactically different. The use of integer arithmetic constraints codice_8 introduces a form of E-unification for which these operations are interpreted and evaluated.

=== Application: type inference ===
Type inference algorithms are typically based on unification, particularly Hindley-Milner type inference which is used by the functional languages Haskell and ML. For example, when attempting to infer the type of the Haskell expression codice_9, the compiler will use the type codice_10 of the list construction function codice_11, the type codice_12 of the first argument codice_13, and the type codice_14 of the second argument codice_15. The polymorphic type variable codice_16 will be unified with codice_12 and the second argument codice_18 will be unified with codice_14. codice_16 cannot be both codice_12 and codice_22 at the same time, therefore this expression is not correctly typed.

Like for Prolog, an algorithm for type inference can be given:

# Any type variable unifies with any type expression, and is instantiated to that expression. A specific theory might restrict this rule with an occurs check.
# Two type constants unify only if they are the same type.
# Two type constructions unify only if they are applications of the same type constructor and all of their component types recursively unify.

=== Application: Feature Structure Unification ===
Unification has been used in different research areas of computational linguistics.

==Order-sorted unification==
&quot;Order-sorted logic&quot; allows one to assign a &quot;sort&quot;, or &quot;type&quot;, to each term, and to declare a sort &quot;s&quot;1 a &quot;subsort&quot; of another sort &quot;s&quot;2, commonly written as &quot;s&quot;1 ⊆ &quot;s&quot;2. For example, when reаsoning about biological creatures, it is useful to declare a sort &quot;dog&quot; to be a subsort of a sort &quot;animal&quot;. Wherever a term of some sort &quot;s&quot; is required, a term of any subsort of &quot;s&quot; may be supplied instead.
For example, assuming a function declaration &quot;mother&quot;: &quot;animal&quot; → &quot;animal&quot;, and a constant declaration &quot;lassie&quot;: &quot;dog&quot;, the term &quot;mother&quot;(&quot;lassie&quot;) is perfectly valid and has the sort &quot;animal&quot;. In order to supply the information that the mother of a dog is a dog in turn, another declaration &quot;mother&quot;: &quot;dog&quot; → &quot;dog&quot; may be issued; this is called &quot;function overloading&quot;, similar to overloading in programming languages.

Walther gave a unification algorithm for terms in order-sorted logic, requiring for any two declared sorts &quot;s&quot;1, &quot;s&quot;2 their intersection &quot;s&quot;1 ∩ &quot;s&quot;2 to be declared, too: if &quot;x&quot;1 and &quot;x&quot;2 is a variable of sort &quot;s&quot;1 and &quot;s&quot;2, respectively, the equation &quot;x&quot;1 ≐ &quot;x&quot;2 has the solution { &quot;x&quot;1 = &quot;x&quot;, &quot;x&quot;2 = &quot;x&quot; }, where &quot;x&quot;: &quot;s&quot;1 ∩ &quot;s&quot;2.

After incorporating this algorithm into a clause-based automated theorem prover, he could solve a benchmark problem by translating it into order-sorted logic, thereby boiling it down an order of magnitude, as many unary predicates turned into sorts.

Smolka generalized order-sorted logic to allow for parametric polymorphism.

In his framework, subsort declarations are propagated to complex type expressions.
As a programming example, a parametric sort &quot;list&quot;(&quot;X&quot;) may be declared (with &quot;X&quot; being a type parameter as in a C++ template), and from a subsort declaration &quot;int&quot; ⊆ &quot;float&quot; the relation &quot;list&quot;(&quot;int&quot;) ⊆ &quot;list&quot;(&quot;float&quot;) is automatically inferred, meaning that each list of integers is also a list of floats.

Schmidt-Schauß generalized order-sorted logic to allow for term declarations.

As an example, assuming subsort declarations &quot;even&quot; ⊆ &quot;int&quot; and &quot;odd&quot; ⊆ &quot;int&quot;, a term declaration like ∀ &quot;i&quot; : &quot;int&quot;. (&quot;i&quot; + &quot;i&quot;) : &quot;even&quot; allows to declare a property of integer addition that could not be expressed by ordinary overloading.

==Unification of infinite terms==

Background on infinite trees:
* 

Unification algorithm, Prolog II:
* 

Applications:

==E-unification==
E-unification is the problem of finding solutions to a given set of equations,
taking into account some equational background knowledge &quot;E&quot;.
The latter is given as a set of universal equalities.
For some particular sets &quot;E&quot;, equation solving algorithms (a.k.a. &quot;E-unification algorithms&quot;) have been devised;
for others it has been proven that no such algorithms can exist.

For example, if and are distinct constants,
the equation has no solution
with respect to purely syntactic unification,
where nothing is known about the operator .
However, if the is known to be commutative,
then the substitution solves the above equation,
since
The background knowledge &quot;E&quot; could state the commutativity of by the universal equality
&quot; for all &quot;.

===Particular background knowledge sets E===
It is said that &quot;unification is decidable&quot; for a theory, if a unification algorithm has been devised for it that terminates for &quot;any&quot; input problem.
It is said that &quot;unification is semi-decidable&quot; for a theory, if a unification algorithm has been devised for it that terminates for any &quot;solvable&quot; input problem, but may keep searching forever for solutions of an unsolvable input problem.

&quot;Unification is decidable&quot; for the following theories:
* &#x27;,&#x27;
* &#x27;,&#x27;,&#x27;
* &#x27;,&#x27; (monoid)
* Boolean rings
* Abelian groups, even if the signature is expanded by arbitrary additional symbols (but not axioms)
* K4 modal algebras

&quot;Unification is semi-decidable&quot; for the following theories:
* &#x27;,&#x27;,
* Commutative rings

===One-sided paramodulation===
If there is a convergent term rewriting system &quot;R&quot; available for &quot;E&quot;,
the &quot;one-sided paramodulation&quot; algorithm
can be used to enumerate all solutions of given equations.

Starting with &quot;G&quot; being the unification problem to be solved and &quot;S&quot; being the identity substitution, rules are applied nondeterministically until the empty set appears as the actual &quot;G&quot;, in which case the actual &quot;S&quot; is a unifying substitution. Depending on the order the paramodulation rules are applied, on the choice of the actual equation from &quot;G&quot;, and on the choice of &quot;R&quot;″s rules in &quot;mutate&quot;, different computations paths are possible. Only some lead to a solution, while others end at a &quot;G&quot; ≠ {} where no further rule is applicable (e.g. &quot;G&quot; = { &quot;f&quot;(...) ≐ &quot;g&quot;(...) }).

For an example, a term rewrite system &quot;R&quot; is used defining the &quot;append&quot; operator of lists built from &quot;cons&quot; and &quot;nil&quot;; where &quot;cons&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;y&quot;) is written in infix notation as &quot;x&quot;.&quot;y&quot; for brevity; e.g. &quot;app&quot;(&quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;) → &quot;a&quot;.&quot;app&quot;(&quot;b&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;) → &quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;app&quot;(&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;) → &quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; demonstrates the concatenation of the lists &quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; and &quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;, employing the rewrite rule 2,2, and 1. The equational theory &quot;E&quot; corresponding to &quot;R&quot; is the congruence closure of &quot;R&quot;, both viewed as binary relations on terms.
For example, &quot;app&quot;(&quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;) ≡ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; ≡ &quot;app&quot;(&quot;a&quot;.&quot;b&quot;.&quot;c&quot;.&quot;d&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;nil&quot;). The paramodulation algorithm enumerates solutions to equations with respect to that &quot;E&quot; when fed with the example &quot;R&quot;.

A successful example computation path for the unification problem { &quot;app&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;app&quot;(&quot;y&quot;,&quot;x&quot;)) ≐ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; } is shown below. To avoid variable name clashes, rewrite rules are consistently renamed each time before their use by rule &quot;mutate&quot;; &quot;v&quot;2, &quot;v&quot;3, ... are computer-generated variable names for this purpose. In each line, the chosen equation from &quot;G&quot; is highlighted in red. Each time the &quot;mutate&quot; rule is applied, the chosen rewrite rule (&quot;1&quot; or &quot;2&quot;) is indicated in parentheses. From the last line, the unifying substitution &quot;S&quot; = { &quot;y&quot; ↦ &quot;nil&quot;, &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; } can be obtained. In fact,
&quot;app&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;app&quot;(&quot;y&quot;,&quot;x&quot;)) {&quot;y&quot;↦&quot;nil&quot;, &quot;x&quot;↦ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; } = &quot;app&quot;(&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;app&quot;(&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;)) ≡ &quot;app&quot;(&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;) ≡ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;app&quot;(&quot;nil&quot;,&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;) ≡ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot; solves the given problem.
A second successful computation path, obtainable by choosing &quot;mutate(1), mutate(2), mutate(2), mutate(1)&quot; leads to the substitution &quot;S&quot; = { &quot;y&quot; ↦ &quot;a&quot;.&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;, &quot;x&quot; ↦ &quot;nil&quot; }; it is not shown here. No other path leads to a success.

===Narrowing===

If &quot;R&quot; is a convergent term rewriting system for &quot;E&quot;,
an approach alternative to the previous section consists in successive application of &quot;narrowing steps&quot;;
this will eventually enumerate all solutions of a given equation.
A narrowing step (cf. picture) consists in
* choosing a nonvariable subterm of the current term,
* syntactically unifying it with the left hand side of a rule from &quot;R&quot;, and
* replacing the instantiated rule&#x27;s right hand side into the instantiated term.
Formally, if is a renamed copy of a rewrite rule from &quot;R&quot;, having no variables in common with a term &quot;s&quot;, and the subterm is not a variable and is unifiable with via the mgu , then can be &quot;narrowed&quot; to the term , i.e. to the term , with the subterm at &quot;p&quot; replaced by . The situation that &quot;s&quot; can be narrowed to &quot;t&quot; is commonly denoted as &quot;s&quot; ↝ &quot;t&quot;.
Intuitively, a sequence of narrowing steps &quot;t&quot;1 ↝ &quot;t&quot;2 ↝ ... ↝ &quot;t&quot;&quot;n&quot; can be thought of as a sequence of rewrite steps &quot;t&quot;1 → &quot;t&quot;2 → ... → &quot;t&quot;&quot;n&quot;, but with the initial term &quot;t&quot;1 being further and further instantiated, as necessary to make each of the used rules applicable.

The above example paramodulation computation corresponds to the following narrowing sequence (&quot;↓&quot; indicating instantiation here):

The last term, &quot;v&quot;2.&quot;v&quot;2.&quot;nil&quot; can be syntactically unified with the original right hand side term &quot;a&quot;.&quot;a&quot;.&quot;nil&quot;.

The &quot;narrowing lemma&quot; ensures that whenever an instance of a term &quot;s&quot; can be rewritten to a term &quot;t&quot; by a convergent term rewriting system, then &quot;s&quot; and &quot;t&quot; can be narrowed and rewritten to a term and , respectively, such that is an instance of .

Formally: whenever holds for some substitution σ, then there exist terms such that and and for some substitution τ.

==Higher-order unification==
Many applications require one to consider the unification of typed lambda-terms instead of first-order terms. Such unification is often called &quot;higher-order unification&quot;. Higher-order unification is undecidable, and such unification problems do not have most general unifiers. For example, the unification problem { &quot;f&quot;(&quot;a&quot;,&quot;b&quot;,&quot;a&quot;) ≐ &quot;d&quot;(&quot;b&quot;,&quot;a&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) }, where the only variable is &quot;f&quot;, has the
solutions {&quot;f&quot; ↦ λ&quot;x&quot;.λ&quot;y&quot;.λ&quot;z&quot;. &quot;d&quot;(&quot;y&quot;,&quot;x&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) }, {&quot;f&quot; ↦ λ&quot;x&quot;.λ&quot;y&quot;.λ&quot;z&quot;. &quot;d&quot;(&quot;y&quot;,&quot;z&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) },
{&quot;f&quot; ↦ λ&quot;x&quot;.λ&quot;y&quot;.λ&quot;z&quot;. &quot;d&quot;(&quot;y&quot;,&quot;a&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) }, {&quot;f&quot; ↦ λ&quot;x&quot;.λ&quot;y&quot;.λ&quot;z&quot;. &quot;d&quot;(&quot;b&quot;,&quot;x&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) },
{&quot;f&quot; ↦ λ&quot;x&quot;.λ&quot;y&quot;.λ&quot;z&quot;. &quot;d&quot;(&quot;b&quot;,&quot;z&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) } and {&quot;f&quot; ↦ λ&quot;x&quot;.λ&quot;y&quot;.λ&quot;z&quot;. &quot;d&quot;(&quot;b&quot;,&quot;a&quot;,&quot;c&quot;) }. A well studied branch of higher-order unification is the problem of unifying simply typed lambda terms modulo the equality determined by αβη conversions. Gérard Huet gave a semi-decidable (pre-)unification algorithm that allows a systematic search of the space of unifiers (generalizing the unification algorithm of Martelli-Montanari with rules for terms containing higher-order variables) that seems to work sufficiently well in practice. Huet and Gilles Dowek have written articles surveying this topic.

Several subsets of higher-order unification are well-behaved, in that they are decidable and have a most-general unifier for solvable problems. One such subset is the previously described first-order terms. Higher-order pattern unification, due to Dale Miller, is another such subset. The higher-order logic programming languages λProlog and Twelf have switched from full higher-order unification to implementing only the pattern fragment; surprisingly pattern unification is sufficient for almost all programs, if each non-pattern unification problem is suspended until a subsequent substitution puts the unification into the pattern fragment. A superset of pattern unification called functions-as-constructors unification is also well-behaved. The Zipperposition theorem prover has an algorithm integrating these well-behaved subsets into a full higher-order unification algorithm.

In computational linguistics, one of the most influential theories of elliptical construction is that ellipses are represented by free variables whose values are then determined using Higher-Order Unification. For instance, the semantic representation of &quot;Jon likes Mary and Peter does too&quot; is and the value of R (the semantic representation of the ellipsis) is determined by the equation . The process of solving such equations is called Higher-Order Unification.

Wayne Snyder gave a generalization of both higher-order unification and E-unification, i.e. an algorithm to unify lambda-terms modulo an equational theory.

==See also==
*Rewriting
*Admissible rule
*Explicit substitution in lambda calculus
*Mathematical equation solving
*Dis-unification: solving inequations between symbolic expression
*Anti-unification: computing a least general generalization (lgg) of two terms, dual to computing a most general instance (mgu)
*Subsumption lattice, a lattice having unification as meet and anti-unification as join
*Ontology alignment (use &quot;unification&quot; with semantic equivalence)

==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==
* Franz Baader and Wayne Snyder (2001). &quot;Unification Theory&quot; . In John Alan Robinson and Andrei Voronkov, editors, &quot;Handbook of Automated Reasoning&quot;, volume I, pages 447–533. Elsevier Science Publishers.
* Gilles Dowek (2001). &quot;Higher-order Unification and Matching&quot; . In &quot;Handbook of Automated Reasoning&quot;.
* Franz Baader and Tobias Nipkow (1998). &quot;Term Rewriting and All That&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Franz Baader and (1993). &quot;Unification Theory&quot;. In &quot;Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming&quot;.
* Jean-Pierre Jouannaud and Claude Kirchner (1991). &quot;Solving Equations in Abstract Algebras: A Rule-Based Survey of Unification&quot;. In &quot;Computational Logic: Essays in Honor of Alan Robinson&quot;.
* Nachum Dershowitz and Jean-Pierre Jouannaud, &quot;Rewrite Systems&quot;, in: Jan van Leeuwen (ed.), &quot;Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science&quot;, volume B &quot;Formal Models and Semantics&quot;, Elsevier, 1990, pp. 243–320
* Jörg H. Siekmann (1990). &quot;Unification Theory&quot;. In Claude Kirchner (editor) &quot;Unification&quot;. Academic Press.
* Gérard Huet and Derek C. Oppen (1980). &quot;Equations and Rewrite Rules: A Survey&quot;. Technical report. Stanford University.
* Claude Kirchner and Hélène Kirchner. &quot;Rewriting, Solving, Proving&quot;. In preparation.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3" end="8" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="13" end="29" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555318" start="44" end="63" title="automated reasoning" label="automated reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q609057" start="65" end="76" title="Unification (computer science)" label="unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879820" start="106" end="123" title="solving equations" label="solving equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498784" start="141" end="152" title="expression (mathematics)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885264" start="326" end="348" title="uninterpreted function" label="uninterpreted function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="354" end="363" title="Singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754055" start="534" end="535" title="↦" label="↦"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="745" end="762" title="first-order terms" label="first-order terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="873" end="890" title="logic programming" label="logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="916" end="927" title="type system" label="type system"/>
<link wikidata="Q200996" start="958" end="972" title="Hindley–Milner" label="Hindley–Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q586459" start="979" end="993" title="type inference" label="type inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q609057" start="1058" end="1090" title="Unification (computer science)" label="higher-order pattern unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q460340" start="1260" end="1268" title="Isabelle (theorem prover)" label="Isabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666857" start="1270" end="1275" title="Twelf" label="Twelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594646" start="1281" end="1293" title="lambdaProlog" label="lambdaProlog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067766" start="1461" end="1471" title="SMT solver" label="SMT solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="1474" end="1488" title="term rewriting" label="term rewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254335" start="1505" end="1527" title="cryptographic protocol" label="cryptographic protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1975" end="1983" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="2801" end="2828" title="lambda-term bound variables" label="lambda-term bound variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="2951" end="2968" title="first-order terms" label="first-order terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="3092" end="3104" title="lambda terms" label="lambda terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="3175" end="3184" title="power set" label="formula_9"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="3318" end="3338" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885264" start="3880" end="3891" title="free theory" label="free theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500272" start="3915" end="3926" title="free object" label="free object"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885264" start="3939" end="3951" title="empty theory" label="empty theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509500" start="3989" end="3998" title="sentence (mathematical logic)" label="sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885264" start="4060" end="4082" title="uninterpreted function" label="uninterpreted function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="4136" end="4141" title="term (logic)" label="terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724019" start="4167" end="4179" title="Algebraic specification" label="constructors"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="4356" end="4372" title="alpha equivalent" label="alpha equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="4586" end="4598" title="finite terms" label="finite terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859736" start="4735" end="4748" title="Tree (set theory)" label="infinite tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q207348" start="4979" end="4988" title="semigroup" label="semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="5016" end="5027" title="associative" label="associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="5064" end="5077" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="5108" end="5119" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="5434" end="5451" title="identity function" label="identity function"/>
<link wikidata="Q746264" start="5490" end="5507" title="constant function" label="constant function"/>
<link wikidata="Q379695" start="5960" end="5976" title="postfix notation" label="postfix notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="6709" end="6720" title="Commutative property" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="7461" end="7471" title="idempotent" label="idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="8603" end="8614" title="associative" label="associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="10665" end="10674" title="Singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q448086" start="12436" end="12452" title="Jacques Herbrand" label="Jacques Herbrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q327981" start="12594" end="12612" title="John Alan Robinson" label="John Alan Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195339" start="13142" end="13145" title="directed acyclic graph" label="DAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="13314" end="13329" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="13633" end="13639" title="Object (computer science)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15443" end="15473" title="#Unification of infinite terms" label="#Unification of infinite terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="16372" end="16393" title="lexicographical order" label="lexicographical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162250" start="16445" end="16458" title="Conor McBride" label="Conor McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q997433" start="16545" end="16562" title="dependently typed" label="dependently typed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382927" start="16580" end="16587" title="Epigram (programming language)" label="Epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q609057" start="16589" end="16626" title="Robinson&amp;#x27;s unification algorithm" label="Robinson&amp;#x27;s unification algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932759" start="16639" end="16675" title="recursive on the number of variables" label="recursive on the number of variables"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17245" end="17249" title="Term (logic)#Operations with terms" label="size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195339" start="17450" end="17472" title="directed acyclic graph" label="directed acyclic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="17612" end="17629" title="logic programming" label="logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051925" start="17686" end="17696" title="Resolution (logic)" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="17761" end="17767" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="17974" end="17982" title="variable (programming)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="18119" end="18136" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664622" start="18225" end="18237" title="occurs check" label="occurs check"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315869" start="18389" end="18396" title="arities" label="arities"/>
<link wikidata="Q586459" start="18883" end="18897" title="Type inference" label="Type inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q200996" start="18958" end="18972" title="Hindley–Milner type system" label="Hindley-Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="19030" end="19037" title="Haskell (programming language)" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q860654" start="19042" end="19044" title="ML (programming language)" label="ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303607" start="20175" end="20193" title="Order-sorted logic" label="Order-sorted logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240252" start="21190" end="21226" title="overloading in programming languages" label="overloading in programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004969" start="21229" end="21236" title="Christoph Walther" label="Walther"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135231" start="22034" end="22057" title="parametric polymorphism" label="parametric polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22286" end="22298" title="Template (C++)#Function templates" label="C++ template"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="23161" end="23170" title="equations" label="equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q842346" start="23286" end="23296" title="equalities" label="equalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="23355" end="23365" title="algorithms" label="algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="23545" end="23553" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q609057" start="23593" end="23614" title="syntactic unification" label="syntactic unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="23691" end="23702" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="24132" end="24146" title="semi-decidable" label="semi-decidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634401" start="24487" end="24499" title="Boolean ring" label="Boolean ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="24503" end="24516" title="Abelian group" label="Abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24604" end="24606" title="Kripke semantics#Correspondence and completeness" label="K4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888003" start="24607" end="24620" title="modal algebra" label="modal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="24712" end="24728" title="Commutative ring" label="Commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136420" start="24776" end="24808" title="convergent term rewriting system" label="convergent term rewriting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="26583" end="26601" title="congruence closure" label="congruence closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136420" start="28760" end="28792" title="convergent term rewriting system" label="convergent term rewriting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q609057" start="29092" end="29114" title="syntactically unifying" label="syntactically unifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="29279" end="29291" title="renamed copy" label="renamed copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="29395" end="29402" title="subterm" label="subterm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29451" end="29454" title="#Syntactic unification of first-order terms" label="mgu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29557" end="29565" title="Term (logic)#Operations with terms" label="replaced"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30060" end="30065" title="#One-sided paramodulation" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="31025" end="31036" title="Undecidable problem" label="undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q974366" start="32216" end="32227" title="Gérard Huet" label="Gérard Huet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="32235" end="32249" title="semi-decidable" label="semi-decidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594646" start="32900" end="32907" title="λProlog" label="λProlog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666857" start="32912" end="32917" title="Twelf" label="Twelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q189743" start="33525" end="33548" title="elliptical construction" label="elliptical construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155616" start="33931" end="33943" title="Wayne Snyder" label="Wayne Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="34102" end="34111" title="Rewriting" label="Rewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560157" start="34113" end="34128" title="Admissible rule" label="Admissible rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421271" start="34130" end="34151" title="Explicit substitution" label="Explicit substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="34155" end="34170" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879820" start="34185" end="34201" title="equation solving" label="equation solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961992" start="34203" end="34218" title="Dis-unification (computer science)" label="Dis-unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003866" start="34269" end="34285" title="Anti-unification (computer science)" label="Anti-unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103767" start="34397" end="34416" title="Subsumption lattice" label="Subsumption lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339878" start="34485" end="34503" title="Ontology alignment" label="Ontology alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449061" start="34538" end="34558" title="semantic equivalence" label="semantic equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q92729" start="34610" end="34622" title="Franz Baader" label="Franz Baader"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155616" start="34627" end="34639" title="Wayne Snyder" label="Wayne Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q327981" start="34684" end="34702" title="John Alan Robinson" label="John Alan Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q502611" start="34707" end="34722" title="Andrei Voronkov" label="Andrei Voronkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647318" start="34739" end="34770" title="Handbook of Automated Reasoning" label="Handbook of Automated Reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34834" end="34846" title="Gilles Dowek" label="Gilles Dowek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217799" start="34974" end="34987" title="Tobias Nipkow" label="Tobias Nipkow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35235" end="35250" title="Claude Kirchner (computer scientist)" label="Claude Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209412" start="35419" end="35436" title="Nachum Dershowitz" label="Nachum Dershowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169424" start="35441" end="35462" title="Jean-Pierre Jouannaud" label="Jean-Pierre Jouannaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812791" start="35497" end="35512" title="Jan van Leeuwen" label="Jan van Leeuwen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35526" end="35566" title="Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science" label="Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35714" end="35729" title="Claude Kirchner (computer scientist)" label="Claude Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q974366" start="35782" end="35793" title="Gérard Huet" label="Gérard Huet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35798" end="35812" title="Derek C. Oppen" label="Derek C. Oppen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54434" wikidata="Q124739458" url="?curid=54434" title="The Wizard of Oz (disambiguation)">
<text>The Wizard of Oz is a 1939 American MGM film starring Judy Garland based on the L. Frank Baum novel.

The Wizard of Oz also commonly refers to:

*&quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot;, the 1900 American novel by L. Frank Baum sometimes reprinted as &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; upon which the 1939 film is based
*Wizard of Oz (character), in the Baum novel series and adaptations thereof

The Wizard of Oz may also refer to:

==Adaptations of the novel==
===Film===
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1925 film), an American silent film directed by Larry Semon
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1933 film), a Canadian animated short directed by Ted Eshbaugh
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1982 film), an anime feature film from Japan

===Television and video===
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1950 film), a half-hour television adaptation
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (TV series), a 1990 American animated series

===Musicals and concerts===
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1902 musical), by L. Frank Baum, Paul Tietjens and others
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1942 musical), commissioned by the St. Louis Municipal Opera
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1987 musical), adapted by the Royal Shakespeare Company
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;, a 2004 musical directed by David Fleeshman
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (2011 musical), by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice

===Gaming===
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1985 video game), an illustrated text adventure game
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1993 video game), an SNES game
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz: Beyond the Yellow Brick Road&quot;, a 2008 Nintendo DS game
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (arcade game), a game that awards tokens redeemable for prizes
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;, a slot machine from WMS Gaming
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (pinball), a pinball machine from Jersey Jack gaming

==People nicknamed &quot;Wizard of Oz&quot;==
* Ozzie Smith (born 1954), American baseball player
* Quinten Hann (born 1977), Australian snooker player
* Simon Whitlock (born 1969), Australian darts player
* The reigning champion of the Oz Academy Openweight Championship

==Other uses==
* Wizard of Oz experiment, a type of research experiment
* &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (album), a cast recording of the 2001 Australian production of the stage musical &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;

==See also==
* Wizards of Oz, Australian jazz ensemble with Dale Barlow, Paul Grabowski, Lloyd Swanton, Tony Buck
* &quot;Wizard of Ahhhs&quot;, a 2007 album by Black Kids
* The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="0" end="16" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739458" start="102" end="118" title="The Wizard of Oz (disambiguation)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="152" end="178" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382687" start="314" end="338" title="Wizard of Oz (character)" label="Wizard of Oz (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227320" start="469" end="509" title="The Wizard of Oz (1925 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1925 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775380" start="561" end="601" title="The Wizard of Oz (1933 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1933 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224176" start="656" end="696" title="The Wizard of Oz (1982 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1982 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775383" start="761" end="801" title="The Wizard of Oz (1950 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1950 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775385" start="839" end="879" title="The Wizard of Oz (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990060" start="944" end="987" title="The Wizard of Oz (1902 musical)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1902 musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775381" start="1034" end="1077" title="The Wizard of Oz (1942 musical)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1942 musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775384" start="1127" end="1170" title="The Wizard of Oz (1987 musical)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1987 musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883391" start="1272" end="1287" title="David Fleeshman" label="David Fleeshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990062" start="1290" end="1333" title="The Wizard of Oz (2011 musical)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (2011 musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603193" start="1387" end="1433" title="The Wizard of Oz (1985 video game)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1985 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258851" start="1472" end="1518" title="The Wizard of Oz (1993 video game)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (1993 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1541" end="1587" title="The Wizard of Oz: Beyond the Yellow Brick Road" label="The Wizard of Oz: Beyond the Yellow Brick Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048968" start="1621" end="1663" title="The Wizard of Oz (arcade game)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (arcade game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953073" start="1765" end="1775" title="WMS Gaming" label="WMS Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048971" start="1778" end="1816" title="The Wizard of Oz (pinball)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (pinball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127494" start="1909" end="1920" title="Ozzie Smith" label="Ozzie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937385" start="1961" end="1973" title="Quinten Hann" label="Quinten Hann"/>
<link wikidata="Q952636" start="2015" end="2029" title="Simon Whitlock" label="Simon Whitlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116413" start="2098" end="2132" title="Oz Academy Openweight Championship" label="Oz Academy Openweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499933" start="2151" end="2174" title="Wizard of Oz experiment" label="Wizard of Oz experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739458" start="2208" end="2244" title="The Wizard of Oz (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Wizard of Oz&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q52605259" start="2363" end="2376" title="Wizards of Oz" label="Wizards of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028744" start="2470" end="2485" title="Wizard of Ahhhs" label="Wizard of Ahhhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9198106" start="2522" end="2565" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (disambiguation)" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54436" wikidata="Q130295" url="?curid=54436" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz">
<text>The Wonderful Wizard of Oz is a 1900 children&#x27;s novel written by author L. Frank Baum and illustrated by W. W. Denslow. It is the first novel in the Oz series of books. A Kansas farm girl named Dorothy ends up in the magical Land of Oz after she and her pet dog Toto are swept away from their home by a cyclone. Upon her arrival in the magical world of Oz, she learns she cannot return home until she has destroyed the Wicked Witch of the West.

The book was first published in the United States in May 1900 by the George M. Hill Company. In January 1901, the publishing company completed printing the first edition, a total of 10,000 copies, which quickly sold out. It had sold three million copies by the time it entered the public domain in 1956. It was often reprinted under the title The Wizard of Oz, which is the title of the successful 1902 Broadway musical adaptation as well as the 1939 live-action film.

The ground-breaking success of both the original 1900 novel and the 1902 musical prompted Baum to write thirteen additional Oz books, which serve as official sequels to the first story. Over a century later, the book is one of the best-known stories in American literature, and the Library of Congress has declared the work to be &quot;America&#x27;s greatest and best-loved homegrown fairytale&quot;.

== Publication ==
L. Frank Baum&#x27;s story was published by George M. Hill Company. The first edition had a printing of 10,000 copies and was sold in advance of the publication date of September 1, 1900. On May 17, 1900, the first copy came off the press; Baum assembled it by hand and presented it to his sister, Mary Louise Baum Brewster. The public saw it for the first time at a book fair at the Palmer House in Chicago, July 5–20. Its copyright was registered on August 1; full distribution followed in September. By October 1900, it had already sold out, and the second edition of 15,000 copies was nearly depleted.

In a letter to his brother, Baum wrote that the book&#x27;s publisher, George M. Hill, predicted a sale of about 250,000 copies. In spite of this favorable conjecture, Hill did not initially predict that the book would be phenomenally successful. He agreed to publish the book only when the manager of the Chicago Grand Opera House, Fred R. Hamlin, committed to making it into a musical stage play to publicize the novel.

The play &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; debuted on June 16, 1902. It was revised to suit adult preferences and was crafted as a &quot;musical extravaganza&quot;, with the costumes modeled after Denslow&#x27;s drawings. When Hill&#x27;s publishing company became bankrupt in 1901, the Indianapolis-based Bobbs-Merrill Company resumed publishing the novel. By 1938, more than one million copies of the book had been printed. By 1956, sales had grown to three million copies.

== Plot ==

Dorothy Gale is a young girl who lives with her Aunt Em, Uncle Henry, and dog, Toto, on a farm on the Kansas prairie. One day, Dorothy and Toto are caught up in a &quot;cyclone&quot; (more accurately a tornado) that deposits them and the farmhouse into Munchkin Country in the magical Land of Oz. The falling house has killed the Wicked Witch of the East, the evil ruler of the Munchkins. The Good Witch of the North arrives with three grateful Munchkins and gives Dorothy the magical silver shoes that originally belonged to the Wicked Witch. The Good Witch tells Dorothy that the only way she can return home to Kansas is to follow the yellow brick road to the Emerald City and ask the great and powerful Wizard of Oz to help her. As Dorothy embarks on her journey, the Good Witch of the North kisses her on the forehead, giving her magical protection from harm.

On her way down the yellow brick road, Dorothy attends a banquet held by a Munchkin named Boq. The next day, she frees a Scarecrow from the pole on which he is hanging, applies oil from a can to the rusted joints of a Tin Woodman, and meets a Cowardly Lion. The Scarecrow wants a brain, the Tin Woodman wants a heart, and the Lion wants courage, so Dorothy encourages them to journey with her and Toto to the Emerald City to ask for help from the Wizard.

After several adventures, the travelers arrive at the Emerald City and meet the Guardian of the Gates, who asks them to wear green tinted spectacles to keep their eyes from being blinded by the city&#x27;s brilliance. Each one is called to see the Wizard. He appears to Dorothy as a giant head, to the Scarecrow as a lovely lady, to the Tin Woodman as a terrible beast, and to the Lion as a ball of fire, with the intention of scaring them all. He agrees to help them all if they kill the Wicked Witch of the West, who rules over Winkie Country. The Guardian warns them that no one has ever managed to defeat the Witch of the West.

The Wicked Witch of the West sees the travelers approaching with her one telescopic eye. She sends a pack of wolves to tear them to pieces, but the Tin Woodman kills them with his axe. She sends a flock of wild crows to peck their eyes out, but the Scarecrow kills them by twisting their necks. She summons a swarm of black bees to sting them, but they are killed while trying to sting the Tin Woodman while the Scarecrow&#x27;s straw hides the others. She sends a dozen of her Winkie slaves to attack them, but the Lion stands firm to repel them. Finally, she uses the power of her Golden Cap to send the Winged Monkeys to capture Dorothy, Toto, and the Lion. She cages the Lion, scatters the straw of the Scarecrow, and dents the Tin Woodman. Dorothy is forced to become the witch&#x27;s personal slave, while the Witch schemes to steal her silver shoes&#x27; powerful magic.
The witch successfully tricks Dorothy out of one of her silver shoes. Angered, she throws a bucket of water at the witch and is shocked to see her melt away. The Winkies rejoice at being freed from her tyranny and help restuff the Scarecrow and mend the Tin Woodman. They ask the Tin Woodman to become their ruler, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Dorothy finds the witch&#x27;s Golden Cap and summons the Winged Monkeys to carry her and her friends back to the Emerald City. The King of the Winged Monkeys tells how he and his band are bound by an enchantment to the cap by the sorceress Gayelette from the North, and that Dorothy may use it to summon them two more times.

When Dorothy and her friends meet the Wizard again, Toto tips over a screen in a corner of the throne room that reveals &quot;the Wizard&quot;, who sadly explains he is a humbug—an ordinary old man who, by a hot air balloon, came to Oz long ago from Omaha. He provides the Scarecrow with a head full of bran, pins, and needles (&quot;a lot of bran-new brains&quot;), the Tin Woodman with a silk heart stuffed with sawdust, and the Lion a potion of &quot;courage&quot;. Their faith in his power gives these items a focus for their desires. He decides to take Dorothy and Toto home and then go back to Omaha in his balloon. At the send-off, he appoints the Scarecrow to rule in his stead, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Toto chases a kitten in the crowd and Dorothy goes after him, but the ropes holding the balloon break and the Wizard floats away.

Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys and tells them to carry her and Toto home, but they explain they can&#x27;t cross the desert surrounding Oz. The Soldier with the Green Whiskers informs Dorothy that Glinda, the Good Witch of the South may be able to help her return home, so the travelers begin their journey to see Glinda&#x27;s castle in Quadling Country. On the way, the Lion kills a giant spider who is terrorizing the animals in a forest. They ask him to become their king, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas. Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys a third time to fly them over a hill to Glinda&#x27;s castle.

Glinda greets them and reveals that Dorothy&#x27;s silver shoes can take her anywhere she wishes to go. She embraces her friends, all of whom will be returned to their new kingdoms through Glinda&#x27;s three uses of the Golden Cap: the Scarecrow to the Emerald City, the Tin Woodman to Winkie Country, and the Lion to the forest; after which the cap will be given to the King of the Winged Monkeys, freeing him and his band. Dorothy takes Toto in her arms, knocks her heels together three times, and wishes to return home. Instantly, she begins whirling through the air and rolling on the grass of the Kansas prairie, up to the farmhouse, though the silver shoes fall off her feet en route and are lost in the Deadly Desert. She runs to Aunt Em, saying &quot;I&#x27;m so glad to be home again!&quot;

== Illustrations ==

The book was illustrated by Baum&#x27;s friend and collaborator W. W. Denslow, who also co-held the copyright. The design was lavish for the time, with illustrations on many pages, backgrounds in different colors, and several color plate illustrations. The typeface featured the newly designed Monotype Old Style. In September 1900, The &quot;Grand Rapids Herald&quot; wrote that Denslow&#x27;s illustrations are &quot;quite as much of the story as in the writing&quot;. The editorial opined that had it not been for Denslow&#x27;s pictures, the readers would be unable to picture precisely the figures of Dorothy, Toto, and the other characters.

Denslow&#x27;s illustrations were so well known that merchants of many products obtained permission to use them to promote their wares. The forms of the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, the Cowardly Lion, the Wizard, and Dorothy were made into rubber and metal sculptures. Costume jewelry, mechanical toys, and soap were also designed using their figures. The distinctive look of Denslow&#x27;s illustrations led to imitators at the time, most notably Eva Katherine Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Zauberlinda, the Wise Witch&quot;, which mimicked both the typography and the illustration design of &quot;Oz&quot;.

A new edition of the book appeared in 1944, with illustrations by Evelyn Copelman. Although it was claimed that the new illustrations were based on Denslow&#x27;s originals, they more closely resemble the characters as seen in the famous 1939 film version of Baum&#x27;s book.

== Creative inspiration ==
=== Baum&#x27;s personal life ===

According to Baum&#x27;s son, Harry Neal, the author had often told his children &quot;whimsical stories before they became material for his books&quot;. Harry Baum called his father the &quot;swellest man I knew&quot;, a man who was able to give a decent reason as to why black birds cooked in a pie could afterwards get out and sing.

Many of the characters, props, and ideas in the novel were drawn from Baum&#x27;s personal life and experiences. Baum held different jobs, moved a lot, and was exposed to many people, so the inspiration for the story could have been taken from many different aspects of his life. In the introduction to the story, Baum writes that &quot;it aspires to being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heart-aches and nightmares are left out&quot;.

==== Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman ====
As a child, Baum frequently had nightmares of a scarecrow pursuing him across a field. Moments before the scarecrow&#x27;s &quot;ragged hay fingers&quot; nearly gripped his neck, it would fall apart before his eyes. Decades later, as an adult, Baum integrated his tormentor into the novel as the Scarecrow. In the early 1880s, Baum&#x27;s play &quot;Matches&quot; was being performed when a &quot;flicker from a kerosene lantern sparked the rafters&quot;, causing the Baum opera house to be consumed by flames. Scholar Evan I. Schwartz suggested that this might have inspired the Scarecrow&#x27;s severest terror: &quot;There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of. A lighted match.&quot;

According to Baum&#x27;s son Harry, the Tin Woodman was born from Baum&#x27;s attraction to window displays. He wished to make something captivating for the window displays, so he used an eclectic assortment of scraps to craft a striking figure. From a wash-boiler he made a body, from bolted stovepipes he made arms and legs, and from the bottom of a saucepan he made a face. Baum then placed a funnel hat on the figure, which ultimately became the Tin Woodman.

==== Dorothy, Uncle Henry, and the Witches ====

Baum&#x27;s wife Maud Gage frequently visited their newborn niece, Dorothy Louise Gage, whom she adored as the daughter she never had. The infant became gravely sick and died at the age of five months in Bloomington, Illinois, on November 11, 1898, from &quot;congestion of the brain&quot;. Maud was devastated. To assuage her distress, Baum made his protagonist of &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; a girl named Dorothy, and he dedicated the book to his wife. The baby was buried at Evergreen Cemetery, where her gravestone has a statue of the character Dorothy placed next to it.

Baum&#x27;s mother-in-law, activist Matilda Joslyn Gage, has also been cited as one of the inspirations for Dorothy.

Decades later, Jocelyn Burdick—the daughter of Baum&#x27;s other niece, Magdalena Carpenter, and a former Democratic U.S. Senator from North Dakota—asserted that her mother also partly inspired the character of Dorothy. Burdick claimed that her great-uncle spent &quot;considerable time at the Сarpenter homestead ... and became very attached to Magdalena&quot;. Burdick has reported many similarities between her mother&#x27;s homestead and the farm of Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.

Uncle Henry was modeled after Henry Gage, Baum&#x27;s father-in-law. Bossed around by his wife Matilda, Henry rarely dissented with her. He flourished in business, though, and his neighbors looked up to him. Likewise, Uncle Henry was a &quot;passive but hard-working man&quot; who &quot;looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke&quot;.

The witches in the novel were influenced by witch-hunting research gathered by Matilda Joslyn Gage. The stories of barbarous acts against accused witches scared Baum. Two key events in the novel involve wicked witches who meet their death through metaphorical means. Baum&#x27;s biographers have also drawn correlations between Baum&#x27;s Good Witch and Gage&#x27;s feminist writings.

==== The Emerald City and the Land of Oz ====

In 1890, Baum lived in Aberdeen, South Dakota during a drought, and he wrote a story in his &quot;Our Landlady&quot; column in Aberdeen&#x27;s &quot;The Saturday Pioneer&quot; about a farmer who gave green goggles to his horses, causing them to believe that the wood chips that they were eating were pieces of grass. Similarly, the Wizard made the people in the Emerald City wear green goggles so that they would believe that their city was built from emeralds.

During Baum&#x27;s short stay in Aberdeen, the dissemination of myths about the West continued. However, the West, instead of being a wonderland, turned into a wasteland because of a drought and a depression. In 1891, Baum moved his family from South Dakota to Chicago. At that time, Chicago was getting ready for the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition in 1893. Scholar Laura Barrett stated that Chicago was &quot;considerably more akin to Oz than to Kansas&quot;. After discovering that the myths about the West&#x27;s incalculable riches were baseless, Baum created &quot;an extension of the American frontier in Oz&quot;. In many respects, Baum&#x27;s creation is similar to the actual frontier save for the fact that the West was still undeveloped at the time. The Munchkins Dorothy encounters at the beginning of the novel represent farmers, as do the Winkies she later meets.

Local legend has it that Oz, also known as the Emerald City, was inspired by a prominent castle-like building in the community of Castle Park near Holland, Michigan, where Baum lived during the summer. The yellow brick road was derived from a road at that time paved by yellow bricks, located in Peekskill, New York, where Baum attended the Peekskill Military Academy. Baum scholars often refer to the 1893 Chicago World&#x27;s Fair (the &quot;White City&quot;) as an inspiration for the Emerald City. Other legends suggest that the inspiration came from the Hotel Del Coronado near San Diego, California. Baum was a frequent guest at the hotel and had written several of the Oz books there. In a 1903 interview with &quot;The Publishers&#x27; Weekly&quot;, Baum said that the name &quot;Oz&quot; came from his file cabinet labeled &quot;O–Z&quot;.

Some critics have suggested that Baum&#x27;s Oz may have been inspired by Australia. Australia is often colloquially spelled or referred to as &quot;Oz&quot;. Furthermore, in &quot;Ozma of Oz&quot; (1907), Dorothy gets back to Oz as the result of a storm at sea while she and Uncle Henry are traveling by ship to Australia. Like Australia, Oz is an island continent somewhere to the west of California with inhabited regions bordering on a great desert. Baum perhaps intended Oz to be Australia or a magical land in the center of the great Australian desert.

=== &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; ===
In addition to being influenced by the fairy-tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, Baum was significantly influenced by English writer Lewis Carroll&#x27;s 1865 novel &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;. Although Baum found the plot of Carroll&#x27;s novel to be incoherent, he identified the book&#x27;s source of popularity as Alice herself—a child with whom younger readers could identify, and this influenced Baum&#x27;s choice of Dorothy as his protagonist.

Although influenced by Carroll&#x27;s distinctly English work, Baum nonetheless sought to create a story that had recognizable American elements, such as farming and industrialization. Consequently, Baum combined the conventional features of a fairy tale such as witches and wizards with well-known fixtures in his young readers&#x27; Midwestern lives such as scarecrows and cornfields.

=== Influence of Denslow ===

The original illustrator of the novel, W. W. Denslow, aided in the development of Baum&#x27;s story and greatly influenced the way it has been interpreted. Baum and Denslow had a close working relationship and worked together to create the presentation of the story through the images and the text. Color is an important element of the story and is present throughout the images, with each chapter having a different color representation. Denslow also added characteristics to his drawings that Baum never described. For example, Denslow drew a house and the gates of the Emerald City with faces on them.

In the later &quot;Oz&quot; books, John R. Neill, who illustrated all the sequels, continued to use elements from Denslow&#x27;s earlier illustrations, including faces on the Emerald City&#x27;s gates. Another aspect is the Tin Woodman&#x27;s funnel hat, which is not mentioned in the text until later books but appears in most artists&#x27; interpretation of the character, including the stage and film productions of 1902–1909, 1908, 1910, 1914, 1925, 1931, 1933, 1939, 1982, 1985, 1988, 1992, and others. One of the earliest illustrators not to include a funnel hat was Russell H. Schulz in the 1957 Whitman Publishing edition—Schulz depicted him wearing a pot on his head. Libico Maraja&#x27;s illustrations, which first appeared in a 1957 Italian edition and have also appeared in English-language and other editions, are well known for depicting him bareheaded.

== Critical response ==
&quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; received positive critical reviews upon release. In a September 1900 review, &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised the novel, writing that it would appeal to child readers and to younger children who could not read yet. The review also praised the illustrations for being a pleasant complement to the text.

During the subsequent decades after the novel&#x27;s publication in 1900, it received little critical analysis from scholars of children&#x27;s literature. Lists of suggested reading published for juvenile readers never contained Baum&#x27;s work, and his works were rarely assigned in classrooms. This lack of interest stemmed from the scholars&#x27; misgivings about fantasy, as well as to their belief that lengthy series had little literary merit.

It frequently came under fire in later decades. In 1957, the director of Detroit&#x27;s libraries banned &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; for having &quot;no value&quot; for children of today, for supporting &quot;negativism&quot;, and for bringing children&#x27;s minds to a &quot;cowardly level&quot;. Professor Russel B. Nye of Michigan State University countered that &quot;if the message of the Oz books—love, kindness, and unselfishness make the world a better place—seems of no value today&quot;, then maybe the time is ripe for &quot;reassess[ing] a good many other things besides the Detroit library&#x27;s approved list of children&#x27;s books&quot;.

In 1986, seven Fundamentalist Christian families in Tennessee opposed the novel&#x27;s inclusion in the public school syllabus and filed a lawsuit. They based their opposition to the novel on its depicting benevolent witches and promoting the belief that integral human attributes were &quot;individually developed rather than God-given&quot;. One parent said: &quot;I do not want my children seduced into godless supernaturalism.&quot; Other reasons included the novel&#x27;s teaching that females are equal to males and that animals are personified and can speak. The judge ruled that when the novel was being discussed in class, the parents were allowed to have their children leave the classroom.

In April 2000, the Library of Congress declared &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; to be &quot;America&#x27;s greatest and best-loved homegrown fairytale&quot;, also naming it the first American fantasy for children and one of the most-read children&#x27;s books. Leonard Everett Fisher of &quot;The Horn Book Magazine&quot; wrote in 2000 that &quot;Oz&quot; has &quot;a timeless message from a less complex era, and it continues to resonate&quot;. The challenge of valuing oneself during impending adversity has not, Fisher noted, lessened during the prior 100 years. Two years later, in a 2002 review, Bill Delaney of &quot;Salem Press&quot; praised Baum for giving children the opportunity to discover magic in the mundane things in their everyday lives. He further commended Baum for teaching &quot;millions of children to love reading during their crucial formative years&quot;. In 2012 it was ranked number 41 on a list of the top 100 children&#x27;s novels published by &quot;School Library Journal&quot;.

== Editions ==

After George M. Hill&#x27;s bankruptcy in 1902, copyright in the book passed to the Bowen-Merrill Company of Indianapolis, which published most of Baum&#x27;s other books from 1901 to 1903, both reprints (&quot;Father Goose, His Book&quot;, &quot;The Magical Monarch of Mo&quot;, &quot;American Fairy Tales&quot;, &quot;Dot and Tot of Merryland&quot;) and new works (&quot;The Master Key&quot;, &quot;The Army Alphabet&quot;, &quot;The Navy Alphabet&quot;, &quot;The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus&quot;, &quot;The Enchanted Island of Yew&quot;, &quot;The Songs of Father Goose&quot;). Bowen-Merrill&#x27;s 1903 edition initially had the title &quot;The New Wizard of Oz&quot;, to distinguish it from the 1902 musical, which was by then better known than the original book and had a very different story. The word &quot;New&quot; was quickly dropped in subsequent printings, leaving the now-familiar shortened title, &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;, and some minor textual changes were added, such as to &quot;yellow daises&quot;, and changing a chapter title from &quot;The Rescue&quot; to &quot;How the Four Were Reunited&quot;. The editions they published lacked most of the in-text color and color plates of the original. Many cost-cutting measures were implemented, including removal of some of the color printing without replacing it with black, printing nothing rather than the beard of the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.

When Baum filed for bankruptcy after his critically and popularly successful film and stage production &quot;The Fairylogue and Radio-Plays&quot; failed to make back its production costs, Baum lost the rights to all of the books published by what was now called Bobbs-Merrill, and they were licensed to the M. A. Donahue Company, which printed them in significantly cheaper &quot;blotting paper&quot; editions with advertising that directly competed with Baum&#x27;s more recent books, published by the Reilly &amp; Britton Company, from which he was making his living, explicitly hurting sales of &quot;The Patchwork Girl of Oz&quot;, the new Oz book for 1913, to boost sales of &quot;Wizard&quot;, which Donahue called in a full-page ad in &quot;The Publishers&#x27; Weekly&quot; (June 28, 1913), Baum&#x27;s &quot;one pre-eminently great Juvenile Book&quot;. In a letter to Baum dated December 31, 1914, F. K. Reilly lamented that the average buyer employed by a retail store would not understand why he should be expected to spend 75 cents for a copy of &quot;Tik-Tok of Oz&quot; when he could buy a copy of &quot;Wizard&quot; for between 33 and 36 cents. Baum had previously written a letter complaining about the Donahue deal, which he did not know about until it was fait accompli, and one of the investors who held &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; rights had inquired why the royalty was only five or six cents per copy, depending on quantity sold, which made no sense to Baum.

A new edition from Bobbs-Merrill in 1949 illustrated by Evelyn Copelman, again titled &quot;The New Wizard of Oz&quot;, paid lip service to Denslow but was based strongly, apart from the Lion, on the MGM movie. Copelman had illustrated a new edition of &quot;The Magical Monarch of Mo&quot; two years earlier.

It was not until the book entered the public domain in 1956 that new editions, either with the original color plates, or new illustrations, proliferated. A revised version of Copelman&#x27;s artwork was published in a Grosset &amp; Dunlap edition, and Reilly &amp; Lee (formerly Reilly &amp; Britton) published an edition in line with the Oz sequels, which had previously treated &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot; as the first Oz book, not having the publication rights to &quot;Wizard&quot;, with new illustrations by Dale Ulrey. Ulrey had previously illustrated Jack Snow&#x27;s &quot;Jaglon and the Tiger-Faries&quot;, an expansion of a Baum short story &quot;The Story of Jaglon&quot;, and a 1955 edition of &quot;The Tin Woodman of Oz&quot;, though both sold poorly. Later Reilly &amp; Lee editions used Denslow&#x27;s original illustrations.

Notable more recent editions are the 1986 Pennyroyal edition illustrated by Barry Moser, which was reprinted by the University of California Press, and the 2000 &quot;The Annotated Wizard of Oz&quot; edited by Michael Patrick Hearn (heavily revised from a 1972 edition that was printed in a wide format that allowed for it to be a facsimile of the original edition with notes and additional illustrations at the sides), which was published by W. W. Norton and included all the original color illustrations, as well as supplemental artwork by Denslow. Other centennial editions included University Press of Kansas&#x27;s &quot;Kansas Centennial Edition&quot;, illustrated by Michael McCurdy with black-and-white illustrations, and Robert Sabuda&#x27;s pop-up book.

== Sequels ==
Baum wrote &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; without any thought of a sequel. After reading the novel, thousands of children wrote letters to him, requesting that he craft another story about Oz. In 1904, amid financial difficulties, Baum wrote and published the first sequel, &quot;The Marvelous Land of Oz&quot;, declaring that he grudgingly wrote the sequel to address the popular demand. He dedicated the book to stage actors Fred Stone and David C. Montgomery who played the characters of the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman on stage. Baum wrote large roles for the Scarecrow and Tin Woodman that he deleted from the stage version, &quot;The Woggle-Bug&quot;, after Montgomery and Stone had balked at leaving a successful show to do a sequel.

Baum later wrote sequels in 1907, 1908, and 1909. In his 1910 &quot;The Emerald City of Oz&quot;, he wrote that he could not continue writing sequels because Ozland had lost contact with the rest of the world. The children refused to accept this story, so Baum, in 1913 and every year thereafter until his death in May 1919, wrote an &quot;Oz&quot; book, ultimately writing 13 sequels and half a dozen Oz short stories.

Baum explained the purpose of his novels in a note he penned to his sister, Mary Louise Brewster, in a copy of &quot;Mother Goose in Prose&quot; (1897), his first book. He wrote: &quot;To please a child is a sweet and a lovely thing that warms one&#x27;s heart and brings its own reward.&quot; After Baum&#x27;s death in 1919, Baum&#x27;s publishers delegated the creation of more sequels to Ruth Plumly Thompson who wrote 21. An original &quot;Oz&quot; book was published every Christmas between 1913 and 1942. By 1956, five million copies of the &quot;Oz&quot; books had been published in the English language, while hundreds of thousands had been published in eight foreign languages.

== Adaptations ==
&quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; has been adapted to other media numerous times. Within several decades after its publication, the book had inspired a number of stage and screen adaptations, including a profitable 1902 Broadway musical and three silent films. The most popular cinematic adaptation of the story is &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;, the 1939 film starring Judy Garland, Ray Bolger, Jack Haley, and Bert Lahr. The 1939 film was considered innovative because of its special effects and revolutionary use of Technicolor.

The story has been translated into other languages (at least once without permission, resulting in Alexander Volkov&#x27;s &quot;The Wizard of the Emerald City&quot; novel and its sequels, which were translated into English by Sergei Sukhinov) and adapted into comics several times. Following the lapse of the original copyright, the characters have been adapted and reused in spin-offs, unofficial sequels, and reinterpretations, some of which have been controversial in their treatment of Baum&#x27;s characters.

== Influence and legacy ==
&quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; has become an established part of multiple cultures, spreading from its early young American readership to becoming known throughout the world. It has been translated or adapted into nearly every major language, at times being modified in local variations. For instance, in some abridged Indian editions, the Tin Woodman was replaced with a horse. In Russia, a translation by Alexander Melentyevich Volkov produced six books, &quot;The Wizard of the Emerald City&quot; series, which became progressively distanced from the Baum version, as Ellie and her dog Totoshka travel throughout the Magic Land. The 1939 film adaptation has become a classic of popular culture, shown annually on American television from 1959 to 1998 and then several times a year every year beginning in 1999.

In 1974, the story was re-envisioned as &quot;The Wiz&quot;, a Tony Award winning musical featuring an all-Black cast and set in the context of modern African-American culture. This musical was adapted in 1978 as the feature film &quot;The Wiz&quot;, a musical adventure fantasy produced by Universal Pictures and Motown Productions.

There were several Hebrew translations published in Israel. As established in the first translation and kept in later ones, the book&#x27;s &quot;Land of Oz&quot; was rendered in Hebrew as &quot;Eretz Uz&quot; (ארץ עוץ)—i.e. the same as the original Hebrew name of the Biblical &quot;Land of Uz&quot;, homeland of Job. Thus, for Hebrew readers, this translators&#x27; choice added a layer of Biblical connotations absent from the English original.

In 2018, &quot;The Lost Art of Oz&quot; project was initiated to locate and catalogue the surviving original artwork John R. Neill, W. W. Denslow, Frank Kramer, Richard &quot;Dirk&quot; Gringhuis, and Dick Martin that was created to illustrate the &quot;Oz&quot; book series. In 2020, an Esperanto translation of the novel was used by a team of scientists to demonstrate a new method for encoding text in DNA that remains readable after repeated copying.

== Allegorical analysis ==
This book also seems to follow Joseph Campbell&#x27;s a &quot;Hero with a thousand faces&quot;/&quot;monomyth&quot; theme. &quot;To see The Wonderful Wizard of Oz simply as Dorothy&#x27;s quest for a way to return to Kansas is to miss many of the sources of the books&#x27; strength, for like most quest heroes, Dorothy achieves far more than simply finding her way home.&quot; &quot;&quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; follows the course of the hero&#x27;s journey in the structure of &#x27;Departure&#x27;, &#x27;Initiation&#x27;, and &#x27;Return&#x27; which Campbell describes in &quot;The Hero with a Thousand Faces&quot;.

=== Allusions to 19th-century America ===
Many decades after its publication, Baum&#x27;s work gave rise to a number of political interpretations, particularly in regards to the 19th-century Populist movement in the United States. In a 1964 &quot;American Quarterly&quot; article titled &quot;The Wizard of Oz: Parable on Populism&quot;, educator Henry Littlefield posited that the book served an allegory for the late 19th-century bimetallism debate regarding monetary policy. Littlefield&#x27;s thesis achieved some support but was widely criticized by others. Other political interpretations soon followed. In 1971, historian Richard J. Jensen theorized in &quot;The Winning of the Midwest&quot; that &quot;Oz&quot; was derived from the common abbreviation for &quot;ounce&quot;, used for denoting quantities of gold and silver.

== See also ==

* 1900 in literature
* &quot;The Baum Bugle&quot;
* &quot;Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz&quot;
* Wizard of Oz Club
* &quot;Tin Man&quot; (miniseries)
* &quot;Wicked&quot;
* &quot;Lost in Oz (TV series)&quot;
* &quot;The Wiz&quot;

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Text:
** 
** &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; (1900 illustrated copy), Publisher&#x27;s green and red illustrated cloth over boards; illustrated endpapers. Plate detached. Public Domain – Charles E. Young Research Library, UCLA. at Internet Archive
** Online version of the 1900 first edition on the Library of Congress website.
* Audio:
** , an unabridged dramatic audio performance at Wired for Books.
* A Long and Dangerous Journey – A History of &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; on the Silver Screen – Scream-It-Loud.com
* &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz Full Story&quot;, a faithful animated narration by Little Fox.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="37" end="58" title="children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s novel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77" end="90" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110" end="123" title="W. W. Denslow" label="W. W. Denslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167095" start="154" end="172" title="List of Oz books" label="Oz series of books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="176" end="182" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583524" start="199" end="206" title="Dorothy Gale" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="230" end="240" title="Land of Oz" label="Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293194" start="267" end="271" title="Toto (Oz)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="308" end="315" title="tornado" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822980" start="424" end="448" title="Wicked Witch of the West" label="Wicked Witch of the West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="520" end="542" title="George M. Hill Company" label="George M. Hill Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="732" end="745" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990060" start="849" end="881" title="The Wizard of Oz (1902 musical)" label="1902 Broadway musical adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="897" end="918" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="1939 live-action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167095" start="1045" end="1053" title="List of Oz books" label="Oz books"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1203" end="1222" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="1342" end="1355" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1386" end="1408" title="George M. Hill Company" label="George M. Hill Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755965" start="1722" end="1738" title="the Palmer House Hilton" label="the Palmer House"/>
<link wikidata="Q120434696" start="2255" end="2280" title="Grand Opera House (Chicago)" label="Chicago Grand Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990060" start="2387" end="2403" title="The Wizard of Oz (1902 musical)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934692" start="2673" end="2694" title="Bobbs-Merrill Company" label="Bobbs-Merrill Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583524" start="2856" end="2868" title="Dorothy Gale" label="Dorothy Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024385" start="2904" end="2911" title="Aunt Em" label="Aunt Em"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024504" start="2913" end="2924" title="Uncle Henry (Oz)" label="Uncle Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293194" start="2935" end="2939" title="Toto (Oz)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="2958" end="2964" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="3058" end="3065" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890315" start="3109" end="3125" title="Munchkin Country" label="Munchkin Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="3141" end="3151" title="Land of Oz" label="Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822977" start="3186" end="3210" title="Wicked Witch of the East" label="Wicked Witch of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018058" start="3234" end="3242" title="Munchkin" label="Munchkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821514" start="3249" end="3272" title="Good Witch of the North (Baum)" label="Good Witch of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516312" start="3341" end="3353" title="Silver Shoes" label="silver shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444039" start="3494" end="3511" title="yellow brick road" label="yellow brick road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961610" start="3519" end="3531" title="Emerald City" label="Emerald City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382687" start="3563" end="3575" title="Wizard of Oz (character)" label="Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168555" start="3812" end="3815" title="Boq" label="Boq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835867" start="3843" end="3852" title="Scarecrow (Oz)" label="Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168555" start="3940" end="3951" title="Tin Woodman" label="Tin Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542307" start="3965" end="3978" title="Cowardly Lion" label="Cowardly Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335227" start="4258" end="4279" title="Guardian of the Gates" label="Guardian of the Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822980" start="4667" end="4691" title="Wicked Witch of the West" label="Wicked Witch of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025463" start="4708" end="4722" title="Winkie Country" label="Winkie Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025179" start="5417" end="5431" title="Winged Monkeys" label="Winged Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6307" end="6316" title="List of Oz characters (created by Baum)#Gayelette" label="Gayelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="6643" end="6648" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557349" start="7421" end="7452" title="Soldier with the Green Whiskers" label="Soldier with the Green Whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292767" start="7474" end="7509" title="Glinda the Good Witch" label="Glinda, the Good Witch of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="7615" end="7631" title="Quadling Country" label="Quadling Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245615" start="8625" end="8638" title="Deadly Desert" label="Deadly Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364808" start="8801" end="8814" title="W. W. Denslow" label="W. W. Denslow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9031" end="9049" title="Bookman (typeface)#Monotype version" label="Monotype Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="10222" end="10239" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="1939 film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671246" start="10354" end="10364" title="Harry Neal Baum" label="Harry Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278172" start="10597" end="10624" title="Sing a Song of Sixpence" label="black birds cooked in a pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792223" start="12411" end="12420" title="Maud Gage Baum" label="Maud Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q577802" start="12598" end="12619" title="Bloomington, Illinois" label="Bloomington, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q132156630" start="12654" end="12677" title="congestion of the brain" label="congestion of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417178" start="12883" end="12901" title="Evergreen Cemetery (Bloomington, Illinois)" label="Evergreen Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119366" start="13018" end="13037" title="Matilda Joslyn Gage" label="Matilda Joslyn Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q453920" start="13115" end="13130" title="Jocelyn Burdick" label="Jocelyn Burdick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="13206" end="13216" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="13217" end="13229" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="13235" end="13247" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024504" start="13580" end="13591" title="Uncle Henry (Oz)" label="Uncle Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119366" start="13675" end="13682" title="Matilda Joslyn Gage" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13961" end="13974" title="Witch-hunt#Early Modern Europe and Colonial America" label="witch-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292767" start="14257" end="14267" title="Glinda" label="Good Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q236713" start="14374" end="14396" title="Aberdeen, South Dakota" label="Aberdeen, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="15132" end="15165" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001742" start="15843" end="15860" title="Holland, Michigan" label="Holland, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="15992" end="16011" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160183" start="16037" end="16063" title="Peekskill Military Academy" label="Peekskill Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631096" start="16255" end="16273" title="Hotel Del Coronado" label="Hotel Del Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="16419" end="16446" title="The Publishers&amp;#x27; Weekly" label="The Publishers&amp;#x27; Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="17222" end="17236" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="17241" end="17264" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="17318" end="17331" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="17356" end="17393" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269082" start="17526" end="17531" title="Alice (Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="17905" end="17915" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="17924" end="17929" title="witch" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="17936" end="17943" title="wizard (fantasy)" label="wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990797" start="18021" end="18030" title="scarecrow" label="scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="18036" end="18045" title="Maize" label="cornfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364808" start="18118" end="18131" title="W. W. Denslow" label="W. W. Denslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45111" start="18720" end="18733" title="John R. Neill" label="John R. Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996621" start="19288" end="19306" title="Whitman Publishing" label="Whitman Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19700" end="19718" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20699" end="20712" title="Russel B. Nye" label="Russel B. Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="20716" end="20741" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="21063" end="21087" title="Fundamentalist Christian" label="Fundamentalist Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="21769" end="21788" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q652547" start="22050" end="22072" title="The Horn Book Magazine" label="The Horn Book Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143675" start="22737" end="22759" title="School Library Journal" label="School Library Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934692" start="22868" end="22889" title="Bobbs-Merrill Company" label="Bowen-Merrill Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="22893" end="22905" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437600" start="22995" end="23017" title="Father Goose, His Book" label="Father Goose, His Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749512" start="23031" end="23056" title="The Magical Monarch of Mo" label="The Magical Monarch of Mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743720" start="23070" end="23090" title="American Fairy Tales" label="American Fairy Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299399" start="23104" end="23128" title="Dot and Tot of Merryland" label="Dot and Tot of Merryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750594" start="23157" end="23171" title="The Master Key (Baum novel)" label="The Master Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180222" start="23247" end="23285" title="The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus" label="The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032608" start="23299" end="23326" title="The Enchanted Island of Yew" label="The Enchanted Island of Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990060" start="23489" end="23505" title="The Wizard of Oz (1902 musical)" label="the 1902 musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557349" start="24183" end="24214" title="Soldier with the Green Whiskers" label="Soldier with the Green Whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986977" start="24326" end="24356" title="The Fairylogue and Radio-Plays" label="The Fairylogue and Radio-Plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310162" start="24720" end="24740" title="Reilly &amp;amp; Britton" label="Reilly &amp;amp; Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q615227" start="24821" end="24845" title="The Patchwork Girl of Oz" label="The Patchwork Girl of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="24965" end="24992" title="The Publishers&amp;#x27; Weekly" label="The Publishers&amp;#x27; Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q829492" start="25163" end="25168" title="buyer" label="buyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801858" start="25281" end="25294" title="Tik-Tok of Oz" label="Tik-Tok of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="26229" end="26249" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659447" start="26397" end="26421" title="The Marvelous Land of Oz" label="The Marvelous Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157322" start="26578" end="26587" title="Jack Snow (writer)" label="Jack Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764801" start="26677" end="26696" title="Animal Fairy Tales" label="The Story of Jaglon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769442" start="26732" end="26753" title="The Tin Woodman of Oz" label="The Tin Woodman of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864543" start="26939" end="26950" title="Barry Moser" label="Barry Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="26979" end="27009" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833404" start="27073" end="27094" title="Michael Patrick Hearn" label="Michael Patrick Hearn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27306" end="27318" title="W. W. Norton" label="W. W. Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364808" start="27405" end="27412" title="Denslow" label="Denslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894894" start="27449" end="27475" title="University Press of Kansas" label="University Press of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832654" start="27537" end="27552" title="Michael McCurdy" label="Michael McCurdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327102" start="27593" end="27606" title="Robert Sabuda" label="Robert Sabuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q759769" start="27614" end="27625" title="pop-up book" label="pop-up book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659447" start="27930" end="27954" title="The Marvelous Land of Oz" label="The Marvelous Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q373738" start="28077" end="28087" title="Fred Stone" label="Fred Stone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28092" end="28111" title="David C. Montgomery" label="David C. Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775406" start="28288" end="28302" title="The Woggle-Bug (musical)" label="The Woggle-Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250366" start="28462" end="28484" title="The Emerald City of Oz" label="The Emerald City of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917355" start="28932" end="28953" title="Mother Goose in Prose" label="Mother Goose in Prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q449234" start="29207" end="29227" title="Ruth Plumly Thompson" label="Ruth Plumly Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990060" start="29742" end="29763" title="The Wizard of Oz (1902 stage play)" label="1902 Broadway musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="29848" end="29864" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="29895" end="29907" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q240886" start="29909" end="29919" title="Ray Bolger" label="Ray Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q927057" start="29921" end="29931" title="Jack Haley" label="Jack Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q827411" start="29937" end="29946" title="Bert Lahr" label="Bert Lahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="30003" end="30018" title="special effects" label="special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="30044" end="30055" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358834" start="30157" end="30173" title="Alexander Volkov (writer)" label="Alexander Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198166" start="30187" end="30217" title="The Wizard of the Emerald City" label="The Wizard of the Emerald City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358834" start="31016" end="31045" title="Alexander Melentyevich Volkov" label="Alexander Melentyevich Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198166" start="31072" end="31102" title="The Wizard of the Emerald City" label="The Wizard of the Emerald City"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="31245" end="31265" title="The Wizard of Oz" label="1939 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855727" start="31470" end="31477" title="The Wiz" label="The Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="31487" end="31497" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007177" start="31575" end="31599" title="African-American culture" label="African-American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q428158" start="31660" end="31667" title="The Wiz (film)" label="The Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="31715" end="31733" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244676" start="31738" end="31756" title="Motown Productions" label="Motown Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="31778" end="31784" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="31811" end="31817" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918164" start="31905" end="31915" title="Land of Oz" label="Land of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967878" start="32043" end="32053" title="Land of Uz" label="Land of Uz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="32073" end="32076" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364808" start="32340" end="32353" title="W. W. Denslow" label="W. W. Denslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="32496" end="32505" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="32613" end="32616" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q295516" start="32722" end="32737" title="Joseph Campbell" label="Joseph Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q176734" start="32753" end="32779" title="The Hero with a Thousand Faces" label="Hero with a thousand faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542815" start="32792" end="32800" title="Hero&amp;#x27;s journey" label="monomyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="33491" end="33521" title="Populist movement (United States, 19th Century)" label="19th-century Populist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744777" start="33560" end="33578" title="American Quarterly" label="American Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724973" start="33660" end="33677" title="Henry Littlefield" label="Henry Littlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="33745" end="33756" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921979" start="33942" end="33959" title="Richard J. Jensen" label="Richard J. Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345276" start="34164" end="34182" title="1900 in literature" label="1900 in literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715920" start="34191" end="34205" title="The Baum Bugle" label="The Baum Bugle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098215" start="34220" end="34248" title="Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz" label="Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153327" start="34257" end="34274" title="International Wizard of Oz Club" label="Wizard of Oz Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968020" start="34277" end="34309" title="Tin Man (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Tin Man&amp;quot; (miniseries)"/>
<link wikidata="Q616439" start="34318" end="34324" title="Wicked (musical)" label="Wicked"/>
<link wikidata="Q59575446" start="34339" end="34361" title="Lost in Oz (TV series)" label="Lost in Oz (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855727" start="34376" end="34383" title="The Wiz" label="The Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="34782" end="34786" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="34791" end="34807" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="34859" end="34878" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026789" start="34946" end="34961" title="Wired for Books" label="Wired for Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54439" wikidata="Q657193" url="?curid=54439" title="Metabolic syndrome">
<text>Metabolic syndrome is a clustering of at least three of the following five medical conditions: abdominal obesity, high blood pressure, high blood sugar, high serum triglycerides, and low serum high-density lipoprotein (HDL).

Metabolic syndrome is associated with the risk of developing cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. In the U.S., about 25% of the adult population has metabolic syndrome, a proportion increasing with age, particularly among racial and ethnic minorities.

Insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and prediabetes are closely related to one another and have overlapping aspects. The syndrome is thought to be caused by an underlying disorder of energy utilization and storage, but the cause of the syndrome is an area of ongoing medical research. Researchers debate whether a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome implies differential treatment or increases risk of cardiovascular disease beyond what is suggested by the sum of its individual components.

== Signs and symptoms ==
The key sign of metabolic syndrome is central obesity, also known as visceral, male-pattern or apple-shaped adiposity. It is characterized by adipose tissue accumulation predominantly around the waist and trunk. Other signs of metabolic syndrome include high blood pressure, decreased fasting serum HDL cholesterol, elevated fasting serum triglyceride level, impaired fasting glucose, insulin resistance, or prediabetes. Associated conditions include hyperuricemia; fatty liver (especially in concurrent obesity) progressing to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; polycystic ovarian syndrome in women and erectile dysfunction in men; and acanthosis nigricans.

=== Neck circumference ===
Neck circumference has been used as a surrogate simple and reliable index to indicate upper-body subcutaneous fat accumulation. Neck circumference of more than for men and more than for women are considered high-risk for metabolic syndrome. Persons with large neck circumferences have a more-than-double risk of metabolic syndrome. In adults with overweight/obesity, clinically significant weight loss may protect against COVID-19 and neck circumference has been associated with the risk of being mechanically ventilated in COVID-19 patients, with a 26% increased risk for each centimeter increase in neck circumference. Moreover, hospitalized COVID-19 patients with a &quot;large neck phenotype&quot; on admission had a more than double risk of death.

=== Complications ===
Metabolic syndrome can lead to several serious and chronic complications, including type-2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, stroke, kidney disease and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Furthermore, metabolic syndrome is associated with a significantly increased risk of surgical complications across most types of surgery in a 2023 systematic review and meta-analysis of over 13 million individuals.

==Causes==
The mechanisms of the complex pathways of metabolic syndrome are under investigation. The pathophysiology is very complex and has been only partially elucidated. Most people affected by the condition are older, obese, sedentary, and have a degree of insulin resistance. Stress can also be a contributing factor. The most important risk factors are diet (particularly sugar-sweetened beverage consumption), genetics, aging, sedentary behavior or low physical activity, disrupted chronobiology/sleep, mood disorders/psychotropic medication use, and excessive alcohol use. The pathogenic role played in the syndrome by the excessive expansion of adipose tissue occurring under sustained overeating, and its resulting lipotoxicity was reviewed by Vidal-Puig.

Recent studies have highlighted the global prevalence of metabolic syndrome, driven by the rise in obesity and type 2 diabetes. The World Health Organization (WHO) and other major health organizations define metabolic syndrome with criteria that include central obesity, insulin resistance, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. As of 2015, metabolic syndrome affects approximately 25% of the global population, with rates significantly higher in urban areas due to increased consumption of high-calorie, low-nutrient diets and decreased physical activity. This condition is associated with a threefold increase in the risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, accounting for a substantial burden of non-communicable diseases globally (Saklayen, 2018).

There is debate regarding whether obesity or insulin resistance is the cause of the metabolic syndrome or if they are consequences of a more far-reaching metabolic derangement. Markers of systemic inflammation, including C-reactive protein, are often increased, as are fibrinogen, interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and others. Some have pointed to a variety of causes, including increased uric acid levels caused by dietary fructose.

Research shows that Western diet habits are a factor in the development of metabolic syndrome, with high consumption of food that is not biochemically suited to humans. Weight gain is associated with metabolic syndrome. Rather than total adiposity, the core clinical component of the syndrome is visceral and/or ectopic fat (i.e., fat in organs not designed for fat storage) whereas the principal metabolic abnormality is insulin resistance. The continuous provision of energy via dietary carbohydrate, lipid, and protein fuels, unmatched by physical activity/energy demand, creates a backlog of the products of mitochondrial oxidation, a process associated with progressive mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance.

===Stress===
Recent research indicates prolonged chronic stress can contribute to metabolic syndrome by disrupting the hormonal balance of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA-axis). A dysfunctional HPA-axis causes high cortisol levels to circulate, which results in raising glucose and insulin levels, which in turn cause insulin-mediated effects on adipose tissue, ultimately promoting visceral adiposity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia and hypertension, with direct effects on the bone, causing &quot;low turnover&quot; osteoporosis. HPA-axis dysfunction may explain the reported risk indication of abdominal obesity to cardiovascular disease (CVD), type 2 diabetes and stroke. Psychosocial stress is also linked to heart disease.

===Obesity===
Central obesity is a key feature of the syndrome, as both a sign and a cause, in that the increasing adiposity often reflected in high waist circumference may both result from and contribute to insulin resistance. However, despite the importance of obesity, affected people who are of normal weight may also be insulin-resistant and have the syndrome.

===Sedentary lifestyle===
Physical inactivity is a predictor of CVD events and related mortality. Many components of metabolic syndrome are associated with a sedentary lifestyle, including increased adipose tissue (predominantly central); reduced HDL cholesterol; and a trend toward increased triglycerides, blood pressure, and glucose in the genetically susceptible. Compared with individuals who watched television or videos or used their computers for less than one hour daily, those who carried out these behaviors for greater than four hours daily have a twofold increased risk of metabolic syndrome.

===Aging===
Metabolic syndrome affects 60% of the U.S. population older than age 50. With respect to that demographic, the percentage of women having the syndrome is higher than that of men. The age dependency of the syndrome&#x27;s prevalence is seen in most populations around the world.

===Diabetes mellitus type 2===
The metabolic syndrome quintuples the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Type 2 diabetes is considered a complication of metabolic syndrome. In people with impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose, presence of metabolic syndrome doubles the risk of developing type 2 diabetes. It is likely that prediabetes and metabolic syndrome denote the same disorder, defining it by the different sets of biological markers.

The presence of metabolic syndrome is associated with a higher prevalence of CVD than found in people with type 2 diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance without the syndrome. Hypoadiponectinemia has been shown to increase insulin resistance and is considered to be a risk factor for developing metabolic syndrome.

===Coronary heart disease===
The approximate prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in people with coronary artery disease (CAD) is 50%, with a prevalence of 37% in people with premature coronary artery disease (age 45), particularly in women. With appropriate cardiac rehabilitation and changes in lifestyle (e.g., nutrition, physical activity, weight reduction, and, in some cases, drugs), the prevalence of the syndrome can be reduced.

===Lipodystrophy===
Lipodystrophic disorders in general are associated with metabolic syndrome. Both genetic (e.g., Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy, Dunnigan familial partial lipodystrophy) and acquired (e.g., HIV-related lipodystrophy in people treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy) forms of lipodystrophy may give rise to severe insulin resistance and many of metabolic syndrome&#x27;s components.

===Rheumatic diseases===
There is research that associates comorbidity with rheumatic diseases. Both psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis have been found to be associated with metabolic syndrome.

===Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease===
Metabolic syndrome is seen to be a comorbidity in up to 50 percent of those with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It may pre-exist or may be a consequence of the lung pathology of COPD.

==Pathophysiology==
It is common for there to be a development of visceral fat, after which the adipocytes (fat cells) of the visceral fat increase plasma levels of TNF-α and alter levels of other substances (e.g., adiponectin, resistin, and PAI-1). TNF-α has been shown to cause the production of inflammatory cytokines and also possibly trigger cell signaling by interaction with a TNF-α receptor that may lead to insulin resistance. An experiment with rats fed a diet with 33% sucrose has been proposed as a model for the development of metabolic syndrome. The sucrose first elevated blood levels of triglycerides, which induced visceral fat and ultimately resulted in insulin resistance. The progression from visceral fat to increased TNF-α to insulin resistance has some parallels to human development of metabolic syndrome. The increase in adipose tissue also increases the number of immune cells, which play a role in inflammation. Chronic inflammation contributes to an increased risk of hypertension, atherosclerosis and diabetes.

The involvement of the endocannabinoid system in the development of metabolic syndrome is indisputable. Endocannabinoid overproduction may induce reward system dysfunction and cause executive dysfunctions (e.g., impaired delay discounting), in turn perpetuating unhealthy behaviors. The brain is crucial in development of metabolic syndrome, modulating peripheral carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.

Metabolic syndrome can be induced by overfeeding with sucrose or fructose, particularly concomitantly with high-fat diet. The resulting oversupply of omega-6 fatty acids, particularly arachidonic acid (AA), is an important factor in the pathogenesis of metabolic syndrome. Arachidonic acid (with its precursor – linoleic acid) serves as a substrate to the production of inflammatory mediators known as eicosanoids, whereas the arachidonic acid-containing compound diacylglycerol (DAG) is a precursor to the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) while fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) mediates the metabolism of anandamide into arachidonic acid. Anandamide can also be produced from &quot;N&quot;-acylphosphatidylethanolamine via several pathways. Anandamide and 2-AG can also be hydrolized into arachidonic acid, potentially leading to increased eicosanoid synthesis.

== Diagnosis ==

===NCEP===
As of 2023, the U.S. National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III (2001) continues to be the most widely used clinical definition. It requires at least three of the following:
* Central obesity: waist circumference ≥ 102 cm or 40 inches (male), ≥ 88 cm or 35 inches(female)
* Dyslipidemia: TG ≥ 1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dL)
* Dyslipidemia: HDL-C &lt; 40 mg/dL (male), &lt; 50 mg/dL (female)
* Blood pressure ≥ 130/85 mmHg (or treated for hypertension)
* Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL)

===2009 Interim Joint Statement===
The International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; the American Heart Association; the World Heart Federation; the International Atherosclerosis Society; and the International Association for the Study of Obesity published an interim joint statement to harmonize the definition of the metabolic syndrome in 2009. According to this statement, the criteria for clinical diagnosis of the
metabolic syndrome are three or more of the following:
* Elevated waist circumference with population- and country-specific definitions
* Elevated triglycerides (≥ 150 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L))
* Reduced HDL-C (≤40 mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L) in males, ≤50 mg/dL (1.3 mmol/L) in females)
* Elevated blood pressure (systolic ≥130 and/or diastolic ≥85 mm Hg)
* Elevated fasting glucose (≥100 mg/dL (5.55 mmol/L)

This definition recognizes that the risk associated with a particular waist measurement will differ in different populations. However, for international comparisons and to facilitate the etiology, the organizations agree that it is critical that a commonly agreed-upon set of criteria be used worldwide, with agreed-upon cut points for different ethnic groups and sexes. There are many people in the world of mixed ethnicity, and in those cases, pragmatic decisions will have to be made. Therefore, an international criterion of overweight may be more appropriate than ethnic specific criteria of abdominal obesity for an anthropometric component of this syndrome which results from an excess lipid storage in adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver.

The report notes that previous definitions of the metabolic syndrome by the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) and the revised National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) are very similar, and they identify individuals with a given set of symptoms as having metabolic syndrome. There are two differences, however: the IDF definition states that if body mass index (BMI) is greater than 30 kg/m2, central obesity can be assumed, and waist circumference does not need to be measured. However, this potentially excludes any subject without increased waist circumference if BMI is less than 30. Conversely, the NCEP definition indicates that metabolic syndrome can be diagnosed based on other criteria. Also, the IDF uses geography-specific cut points for waist circumference, while NCEP uses only one set of cut points for waist circumference regardless of geography.

===WHO===
The World Health Organization (1999) requires the presence of any one of diabetes mellitus, impaired glucose tolerance, impaired fasting glucose or insulin resistance, AND two of the following:
* Blood pressure ≥ 140/90 mmHg
* Dyslipidemia: triglycerides (TG) ≥ 1.695 mmol/L and HDL cholesterol ≤ 0.9 mmol/L (male), ≤ 1.0 mmol/L (female)
* Central obesity: waist:hip ratio &gt; 0.90 (male); &gt; 0.85 (female), or BMI &gt; 30 kg/m2
* Microalbuminuria: urinary albumin excretion ratio ≥ 20 μg/min or albumin:creatinine ratio ≥ 30 mg/g

===EGIR===
The European Group for the Study of Insulin Resistance (1999) requires that subjects have insulin resistance (defined for purposes of clinical practivality as the top 25% of the fasting insulin values among nondiabetic individuals) AND two or more of the following:
* Central obesity: waist circumference ≥ 94 cm or 37 inches (male), ≥ 80 cm or 31.5 inches (female)
* Dyslipidemia: TG ≥ 2.0 mmol/L (177 mg/dL) and/or HDL-C &lt; 1.0 mmol/L (38.61 mg/dL) or treated for dyslipidemia
* Blood pressure ≥ 140/90 mmHg or antihypertensive medication
* Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL)

===Cardiometabolic index===
The Cardiometabolic index (CMI) is a tool used to calculate risk of type 2 diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and metabolic issues. It is based on calculations from waist-to-height ratio and triglycerides-to-HDL cholesterol ratio.

CMI can also be used for finding connections between cardiovascular disease and erectile dysfunction. When following an anti inflammatory diet (low-glycemic carbohydrates, fruits, vegetables, fish, less red meat and processed foods) the markers may drop resulting in a significant reduction in body weight and adipose tissue.

===Other===
High-sensitivity C-reactive protein has been developed and used as a marker to predict coronary vascular diseases in metabolic syndrome, and it was recently used as a predictor for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (steatohepatitis) in correlation with serum markers that indicated lipid and glucose metabolism. Fatty liver disease and steatohepatitis can be considered manifestations of metabolic syndrome, indicative of abnormal energy storage as fat in ectopic distribution.
Reproductive disorders (such as polycystic ovary syndrome in women of reproductive age), and erectile dysfunction or decreased total testosterone (low testosterone-binding globulin) in men can be attributed to metabolic syndrome.

==Prevention==
Various strategies have been proposed to prevent the development of metabolic syndrome. These include increased physical activity (such as walking 30 minutes every day), and a healthy, reduced calorie diet. Many studies support the value of a healthy lifestyle as above. However, one study stated these potentially beneficial measures are effective in only a minority of people, primarily because of a lack of compliance with lifestyle and diet changes. The International Obesity Taskforce states that interventions on a sociopolitical level are required to reduce development of the metabolic syndrome in populations.

The Caerphilly Heart Disease Study followed 2,375 male subjects over 20 years and suggested the daily intake of an Imperial pint (~568 mL) of milk or equivalent dairy products more than halved the risk of metabolic syndrome. Some subsequent studies support the authors&#x27; findings, while others dispute them. A systematic review of four randomized controlled trials said that, in the short term, a paleolithic nutritional pattern improved three of five measurable components of the metabolic syndrome in participants with at least one of the components.

== Management ==
===Diet===
Dietary carbohydrate restriction reduces blood glucose levels, contributes to weight loss, and reduces the use of several medications that may be prescribed for metabolic syndrome. Studies suggest that meal timing and frequency can significantly impact the risk of developing metabolic syndrome. Research indicates that individuals who maintain regular meal timings and avoid eating late at night have a reduced risk of developing this condition.

===Medications===
Generally, the individual disorders that compose the metabolic syndrome are treated separately. Diuretics and ACE inhibitors may be used to treat hypertension. Various cholesterol medications may be useful if LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and/or HDL cholesterol is abnormal.

==Epidemiology==

Approximately 20–25 percent of the world&#x27;s adult population has the cluster of risk factors that is metabolic syndrome. In 2000, approximately 32% of U.S. adults had metabolic syndrome. In more recent years that figure has climbed to 34%.

In young children, there is no consensus on how to measure metabolic syndrome since age-specific cut points and reference values that would indicate &quot;high risk&quot; have not been well established. A continuous cardiometabolic risk summary score is often used for children instead of a dichotomous measure of metabolic syndrome.

Other conditions and specific microbiome diversity seems to be associated with metabolic syndrome, with certain-degree of gender-specificity.

==History==
In 1921, Joslin first reported the association of diabetes with hypertension and hyperuricemia.
In 1923, Kylin reported additional studies on the above triad.
In 1947, Vague observed that upper body obesity appeared to predispose to diabetes, atherosclerosis, gout and calculi.
In the late 1950s, the term metabolic syndrome was first used.

In 1967, Avogadro, Crepaldi and coworkers described six moderately obese people with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and marked hypertriglyceridemia, all of which improved when the affected people were put on a hypocaloric, low-carbohydrate diet.
In 1977, Haller used the term &quot;metabolic syndrome&quot; for associations of obesity, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipoproteinemia, hyperuricemia, and hepatic steatosis when describing the additive effects of risk factors on atherosclerosis.
The same year, Singer used the term for associations of obesity, gout, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension with hyperlipoproteinemia.
In 1977 and 1978, Gerald B. Phillips developed the concept that risk factors for myocardial infarction concur to form a &quot;constellation of abnormalities&quot; (i.e., glucose intolerance, hyperinsulinemia, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and hypertension) associated not only with heart disease, but also with aging, obesity and other clinical states. He suggested there must be an underlying linking factor, the identification of which could lead to the prevention of cardiovascular disease; he hypothesized that this factor was sex hormones.
In 1988, in his Banting lecture, Gerald M. Reaven proposed insulin resistance as the underlying factor and named the constellation of abnormalities syndrome X. Reaven did not include abdominal obesity, which has also been hypothesized as the underlying factor, as part of the condition.

== See also ==
* Metabolic disorder
* Portal-visceral hypothesis

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q657193" start="0" end="18" title="Metabolic syndrome" label="Metabolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140549" start="95" end="112" title="abdominal obesity" label="abdominal obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="114" end="133" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q271993" start="135" end="151" title="hyperglycemia" label="high blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467339" start="153" end="177" title="Hypertriglyceridemia" label="high serum triglycerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q410020" start="193" end="217" title="high-density lipoprotein" label="high-density lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="287" end="309" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="314" end="329" title="Diabetes mellitus type 2" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053470" start="486" end="504" title="Insulin resistance" label="Insulin resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087205" start="530" end="541" title="prediabetes" label="prediabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="611" end="619" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752427" start="757" end="773" title="medical research" label="medical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="888" end="910" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140549" start="1041" end="1056" title="central obesity" label="central obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="1145" end="1159" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="1342" end="1354" title="triglyceride" label="triglyceride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306264" start="1362" end="1386" title="impaired fasting glucose" label="impaired fasting glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49970" start="1454" end="1467" title="hyperuricemia" label="hyperuricemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058862" start="1469" end="1480" title="fatty liver" label="fatty liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="1507" end="1514" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546498" start="1531" end="1563" title="nonalcoholic fatty liver disease" label="nonalcoholic fatty liver disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q500816" start="1565" end="1592" title="polycystic ovarian syndrome" label="polycystic ovarian syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="1606" end="1626" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q415833" start="1639" end="1659" title="acanthosis nigricans" label="acanthosis nigricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="2549" end="2564" title="Type 2 diabetes" label="type-2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="2566" end="2588" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="2591" end="2597" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="2599" end="2613" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546498" start="2618" end="2651" title="Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease" label="nonalcoholic fatty liver disease."/>
<link wikidata="Q1135939" start="2970" end="2985" title="pathophysiology" label="pathophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="3150" end="3156" title="Stress (biology)" label="Stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="3211" end="3223" title="risk factors" label="risk factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q506874" start="3358" end="3371" title="chronobiology" label="chronobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q331632" start="3564" end="3574" title="overeating" label="overeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556772" start="3594" end="3606" title="lipotoxicity" label="lipotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q61080073" start="3623" end="3633" title="Antonio Vidal-Puig" label="Vidal-Puig"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="4591" end="4603" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q422766" start="4615" end="4633" title="C-reactive protein" label="C-reactive protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q381899" start="4663" end="4673" title="fibrinogen" label="fibrinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q412889" start="4675" end="4688" title="interleukin 6" label="interleukin 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="4690" end="4717" title="tumor necrosis factor-alpha" label="tumor necrosis factor-alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="4801" end="4810" title="uric acid" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="4836" end="4844" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734081" start="5336" end="5348" title="Carbohydrate metabolism" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792936" start="5350" end="5355" title="Lipid metabolism" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862551" start="5361" end="5368" title="Protein metabolism" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="5459" end="5482" title="Oxidative phosphorylation" label="mitochondrial oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305232" start="5622" end="5636" title="chronic stress" label="chronic stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="5716" end="5751" title="hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis" label="hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="5801" end="5809" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="5856" end="5863" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="5868" end="5875" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140549" start="5969" end="5987" title="visceral adiposity" label="visceral adiposity"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="6106" end="6118" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="6206" end="6228" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="6256" end="6262" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="6264" end="6276" title="Psychosocial" label="Psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q236232" start="6467" end="6486" title="waist circumference" label="waist circumference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="6772" end="6781" title="Death" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="6843" end="6862" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="7718" end="7730" title="complication (medicine)" label="complication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087205" start="8167" end="8193" title="impaired glucose tolerance" label="impaired glucose tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8216" end="8235" title="Adiponectin#Hypoadiponectinemia" label="Hypoadiponectinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="8453" end="8476" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038717" start="8615" end="8637" title="Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation" label="cardiac rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538213" start="8814" end="8838" title="Lipodystrophy" label="Lipodystrophic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242224" start="8910" end="8952" title="Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy" label="Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315596" start="8954" end="8993" title="Dunnigan familial partial lipodystrophy" label="Dunnigan familial partial lipodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="9015" end="9018" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="9064" end="9100" title="highly active antiretroviral therapy" label="highly active antiretroviral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="9320" end="9329" title="psoriasis" label="psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511097" start="9334" end="9353" title="psoriatic arthritis" label="psoriatic arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="9538" end="9575" title="chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="9723" end="9735" title="visceral fat" label="visceral fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q357519" start="9753" end="9762" title="adipocyte" label="adipocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="9805" end="9811" title="blood plasma" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="9822" end="9827" title="TNF-α" label="TNF-α"/>
<link wikidata="Q357439" start="9872" end="9883" title="adiponectin" label="adiponectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419499" start="9885" end="9893" title="resistin" label="resistin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410485" start="9899" end="9904" title="PAI-1" label="PAI-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="9968" end="9976" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579343" start="10041" end="10055" title="TNF receptor superfamily" label="TNF-α receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="10137" end="10144" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q131994715" start="10721" end="10743" title="endocannabinoid system" label="endocannabinoid system"/>
<link wikidata="Q670713" start="10844" end="10857" title="reward system" label="reward system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419936" start="10880" end="10901" title="executive dysfunction" label="executive dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q306246" start="11248" end="11267" title="omega-6 fatty acids" label="omega-6 fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q407699" start="11282" end="11298" title="arachidonic acid" label="arachidonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="11335" end="11347" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q407426" start="11410" end="11423" title="linoleic acid" label="linoleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q407680" start="11500" end="11511" title="eicosanoids" label="eicosanoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q161466" start="11562" end="11576" title="diacylglycerol" label="diacylglycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q209320" start="11621" end="11643" title="2-arachidonoylglycerol" label="2-arachidonoylglycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q21113274" start="11657" end="11683" title="fatty acid amide hydrolase" label="fatty acid amide hydrolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q410228" start="11718" end="11728" title="anandamide" label="anandamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407699" start="11734" end="11750" title="arachidonic acid" label="arachidonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951352" start="11789" end="11831" title="N-Acylphosphatidylethanolamine" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-acylphosphatidylethanolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407680" start="11953" end="11963" title="eicosanoid" label="eicosanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q599756" start="12025" end="12063" title="National Cholesterol Education Program" label="National Cholesterol Education Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508818" start="12560" end="12593" title="International Diabetes Federation" label="International Diabetes Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973027" start="12641" end="12682" title="National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute" label="National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="12688" end="12714" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655368" start="12720" end="12742" title="World Heart Federation" label="World Heart Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12748" end="12785" title="International Atherosclerosis Society" label="International Atherosclerosis Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12795" end="12845" title="International Association for the Study of Obesity" label="International Association for the Study of Obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q599756" start="14300" end="14338" title="National Cholesterol Education Program" label="National Cholesterol Education Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q131191" start="14523" end="14538" title="body mass index" label="body mass index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="15055" end="15080" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476525" start="15278" end="15290" title="Dyslipidemia" label="Dyslipidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676817" start="15485" end="15501" title="Microalbuminuria" label="Microalbuminuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q422766" start="16800" end="16835" title="C-reactive protein" label="High-sensitivity C-reactive protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q747883" start="17635" end="17652" title="physical activity" label="physical activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052222" start="17981" end="18012" title="International Obesity Taskforce" label="International Obesity Taskforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954785" start="18147" end="18177" title="Caerphilly Heart Disease Study" label="Caerphilly Heart Disease Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q11123" start="18267" end="18271" title="pint" label="pint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="18483" end="18511" title="randomized controlled trials" label="randomized controlled trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q533945" start="18544" end="18567" title="Paleolithic diet" label="paleolithic nutritional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570280" start="18737" end="18761" title="Low-carbohydrate diet" label="carbohydrate restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200656" start="19291" end="19299" title="Diuretic" label="Diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q288280" start="19305" end="19318" title="ACE inhibitor" label="ACE inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="20459" end="20467" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="20469" end="20484" title="atherosclerosis" label="atherosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="20486" end="20490" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q617079" start="20495" end="20502" title="Calculus (medicine)" label="calculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q762713" start="20663" end="20683" title="hypercholesterolemia" label="hypercholesterolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467339" start="20696" end="20716" title="hypertriglyceridemia" label="hypertriglyceridemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="20924" end="20944" title="hyperlipoproteinemia" label="hyperlipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49970" start="20946" end="20959" title="hyperuricemia" label="hyperuricemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058862" start="20965" end="20982" title="hepatic steatosis" label="hepatic steatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="21271" end="21292" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087205" start="21360" end="21379" title="glucose intolerance" label="glucose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14375936" start="21381" end="21397" title="hyperinsulinemia" label="hyperinsulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q762713" start="21399" end="21419" title="hypercholesterolemia" label="hypercholesterolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467339" start="21421" end="21441" title="hypertriglyceridemia" label="hypertriglyceridemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422812" start="21735" end="21747" title="sex hormones" label="sex hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857235" start="21765" end="21780" title="Banting Lectures" label="Banting lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488818" start="21782" end="21798" title="Gerald M. Reaven" label="Gerald M. Reaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="22054" end="22072" title="Metabolic disorder" label="Metabolic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231468" start="22075" end="22101" title="Portal-visceral hypothesis" label="Portal-visceral hypothesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54444" wikidata="Q43489" url="?curid=54444" title="Falcon">
<text>Falcons () are birds of prey in the genus Falco, which includes about 40 species. Some small species of falcons with long, narrow wings are called hobbies, and some that hover while hunting are called kestrels. Falcons are widely distributed on all continents of the world except Antarctica, though closely related raptors did occur there in the Eocene.

Adult falcons have thin, tapered wings, which enable them to fly at high speed and change direction rapidly. Fledgling falcons, in their first year of flying, have longer flight feathers, which make their configuration more like that of a general-purpose bird such as a . This makes flying easier while still learning the aerial skills required to be effective hunters like the adults.

The falcons are the largest genus in the Falconinae subfamily of Falconidae, which also includes two other subfamilies comprising caracaras and a few other species of &quot;falcons&quot;. All these birds kill prey with their beaks, using a tomial &quot;tooth&quot; on the side of their beaks—unlike the hawks, eagles and other larger birds of prey from the unrelated family Accipitridae, who use talons on their feet.

The largest falcon is the gyrfalcon at up to in length. The smallest falcon species is the pygmy falcon, which measures just . As with hawks and owls, falcons exhibit sexual dimorphism, with the females typically larger than the males, thus allowing a wider range of prey species.

As is the case with many birds of prey, falcons have exceptional powers of vision; the visual acuity of one species has been measured at 2.6 times that of human eyes. They are incredibly fast fliers, with the Peregrine falcons having been recorded diving at speeds of , making them the fastest-moving creatures on Earth; the fastest recorded dive attained a vertical speed of .

==Taxonomy==
The genus &quot;Falco&quot; was introduced in 1758 by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;. The type species is the merlin (&quot;Falco columbarius&quot;). The genus name is Late Latin meaning a &quot;falcon&quot; from , , meaning &quot;a sickle&quot;, referring to the claws of the bird. In Middle English and Old French, the title refers generically to several captive raptor species.

The traditional term for a male falcon is &quot;tercel&quot; (British spelling) or &quot;tiercel&quot; (American spelling), from the Latin (third) because of the belief that only one in three eggs hatched a male bird. Some sources give the etymology as deriving from the fact that a male falcon is about one-third smaller than a female (). A falcon chick, especially one reared for falconry, still in its downy stage, is known as an &quot;eyas&quot; (sometimes spelled &quot;eyass&quot;). The word arose by mistaken division of Old French , from Latin presumed (nestling) from (nest). The technique of hunting with trained captive birds of prey is known as falconry.

Compared to other birds of prey, the fossil record of the falcons is not well distributed in time. For years, the oldest fossils tentatively assigned to this genus were from the Late Miocene, less than 10 million years ago. This coincides with a period in which many modern genera of birds became recognizable in the fossil record. As of 2021, the oldest falconid fossil is estimated to be 55 million years old. Given the distribution of fossil and living &quot;Falco&quot; taxa, falcons are probably of North American, African, or possibly Middle Eastern or European origin. Falcons are not closely related to other birds of prey, and their nearest relatives are parrots and songbirds.

===Overview===
Falcons are roughly divisible into three or four groups. The first contains the kestrels (probably excepting the American kestrel); usually small and stocky falcons of mainly brown upperside colour and sometimes sexually dimorphic; three African species that are generally gray in colour stand apart from the typical members of this group. The fox and greater kestrels can be told apart at first glance by their tail colours, but not by much else; they might be very close relatives and are probably much closer to each other than the lesser and common kestrels. Kestrels feed chiefly on terrestrial vertebrates and invertebrates of appropriate size, such as rodents, reptiles, or insects.

The second group contains slightly larger (on average) species, the hobbies and relatives. These birds are characterized by considerable amounts of dark slate-gray in their plumage; their malar areas are nearly always black. They feed mainly on smaller birds.

Third are the peregrine falcon and its relatives, variably sized powerful birds that also have a black malar area (except some very light color morphs), and often a black cap, as well. They are very fast birds with a maximum speed of 390 kilometres per hour. Otherwise, they are somewhat intermediate between the other groups, being chiefly medium grey with some lighter or brownish colours on their upper sides. They are, on average, more delicately patterned than the hobbies and, if the hierofalcons are excluded (see below), this group typically contains species with horizontal barring on their undersides. As opposed to the other groups, where tail colour varies much in general but little according to evolutionary relatedness, the tails of the large falcons are quite uniformly dark grey with inconspicuous black banding and small, white tips, though this is probably plesiomorphic. These large &quot;Falco&quot; species feed on mid-sized birds and terrestrial vertebrates.

Very similar to these, and sometimes included therein, are the four or so species of hierofalcon (literally, &quot;hawk-falcons&quot;). They represent taxa with, usually, more phaeomelanins, which impart reddish or brown colors, and generally more strongly patterned plumage reminiscent of hawks. Their undersides have a lengthwise pattern of blotches, lines, or arrowhead marks.

While these three or four groups, loosely circumscribed, are an informal arrangement, they probably contain several distinct clades in their entirety.

A study of mtDNA cytochrome &quot;b&quot; sequence data of some kestrels identified a clade containing the common kestrel and related &quot;malar-striped&quot; species, to the exclusion of such taxa as the greater kestrel (which lacks a malar stripe), the lesser kestrel (which is very similar to the common, but also has no malar stripe), and the American kestrel, which has a malar stripe, but its colour pattern – apart from the brownish back – and also the black feathers behind the ear, which never occur in the true kestrels, are more reminiscent of some hobbies. The malar-striped kestrels apparently split from their relatives in the Gelasian, roughly 2.0–2.5 million years ago (Mya), and are seemingly of tropical East African origin. The entire &quot;true kestrel&quot; group—excluding the American species—is probably a distinct and quite young clade, as also suggested by their numerous apomorphies.

Other studies have confirmed that the hierofalcon are a monophyletic group–and that hybridization is quite frequent at least in the larger falcon species. Initial studies of mtDNA cytochrome &quot;b&quot; sequence data suggested that the hierofalcon are basal among living falcons. The discovery of a NUMT proved this earlier theory erroneous. In reality, the hierofalcon are a rather young group, originating at the same time as the start of the main kestrel radiation, about 2 Mya. Very little fossil history exists for this lineage. However, the present diversity of very recent origin suggests that this lineage may have nearly gone extinct in the recent past.

The phylogeny and delimitations of the peregrine and hobby groups are more problematic. Molecular studies have only been conducted on a few species, and the morphologically ambiguous taxa have often been little researched. The morphology of the syrinx, which contributes well to resolving the overall phylogeny of the Falconidae, is not very informative in the present genus. Nonetheless, a core group containing the peregrine and Barbary falcons, which, in turn, group with the hierofalcon and the more distant prairie falcon (which was sometimes placed with the hierofalcon, though it is entirely distinct biogeographically), as well as at least most of the &quot;typical&quot; hobbies, are confirmed to be monophyletic as suspected.

Given that the American &quot;Falco&quot; species of today belong to the peregrine group, or are apparently more basal species, the initially most successful evolutionary radiation seemingly was a Holarctic one that originated possibly around central Eurasia or in (northern) Africa. One or several lineages were present in North America by the Early Pliocene at latest.

The origin of today&#x27;s major &quot;Falco&quot; groups—the &quot;typical&quot; hobbies and kestrels, for example, or the peregrine-hierofalcon complex, or the aplomado falcon lineage—can be quite confidently placed from the Miocene-Pliocene boundary through the Zanclean and Piacenzian and just into the Gelasian, that is from 2.4 to 5.3 Mya, when the malar-striped kestrels diversified. Some groups of falcons, such as the hierofalcon complex and the peregrine-Barbary superspecies, have only evolved in more recent times; the species of the former seem to be 120,000 years old or so.

===Species===
The sequence follows the taxonomic order of White &quot;et al.&quot; (1996), except for adjustments in the kestrel sequence.

===Extinct species===
*Réunion kestrel, &quot;Falco duboisi&quot; – extinct (about 1700)

===Fossil record===
*&quot;Falco medius&quot; (Late Miocene of Cherevichnyi, Ukraine)
*&quot;?Falco&quot; sp. (Late Miocene of Idaho)
*&quot;Falco&quot; sp. (Early Pliocene of Kansas)
*&quot;Falco&quot; sp. (Early Pliocene of Bulgaria – Early Pleistocene of Spain and Czech Republic)
*&quot;Falco oregonus&quot; (Early/Middle Pliocene of Fossil Lake, Oregon) – possibly not distinct from a living species
*&quot;Falco umanskajae&quot; (Late Pliocene of Kryzhanovka, Ukraine) – includes &quot;Falco odessanus&quot;, a &quot;nomen nudum&quot;
*&quot;?Falco bakalovi&quot; (Late Pliocene of Varshets, Bulgaria)
*&quot;Falco antiquus&quot; (Middle Pleistocene of Noailles, France and possibly Horvőlgy, Hungary)
* Cuban kestrel, &quot;Falco kurochkini&quot; (Late Pleistocene/Holocene of Cuba, West Indies)
* &quot;Falco chowi&quot; (China)
*&quot;Falco bulgaricus&quot; (Late Miocene of Hadzhidimovo, Bulgaria)

Several more paleosubspecies of extant species also been described; see species accounts for these.

&quot;&quot;Sushkinia&quot; pliocaena&quot; from the Early Pliocene of Pavlodar (Kazakhstan) appears to be a falcon of some sort. It might belong in this genus or a closely related one. In any case, the genus name &quot;Sushkinia&quot; is invalid for this animal because it had already been allocated to a prehistoric dragonfly relative. In 2015 the bird genus was renamed &quot;Psushkinia&quot;.

The supposed &quot;&quot;Falco&quot; pisanus&quot; was actually a pigeon of the genus &quot;Columba&quot;, possibly the same as &quot;Columba omnisanctorum&quot;, which, in that case, would adopt the older species name of the &quot;falcon&quot;. The Eocene fossil &quot;&quot;Falco&quot; falconellus&quot; (or &quot;&quot;F.&quot; falconella&quot;) from Wyoming is a bird of uncertain affiliations, maybe a falconid, maybe not; it certainly does not belong in this genus. &quot;&quot;Falco&quot; readei&quot; is now considered a paleosubspecies of the yellow-headed caracara (&quot;Milvago chimachima&quot;).

==See also==

*Abu Dhabi Falcon Hospital
*Falconry
*Ra
*Horus
*Khonsu
* National symbols of Kuwait
*National symbols of Saudi Arabia

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==


==External links==

*Falconidae videos on the Internet Bird Collection, ibc.lynxeds.com
*The Raptor Resource Project – Peregrine, owl, eagle and osprey cams, facts, and other resources, raptorresource.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="0" end="7" title="Falcon" label="Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="15" end="28" title="birds of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="36" end="41" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="73" end="80" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q15719234" start="130" end="134" title="bird wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132015" start="147" end="154" title="hobby (bird)" label="hobbies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="170" end="175" title="hover (behaviour)#Wind hoverers" label="hover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488588" start="201" end="208" title="kestrel" label="kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="280" end="290" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="346" end="352" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="526" end="540" title="flight feather" label="flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="794" end="803" title="subfamily" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q21744" start="807" end="817" title="Falconidae" label="Falconidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583899" start="872" end="880" title="caracara (subfamily)" label="caracara"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="967" end="971" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="982" end="988" title="beak#Tomia" label="tomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="1045" end="1049" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="1052" end="1057" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="1116" end="1128" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="1138" end="1143" title="Talon (anatomy)" label="talon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177688" start="1187" end="1196" title="gyrfalcon" label="gyrfalcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q513174" start="1252" end="1264" title="pygmy falcon" label="pygmy falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="1306" end="1309" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="1328" end="1345" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="1518" end="1524" title="Visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="1530" end="1543" title="visual acuity" label="visual acuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="1598" end="1607" title="human eye" label="human eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="1652" end="1668" title="Peregrine falcon" label="Peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1839" end="1844" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1912" end="1925" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="1933" end="1946" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="1960" end="1975" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="1987" end="1999" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q131918" start="2007" end="2013" title="Merlin (bird)" label="merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="2065" end="2075" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2183" end="2197" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2202" end="2212" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="2341" end="2357" title="British English" label="British spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="2383" end="2400" title="American English" label="American spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q201" start="2419" end="2424" title="3 (number)" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="2661" end="2669" title="falconry" label="falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2807" end="2817" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785" start="2857" end="2861" title="nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="2936" end="2944" title="falconry" label="falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2984" end="2990" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="3130" end="3137" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="3421" end="3425" title="taxa" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3589" end="3606" title="Bird of prey#Phylogeny" label="nearest relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q31431" start="3611" end="3618" title="parrots" label="parrots"/>
<link wikidata="Q194240" start="3623" end="3632" title="songbirds" label="songbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488588" start="3730" end="3737" title="kestrel" label="kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q651545" start="3763" end="3779" title="American kestrel" label="American kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q637624" start="3994" end="3997" title="fox kestrel" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q748362" start="4002" end="4017" title="greater kestrel" label="greater kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="4238" end="4249" title="terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="4250" end="4260" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="4266" end="4278" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="4309" end="4315" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="4318" end="4325" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="4331" end="4337" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q47038" start="4529" end="4534" title="Cheek" label="malar"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="4746" end="4751" title="morph (zoology)" label="morph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="5311" end="5320" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q932223" start="5478" end="5489" title="plesiomorph" label="plesiomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q843050" start="5670" end="5681" title="hierofalcon" label="hierofalcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="5761" end="5773" title="phaeomelanin" label="phaeomelanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="5875" end="5879" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="6091" end="6096" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="6129" end="6134" title="mtDNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774486" start="6135" end="6159" title="cytochrome b" label="cytochrome &amp;quot;b&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="6160" end="6168" title="DNA sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47038" start="6258" end="6263" title="Cheek" label="malar"/>
<link wikidata="Q428579" start="6760" end="6768" title="Gelasian" label="Gelasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="6974" end="6979" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="7017" end="7025" title="apomorph" label="apomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="7087" end="7099" title="monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="7115" end="7128" title="hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="7285" end="7290" title="basal (evolution)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069705" start="7332" end="7336" title="Numt" label="NUMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="7924" end="7934" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361748" start="7942" end="7948" title="Syrinx (bird anatomy)" label="syrinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="7998" end="8007" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q21744" start="8015" end="8025" title="Falconidae" label="Falconidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q844234" start="8209" end="8223" title="prairie falcon" label="prairie falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="8305" end="8320" title="biogeographical" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="8406" end="8418" title="monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="8592" end="8614" title="evolutionary radiation" label="evolutionary radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q847051" start="8631" end="8640" title="Holarctic" label="Holarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146094" start="8779" end="8793" title="Early Pliocene" label="Early Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q773651" start="8968" end="8983" title="aplomado falcon" label="aplomado falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="9033" end="9040" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="9041" end="9049" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146094" start="9071" end="9079" title="Zanclean" label="Zanclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q514873" start="9084" end="9094" title="Piacenzian" label="Piacenzian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040725" start="9559" end="9574" title="Réunion kestrel" label="Réunion kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="9604" end="9611" title="Holocene extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9653" end="9665" title="Falco medius" label="Falco medius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9917" end="9931" title="Falco oregonus" label="Falco oregonus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10038" end="10054" title="Falco umanskajae" label="Falco umanskajae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10118" end="10133" title="Falco odessanus" label="Falco odessanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q844326" start="10149" end="10160" title="nomen nudum" label="nomen nudum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10175" end="10189" title="Falco bakalovi" label="Falco bakalovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592654" start="10241" end="10255" title="Falco antiquus" label="Falco antiquus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754676" start="10336" end="10349" title="Cuban kestrel" label="Cuban kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10437" end="10448" title="Falco chowi" label="Falco chowi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10470" end="10486" title="Falco bulgaricus" label="Falco bulgaricus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10856" end="10865" title="Sushkinia" label="Sushkinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="10954" end="10963" title="dragonfly" label="dragonfly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11015" end="11025" title="Psushkinia" label="Psushkinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209239" start="11126" end="11133" title="Columba (genus)" label="Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="11284" end="11290" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088349" start="11563" end="11578" title="paleosubspecies" label="paleosubspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28484" start="11586" end="11608" title="yellow-headed caracara" label="yellow-headed caracara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670129" start="11659" end="11684" title="Abu Dhabi Falcon Hospital" label="Abu Dhabi Falcon Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="11686" end="11694" title="Falconry" label="Falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="11696" end="11698" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q84122" start="11700" end="11705" title="Horus" label="Horus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190521" start="11707" end="11713" title="Khonsu" label="Khonsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470192" start="11716" end="11742" title="National symbols of Kuwait" label="National symbols of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470400" start="11744" end="11776" title="National symbols of Saudi Arabia" label="National symbols of Saudi Arabia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54445" wikidata="Q48428" url="?curid=54445" title="Bird of prey">
<text>Birds of prey or predatory birds, also known as (although not the same as) raptors, are hypercarnivorous bird species that actively hunt and feed on other vertebrates (mainly mammals, reptiles and smaller birds). In addition to speed and strength, these predators have keen eyesight for detecting prey from a distance or during flight, strong feet with sharp talons for grasping or killing prey, and powerful, curved beaks for tearing off flesh. Although predatory birds primarily hunt live prey, many species (such as fish eagles, vultures and condors) also scavenge and eat carrion.

Although the term &quot;bird of prey&quot; could theoretically be taken to include all birds that actively hunt and eat other animals, ornithologists typically use the narrower definition followed in this page, excluding many piscivorous predators such as storks, cranes, herons, gulls, skuas, penguins, and kingfishers, as well as many primarily insectivorous birds such as passerines (e.g. shrikes), nightjars, frogmouths, songbirds such as crows and ravens, alongside opportunistic predators from predominantly frugivorous or herbivorous ratites such as cassowaries and rheas. Some extinct predatory telluravian birds had talons similar to those of modern birds of prey, including mousebird relatives (Sandcoleidae), and Messelasturidae indicating possible common descent. Some Enantiornithes also had such talons, indicating possible convergent evolution, as enanthiornithines weren&#x27;t even modern birds.

==Common names==
The term &quot;raptor&quot; is derived from the Latin word &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;to seize or take by force&quot;. The common names for various birds of prey are based on structure, but many of the traditional names do not reflect the evolutionary relationships between the groups.
* Eagles tend to be large, powerful birds with long, broad wings and massive feet. Booted eagles have legs and feet feathered to the toes and build very large stick nests.
* Falcons and kestrels are medium-size birds of prey with long pointed wings, and many are particularly swift flyers. They belong to the family Falconidae, only distantly related to the Accipitriformes below. Caracaras are a distinct subgroup of the Falconidae unique to the New World, and most common in the Neotropics – their broad wings, naked faces and appetites of a generalist suggest some level of convergence with either &quot;Buteo&quot; or the vulturine birds, or both.
* True hawks are medium-sized birds of prey that usually belong to the genus &quot;Accipiter&quot; (see below). They are mainly woodland birds that hunt by sudden dashes from a concealed perch. They usually have long tails for tight steering.
* Buzzards are medium-large raptors with robust bodies and broad wings, or, alternatively, any bird of the genus &quot;Buteo&quot; (also commonly known as &quot;hawks&quot; in North America, while &quot;buzzard&quot; is colloquially used for vultures).
* Harriers are large, slender hawk-like birds with long tails and long thin legs. Most use a combination of keen eyesight and hearing to hunt small vertebrates, gliding on their long broad wings and circling low over grasslands and marshes.
* Kites have long wings and relatively weak legs. They spend much of their time soaring. They will take live vertebrate prey, but mostly feed on insects or even carrion.
* The osprey, a single species found worldwide that specializes in catching fish and builds large stick nests.
* Owls are variable-sized, typically night-specialized hunting birds. They fly almost silently due to their special feather structure that reduces turbulence. They have particularly acute hearing and nocturnal eyesight.
* The secretarybird is a single species with a large body and long, stilted legs endemic to the open grasslands of Sub-Saharan Africa.
* Vultures are scavengers and carrion-eating raptors of two distinct biological families: the Old World vultures (Accipitridae), which occurs only in the Eastern Hemisphere; and the New World vultures (Cathartidae), which occurs only in the Western Hemisphere. Members of both groups have heads either partly or fully devoid of feathers.

Many of these English language group names originally referred to particular species encountered in Britain. As English-speaking people travelled further, the familiar names were applied to new birds with similar characteristics. Names that have generalised this way include: kite (&quot;Milvus milvus&quot;), sparrowhawk or sparhawk (&quot;Accipiter nisus&quot;), goshawk (&quot;Accipiter gentilis&quot;), kestrel (&quot;Falco tinninculus&quot;), hobby (&quot;Falco subbuteo&quot;), harrier (simplified from &quot;hen-harrier&quot;, &quot;Circus cyaneus&quot;), buzzard (&quot;Buteo buteo&quot;).

Some names have not generalised, and refer to single species (or groups of closely related (sub)species), such as the merlin (&quot;Falco columbarius&quot;).

==Systematics==
===Historical classifications===
The taxonomy of Carl Linnaeus grouped birds (class Aves) into orders, genera, and species, with no formal ranks between genus and order. He placed all birds of prey into a single order, &quot;Accipitres&quot;, subdividing this into four genera: &quot;Vultur&quot; (vultures), &quot;Falco&quot; (eagles, hawks, falcons, etc.), &quot;Strix&quot; (owls), and &quot;Lanius&quot; (shrikes). This approach was followed by subsequent authors such as Gmelin, Latham and Turton.

Louis Pierre Vieillot used additional ranks: order, tribe, family, genus, species. Birds of prey (order Accipitres) were divided into diurnal and nocturnal tribes; the owls remained monogeneric (family Ægolii, genus &quot;Strix&quot;), whilst the diurnal raptors were divided into three families: Vulturini, Gypaëti, and Accipitrini. Thus Vieillot&#x27;s families were similar to the Linnaean genera, with the difference that shrikes were no longer included amongst the birds of prey. In addition to the original &quot;Vultur&quot; and &quot;Falco&quot; (now reduced in scope), Vieillot adopted four genera from Savigny: &quot;Phene&quot;, &quot;Haliæetus&quot;, &quot;Pandion&quot;, and &quot;Elanus&quot;. He also introduced five new genera of vultures (&quot;Gypagus&quot;, &quot;Catharista&quot;, &quot;Daptrius&quot;, &quot;Ibycter&quot;, &quot;Polyborus&quot;) and eleven new genera of accipitrines (&quot;Aquila&quot;, &quot;Circaëtus&quot;, &quot;Circus&quot;, &quot;Buteo&quot;, &quot;Milvus&quot;, &quot;Ictinia&quot;, &quot;Physeta&quot;, &quot;Harpia&quot;, &quot;Spizaëtus&quot;, &quot;Asturina&quot;, &quot;Sparvius&quot;).

Falconimorphae is a deprecated superorder within Raptores, formerly composed of the orders Falconiformes and Strigiformes. The clade was invalidated after 2012. Falconiformes is now placed in Eufalconimorphae, while Strigiformes is placed in Afroaves.

===Modern systematics===
The order Accipitriformes is believed to have originated 44 million years ago when it split from the common ancestor of the secretarybird (&quot;Sagittarius serpentarius&quot;) and the accipitrid species. The phylogeny of Accipitriformes is complex and difficult to unravel. Widespread paraphylies were observed in many phylogenetic studies. More recent and detailed studies show similar results. However, according to the findings of a 2014 study, the sister relationship between larger clades of Accipitriformes was well supported (e.g. relationship of &quot;Harpagus&quot; kites to buzzards and sea eagles and these latter two with &quot;Accipiter&quot; hawks are sister taxa of the clade containing Aquilinae and Harpiinae).

The diurnal birds of prey are formally classified into six families of two different orders (Accipitriformes and Falconiformes).
* Accipitridae: hawks, eagles, buzzards, harriers, kites, and Old World vultures
* Pandionidae: the osprey
* Sagittariidae: the secretarybird
* Falconidae: falcons, caracaras, and forest falcons
* Cathartidae: New World vultures, including condors

These families were traditionally grouped together in a single order Falconiformes but are now split into two orders, the Falconiformes and Accipitriformes. The Cathartidae are sometimes placed in a separate order Cathartiformes. Formerly, they were sometimes placed in the order Ciconiiformes.

The secretary bird and/or osprey are sometimes listed as subfamilies of Acciptridae: Sagittariinae and Pandioninae, respectively.

Australia&#x27;s letter-winged kite is a member of the family Accipitridae, although it is a nocturnal bird.

The nocturnal birds of prey—the owls—are classified separately as members of two extant families of the order Strigiformes:
* Strigidae: &quot;typical owls&quot;
* Tytonidae: barn and bay owls

===Phylogeny===
Below is a simplified phylogeny of Telluraves which is the clade where the birds of prey belong to along with passerines and several near-passerine lineages. The orders in bold text are birds of prey orders; this is to show the paraphyly of the group as well as their relationships to other birds.

A recent phylogenomic study from Wu et al. (2024) has found an alternative phylogeny for the placement of the birds of prey. Their analysis has found support in a clade consisting of the Strigiformes and Accipitriformes in new clade Hieraves. Hieraves was also recovered to be the sister clade to Australaves (which it includes the Cariamiformes and Falconiformes along with Psittacopasserae). Below is their phylogeny from the study.

==Possible inclusion of Cariamiformes==
Cariamiformes is an order of telluravian birds consisting of the living seriemas and extinct terror birds. Jarvis et al. 2014 suggested including them in the category of birds of prey, and McClure et al. 2019 considered seriemas to be birds of prey. The Peregrine Fund also considers seriemas to be birds of prey. Like most birds of prey, seriemas and terror birds prey on vertebrates.

However, seriemas were not traditionally considered birds of prey, and they are still not considered birds of prey in general parlance. They were traditionally classified in the order Gruiformes, but later research has reclassified them into Cariamiformes.

The bodies of seriemas are also shaped somewhat differently from birds of prey. Their legs and necks are significantly longer than those of typical raptors, although the secretarybirds (traditionally considered raptors) also have comparably long legs. The beaks of seriemas are hooked (as in raptors), but are longer than those of typical raptors.

==Migration==
Migratory behaviour evolved multiple times within accipitrid raptors.

The earliest event occurred nearly 14 to 12 million years ago. This result seems to be one of the oldest dates published so far in the case of birds of prey. For example, a previous reconstruction of migratory behaviour in one &quot;Buteo&quot; clade with a result of the origin of migration around 5 million years ago was also supported by that study.

Migratory species of raptors may have had a southern origin because it seems that all of the major lineages within Accipitridae had an origin in one of the biogeographic realms of the Southern Hemisphere. The appearance of migratory behaviour occurred in the tropics parallel with the range expansion of migratory species to temperate habitats. Similar results of southern origin in other taxonomic groups can be found in the literature.

Distribution and biogeographic history highly determine the origin of migration in birds of prey. Based on some comparative analyses, diet breadth also has an effect on the evolution of migratory behaviour in this group, but its relevance needs further investigation. The evolution of migration in animals seems to be a complex and difficult topic with many unanswered questions.

A recent study discovered new connections between migration and the ecology, life history of raptors. A brief overview from abstract of the published paper shows that &quot;clutch size and hunting strategies have been proved to be the most important variables in shaping distribution areas, and also the geographic dissimilarities may mask important relationships between life history traits and migratory behaviours. The West Palearctic-Afrotropical and the North-South American migratory systems are fundamentally different from the East Palearctic-Indomalayan system, owing to the presence versus absence of ecological barriers.&quot; Maximum entropy modelling can help in answering the question: why species winters at one location while the others are elsewhere. Temperature and precipitation related factors differ in the limitation of species distributions. &quot;This suggests that the migratory behaviours differ among the three main migratory routes for these species&quot; which may have important conservational consequences in the protection of migratory raptors.

==Sexual dimorphism==

Birds of prey (raptors) are known to display patterns of sexual dimorphism. It is commonly believed that the dimorphisms found in raptors occur due to sexual selection or environmental factors. In general, hypotheses in favor of ecological factors being the cause for sexual dimorphism in raptors are rejected. This is because the ecological model is less parsimonious, meaning that its explanation is more complex than that of the sexual selection model. Additionally, ecological models are much harder to test because a great deal of data is required.

Dimorphisms can also be the product of intrasexual selection between males and females. It appears that both sexes of the species play a role in the sexual dimorphism within raptors; females tend to compete with other females to find good places to nest and attract males, and males competing with other males for adequate hunting ground so they appear as the most healthy mate.
It has also been proposed that sexual dimorphism is merely the product of disruptive selection, and is merely a stepping stone in the process of speciation, especially if the traits that define gender are independent across a species. Sexual dimorphism can be viewed as something that can accelerate the rate of speciation.

In non-predatory birds, males are typically larger than females. However, in birds of prey, the opposite is the case. For instance, the kestrel is a type of falcon in which males are the primary providers, and the females are responsible for nurturing the young. In this species, the smaller the kestrels are, the less food is needed and thus, they can survive in environments that are harsher. This is particularly true in the male kestrels. It has become more energetically favorable for male kestrels to remain smaller than their female counterparts because smaller males have an agility advantage when it comes to defending the nest and hunting. Larger females are favored because they can incubate larger numbers of offspring, while also being able to brood a larger clutch size.

==Olfaction==
It is a long-standing belief that birds lack any sense of smell, but it has become clear that many birds do have functional olfactory systems. Despite this, most raptors are still considered to primarily rely on vision, with raptor vision being extensively studied. A 2020 review of the existing literature combining anatomical, genetic, and behavioural studies showed that, in general, raptors have functional olfactory systems that they are likely to use in a range of different contexts.

== Persecution ==
Birds of prey have been historically persecuted both directly and indirectly. In the Danish Faroe Islands, there were rewards &quot;Naebbetold&quot; (by royal decree from 1741) given in return for the bills of birds of prey shown by hunters. In Britain, kites and buzzards were seen as destroyers of game and killed, for instance in 1684–5 alone as many as 100 kites were killed. Rewards for their killing were also in force in the Netherlands from 1756. From 1705 to 1800, it has been estimated that 624087 birds of prey were killed in a part of Germany that included Hannover, Luneburg, Lauenburg and Bremen with 14125 claws deposited just in 1796–97. Many species also develop lead poisoning after accidental consumption of lead shot when feeding on animals that had been shot by hunters. Lead pellets from direct shooting that the birds have escaped from also cause reduced fitness and premature deaths.

==Attacks on humans==
Some evidence supports the contention that the African crowned eagle occasionally views human children as prey, with a witness account of one attack (in which the victim, a seven-year-old boy, survived and the eagle was killed), and the discovery of part of a human child skull in a nest. This would make it the only living bird known to prey on humans, although other birds such as ostriches and cassowaries have killed humans in self-defense and a lammergeier might have killed Aeschylus by accident. Many stories of Brazilian indigenous peoples speak about children mauled by Uiruuetê, the Harpy Eagle in Tupi language. Various large raptors like golden eagles are reported attacking human beings, but its unclear if they intend to eat them or if they have ever been successful in killing one.

Some fossil evidence indicates large birds of prey occasionally preyed on prehistoric hominids. The Taung Child, an early human found in Africa, is believed to have been killed by an eagle-like bird similar to the crowned eagle. The Haast&#x27;s eagle may have preyed on early humans in New Zealand, and this conclusion would be consistent with Maori folklore. &quot;Leptoptilos robustus&quot; might have preyed on both &quot;Homo floresiensis&quot; and anatomically modern humans, and the Malagasy crowned eagle, teratorns, Woodward&#x27;s eagle and &quot;Caracara major&quot; are similar in size to the Haast&#x27;s eagle, implying that they similarly could pose a threat to a human being.

==Vision==
Birds of prey have incredible vision and rely heavily on it for a number of tasks. They utilize their high visual acuity to obtain food, navigate their surroundings, distinguish and flee from predators, mating, nest construction, and much more. They accomplish these tasks with a large eye in relation to their skull, which allows for a larger image to be projected onto the retina. The visual acuity of some large raptors such as eagles and Old World vultures are the highest known among vertebrates; the wedge-tailed eagle has twice the visual acuity of a typical human and six times that of the common ostrich, the vertebrate with the largest eyes.

There are two regions in the retina, called the deep and shallow fovea, that are specialized for acute vision. These regions contain the highest density of photoreceptors, and provide the highest points of visual acuity. The deep fovea points forward at an approximate 45° angle, while the shallow fovea points approximately 15° to the right or left of the head axis. Several raptor species repeatedly cock their heads into three distinct positions while observing an object. First, is straight ahead with their head pointed towards the object. Second and third are sideways to the right or left of the object, with their head axis positioned approximately 40° adjacent to the object. This movement is believed to be associated with lining up the incoming image to fall on the deep fovea. Raptors will choose which head position to use depending on the distance to the object. At distances as close as 8m, they used primarily binocular vision. At distances greater than 21m, they spent more time using monocular vision. At distances greater than 40m, they spent 80% or more time using their monocular vision. This suggests that raptors tilt their head to rely on the highly acute deep fovea.

Like all birds, raptors possess tetrachromacy, however, due to their emphasis on visual acuity, many diurnal birds of prey have little ability to see ultraviolet light as this produces chromatic aberration which decreases the clarity of vision.

== See also ==

* Origin of birds

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* Olsen, Jerry 2014, Australian High Country raptors, CSIRO Publishing, Melbourne, .
* Remsen, J. V. Jr., C. D. Cadena, A. Jaramillo, M. Nores, J. F. Pacheco, M. B. Robbins, T. S. Schulenberg, F. G. Stiles, D. F. Stotz, and K. J. Zimmer. [Version 2007-04-05.] A classification of the bird species of South America. American Ornithologists&#x27; Union. Accessed 2007-04-10.

== External links ==

* Explore Birds of Prey with The Peregrine Fund
* Explore Birds of Prey on the Internet Bird Collection
* Bird of Prey Pictures
* Global Raptor Information Network
* The Arboretum at Flagstaff&#x27;s Wild Birds of Prey Program
* Raptor Resource Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="0" end="13" title="Bird of prey" label="Birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="17" end="32" title="Bird of prey" label="predatory birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="75" end="82" title="Bird of prey" label="raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242964" start="88" end="104" title="hypercarnivorous" label="hypercarnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="105" end="109" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="110" end="117" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="132" end="145" title="predation" label="hunt and feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="155" end="165" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="175" end="181" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="184" end="191" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q49345" start="269" end="282" title="bird vision" label="keen eyesight"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="359" end="365" title="talon (anatomy)" label="talons"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="417" end="421" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="519" end="529" title="fish eagle" label="fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="532" end="539" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211606" start="545" end="551" title="condor" label="condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="559" end="567" title="scavenge" label="scavenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="576" end="583" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750229" start="721" end="735" title="ornithologists" label="ornithologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420208" start="812" end="823" title="piscivorous" label="piscivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="842" end="847" title="stork" label="stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q25365" start="850" end="856" title="Crane (bird)" label="cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="858" end="863" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="866" end="870" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q205323" start="873" end="877" title="skua" label="skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="880" end="887" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8154335" start="894" end="904" title="kingfisher" label="kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="933" end="946" title="insectivorous" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="961" end="970" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="978" end="984" title="shrike" label="shrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q27244" start="988" end="996" title="nightjar" label="nightjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q788536" start="999" end="1008" title="frogmouth" label="frogmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="1029" end="1033" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="1039" end="1044" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470764" start="1100" end="1111" title="frugivorous" label="frugivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="1115" end="1126" title="herbivorous" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q19170" start="1127" end="1133" title="ratite" label="ratite"/>
<link wikidata="Q201231" start="1143" end="1154" title="cassowaries" label="cassowaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19171" start="1159" end="1164" title="rheas" label="rheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645445" start="1189" end="1200" title="telluravian" label="telluravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180691" start="1270" end="1279" title="mousebird" label="mousebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091970" start="1291" end="1303" title="Sandcoleidae" label="Sandcoleidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558536" start="1310" end="1325" title="Messelasturidae" label="Messelasturidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="1346" end="1360" title="common descent" label="common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q132268" start="1367" end="1381" title="Enantiornithes" label="Enantiornithes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="1424" end="1444" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="1485" end="1497" title="modern birds" label="modern birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="1641" end="1652" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="1806" end="1811" title="Eagle" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q149957" start="1887" end="1899" title="Aquilinae" label="Booted eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="1978" end="1984" title="Falcon" label="Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488588" start="1990" end="1997" title="kestrel" label="kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q754660" start="2120" end="2130" title="Falconinae" label="Falconidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21736" start="2162" end="2177" title="Accipitriformes" label="Accipitriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583899" start="2185" end="2194" title="Caracara (subfamily)" label="Caracaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="2251" end="2260" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="2285" end="2295" title="Neotropical realm" label="Neotropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q235152" start="2411" end="2416" title="Buteo" label="Buteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q940115" start="2458" end="2467" title="Accipitrinae" label="True hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188737" start="2539" end="2548" title="Accipiter" label="Accipiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251488" start="2701" end="2708" title="Buzzard" label="Buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q235152" start="2818" end="2823" title="Buteo" label="Buteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325926" start="2954" end="2961" title="Harrier (bird)" label="Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="3169" end="3178" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="3184" end="3189" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208342" start="3195" end="3199" title="Kite (bird)" label="Kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="3338" end="3344" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="3369" end="3375" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="3476" end="3479" title="Owl" label="Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q168748" start="3700" end="3713" title="secretarybird" label="secretarybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="3831" end="3838" title="Vulture" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="3844" end="3853" title="scavenger" label="scavenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="3923" end="3940" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="3943" end="3955" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="3983" end="4001" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q184858" start="4011" end="4028" title="New World vulture" label="New World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184858" start="4031" end="4042" title="Cathartidae" label="Cathartidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="4070" end="4088" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4182" end="4198" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4268" end="4275" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="4456" end="4469" title="red kite" label="Milvus milvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380" start="4509" end="4524" title="Eurasian sparrowhawk" label="Accipiter nisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="4548" end="4566" title="northern goshawk" label="Accipiter gentilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26490" start="4590" end="4607" title="common kestrel" label="Falco tinninculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25876" start="4629" end="4643" title="Eurasian hobby" label="Falco subbuteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="4708" end="4722" title="hen harrier" label="Circus cyaneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25385" start="4746" end="4757" title="common buzzard" label="Buteo buteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131918" start="4885" end="4891" title="merlin (bird)" label="merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="4991" end="5004" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="5226" end="5232" title="Vulture" label="Vultur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="5257" end="5262" title="Falco (bird)" label="Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q241515" start="5307" end="5312" title="Strix (genus)" label="Strix"/>
<link wikidata="Q754657" start="5337" end="5343" title="Lanius" label="Lanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="5418" end="5424" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334364" start="5426" end="5432" title="John Latham (ornithologist)" label="Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q599800" start="5437" end="5443" title="William Turton" label="Turton"/>
<link wikidata="Q358217" start="5446" end="5467" title="Louis Pierre Vieillot" label="Louis Pierre Vieillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="6616" end="6626" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q326483" start="6777" end="6793" title="Eufalconimorphae" label="Eufalconimorphae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718604" start="6827" end="6835" title="Afroaves" label="Afroaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q168748" start="6987" end="7000" title="secretarybird" label="secretarybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="7149" end="7160" title="Paraphyly" label="paraphylies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="7597" end="7604" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="7652" end="7660" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="7724" end="7736" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="7738" end="7742" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="7745" end="7750" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251488" start="7753" end="7760" title="buzzard" label="buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325926" start="7763" end="7771" title="Harrier (bird)" label="harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208342" start="7773" end="7777" title="kite (bird)" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="7784" end="7801" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893145" start="7805" end="7816" title="Pandionidae" label="Pandionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="7822" end="7828" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346527" start="7831" end="7844" title="Sagittariidae" label="Sagittariidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q168748" start="7850" end="7863" title="secretarybird" label="secretarybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q21744" start="7866" end="7876" title="Falconidae" label="Falconidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="7878" end="7884" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583899" start="7887" end="7895" title="Caracara (subfamily)" label="caracara"/>
<link wikidata="Q579064" start="7902" end="7915" title="forest falcon" label="forest falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184858" start="7919" end="7930" title="Cathartidae" label="Cathartidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25370" start="8040" end="8053" title="Falconiformes" label="Falconiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21736" start="8111" end="8126" title="Accipitriformes" label="Accipitriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639356" start="8185" end="8199" title="Cathartiformes" label="Cathartiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="8251" end="8264" title="Ciconiiformes" label="Ciconiiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q269284" start="8415" end="8433" title="letter-winged kite" label="letter-winged kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="8460" end="8472" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="8512" end="8521" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="8540" end="8543" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="8589" end="8595" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="8596" end="8604" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="8618" end="8630" title="owl" label="Strigiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26012" start="8634" end="8643" title="Strigidae" label="Strigidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27112" start="8672" end="8681" title="Tytonidae" label="Tytonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645445" start="8753" end="8763" title="Telluraves" label="Telluraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="8946" end="8955" title="paraphyly" label="paraphyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q124518532" start="9250" end="9258" title="Hieraves" label="Hieraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q14635103" start="9314" end="9325" title="Australaves" label="Australaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856078" start="9392" end="9408" title="Psittacopasserae" label="Psittacopasserae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207101" start="9493" end="9506" title="Cariamiformes" label="Cariamiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20645445" start="9522" end="9533" title="telluravian" label="telluravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q754030" start="9565" end="9573" title="seriemas" label="seriemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q752173" start="9586" end="9597" title="terror bird" label="terror bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756671" start="9743" end="9761" title="The Peregrine Fund" label="The Peregrine Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="9866" end="9876" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25557" start="10064" end="10074" title="Gruiformes" label="Gruiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207101" start="10122" end="10135" title="Cariamiformes" label="Cariamiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q168748" start="10308" end="10321" title="secretarybird" label="secretarybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="12904" end="12921" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805805" start="13203" end="13215" title="Maximum parsimony (phylogenetics)" label="parsimonious"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="13279" end="13295" title="sexual selection" label="sexual selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="13441" end="13462" title="intrasexual selection" label="intrasexual selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q591877" start="13855" end="13875" title="disruptive selection" label="disruptive selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488588" start="14242" end="14249" title="kestrel" label="kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054094" start="15030" end="15047" title="olfactory systems" label="olfactory systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="15508" end="15521" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="16096" end="16110" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q591640" start="16394" end="16415" title="Crowned eagle" label="African crowned eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201231" start="16744" end="16755" title="Cassowary" label="cassowaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="16797" end="16808" title="lammergeier" label="lammergeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="16827" end="16836" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q53745" start="16940" end="16951" title="Harpy Eagle" label="Harpy Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="16955" end="16968" title="Tupi language" label="Tupi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="16997" end="17010" title="golden eagles" label="golden eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q762810" start="17245" end="17256" title="Taung Child" label="Taung Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q591640" start="17359" end="17372" title="crowned eagle" label="crowned eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q243451" start="17378" end="17396" title="Haast&amp;#x27;s eagle" label="Haast&amp;#x27;s eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="17432" end="17443" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647357" start="17490" end="17504" title="Maori folklore" label="Maori folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797209" start="17512" end="17532" title="Leptoptilos robustus" label="Leptoptilos robustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186266" start="17571" end="17588" title="Homo floresiensis" label="Homo floresiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088733" start="17635" end="17657" title="Malagasy crowned eagle" label="Malagasy crowned eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q135217" start="17659" end="17668" title="teratorns" label="teratorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033548" start="17670" end="17691" title="Woodward&amp;#x27;s eagle" label="Woodward&amp;#x27;s eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="18236" end="18249" title="visual acuity" label="visual acuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="18280" end="18285" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="18291" end="18308" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q752465" start="18355" end="18373" title="wedge-tailed eagle" label="wedge-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17592" start="18447" end="18461" title="common ostrich" label="common ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q94556" start="19727" end="19740" title="tetrachromacy" label="tetrachromacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="19880" end="19900" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q905761" start="19959" end="19974" title="Origin of birds" label="Origin of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="20345" end="20358" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q465985" start="20360" end="20395" title="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54448" wikidata="Q1053470" url="?curid=54448" title="Insulin resistance">
<text>Insulin resistance (IR) is a pathological condition in which cells in insulin-sensitive tissues in the body fail to respond normally to the hormone insulin or downregulate insulin receptors in response to hyperinsulinemia.

Insulin is a hormone that facilitates the transport of glucose from blood into cells, thereby reducing blood glucose (blood sugar). Insulin is released by the pancreas in response to carbohydrates consumed in the diet. In states of insulin resistance, the same amount of insulin does not have the same effect on glucose transport and blood sugar levels. There are many causes of insulin resistance and the underlying process is still not completely understood. Risk factors for insulin resistance include obesity, sedentary lifestyle, family history of diabetes, various health conditions, and certain medications. Insulin resistance is considered a component of the metabolic syndrome. Insulin resistance can be improved or reversed with lifestyle approaches, such as weight reduction, exercise, and dietary changes.

There are multiple ways to measure insulin resistance such as fasting insulin levels or glucose tolerance tests, but these are not often used in clinical practice.

==Cause==
===Risk factors===
There are a number of risk factors for insulin resistance, including being overweight or obese or having a sedentary lifestyle. Various genetic factors can increase risk, such as a family history of diabetes, and there are some specific medical conditions associated with insulin resistance, such as polycystic ovary syndrome.

The U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases states that specific risks that may predispose an individual to insulin resistance can include:
* being aged 45 or older
* having African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander American ethnicity
* having health conditions such as high blood pressure and abnormal cholesterol levels
* having a history of gestational diabetes
* having a history of heart disease or stroke.

In addition some medications and other health conditions can raise the risk.

===Lifestyle factors===
Dietary factors are likely to contribute to insulin resistance. However, causative foods are difficult to determine given the limitations of nutrition research. Foods that have independently been linked to insulin resistance include those high in sugar with high glycemic indices, low in omega-3 and fiber, and which are hyperpalatable which increases risk of overeating. Overconsumption of fat- and sugar-rich meals and beverages have been proposed as a fundamental factor behind the metabolic syndrome epidemic.

Diet also has the potential to change the ratio of polyunsaturated to saturated phospholipids in cell membranes. The percentage of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) is inversely correlated with insulin resistance. It is hypothesized that increasing cell membrane fluidity by increasing PUFA concentration might result in an enhanced number of insulin receptors, an increased affinity of insulin to its receptors, and reduced insulin resistance.

Vitamin D deficiency has also been associated with insulin resistance.

Sedentary lifestyle increases the likelihood of development of insulin resistance. In epidemiological studies, higher levels of physical activity (more than 90 minutes per day) reduce the risk of diabetes by 28%.

Studies have consistently shown that there is a link between insulin resistance and circadian rhythm, with insulin sensitivity being higher in the morning and lower in the evening. A mismatch between the circadian rhythm and the meals schedule, such as in circadian rhythm disorders, may increase insulin resistance.
Insufficient sleep has been shown to cause insulin resistance, and also increases the risk of developing metabolic diseases such as type 2 diabetes and obesity.

===Medications===
Some medications are associated with insulin resistance including corticosteroids, protease inhibitors (type of HIV medication), and atypical antipsychotics.

===Exposure to light during sleep===
Being exposed to light during sleep has been shown to cause insulin resistance and increase heart rate.

===Hormones===
Many hormones can induce insulin resistance including cortisol, growth hormone, and human placental lactogen.

Cortisol counteracts insulin and can lead to increased hepatic gluconeogenesis, reduced peripheral utilization of glucose, and increased insulin resistance. It does this by decreasing the translocation of glucose transporters (especially GLUT4) to the cell membrane.

Based on the significant improvement in insulin sensitivity in humans after bariatric surgery and rats with surgical removal of the duodenum, it has been proposed that some substance is produced in the mucosa of that initial portion of the small intestine that signals body cells to become insulin resistant. If the producing tissue is removed, the signal ceases and body cells revert to normal insulin sensitivity. No such substance has been found as yet, and the existence of such a substance remains speculative.

Leptin is a hormone produced from the ob gene and adipocytes. Its physiological role is to regulate hunger by alerting the body when it is full. Studies show that lack of leptin causes severe obesity and is strongly linked with insulin resistance.

===Diseases===
Polycystic ovary syndrome and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are associated with insulin resistance. Hepatitis C also makes people three to four times more likely to develop type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance.

=== Mitochondrial dysfunction ===
Multiple studies involving different methodology suggest that impaired function of mitochondria might play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. Mitochondrial dysfunction may result from the formation of reactive oxygen species, genetic factors, aging, and reduced mitochondrial biogenesis. Important questions remain unsolved to date, however. If confirmed by rigorous studies, a link between mitochondrial disorders and reduced insulin sensitivity might pave the way to new therapeutic approaches.

=== Inflammation ===
Acute or chronic inflammation, such as in infections, can cause insulin resistance. TNF-α is a cytokine that may promote insulin resistance by promoting lipolysis, disrupting insulin signaling, and reducing the expression of GLUT4.

=== Genetics ===
Several genetic loci have been identified as associated with insulin insensitivity. These include variations in loci near the NAT2, GCKR, and IGFI genes, which are linked to insulin resistance. Further research has indicated that loci near these genes are correlated with insulin resistance. However, it is estimated that these loci only account for 25–44% of the genetic component of insulin resistance.

==Pathophysiology==
In normal metabolism, the elevated blood glucose instructs beta (β) cells in the Islets of Langerhans, located in the pancreas, to release insulin into the blood. The insulin makes insulin-sensitive tissues in the body (primarily skeletal muscle cells, adipose tissue, and liver) absorb glucose which provides energy as well as lowers blood glucose. The beta cells reduce insulin output as the blood glucose level falls, allowing blood glucose to settle at a constant of approximately 5 mmol/L (90 mg/dL). In an &quot;insulin-resistant&quot; person, normal levels of insulin do not have the same effect in controlling blood glucose levels.

When the body produces insulin under conditions of insulin resistance, the cells are unable to absorb or use it as effectively and it stays in the bloodstream. Certain cell types such as fat and muscle cells require insulin to absorb glucose and when these cells fail to respond adequately to circulating insulin, blood glucose levels rise. The liver normally helps regulate glucose levels by reducing its secretion of glucose in the presence of insulin. However, in insulin resistance, this normal reduction in the liver&#x27;s glucose production may not occur, further contributing to elevated blood glucose.

Insulin resistance in fat cells results in reduced uptake of circulating lipids and increased hydrolysis of stored triglycerides. This leads to elevated free fatty acids in the blood plasma and can further worsen insulin resistance. Since insulin is the primary hormonal signal for energy storage into fat cells, which tend to retain their sensitivity in the face of hepatic and skeletal muscle resistance, insulin resistance stimulates the formation of new fatty tissue and accelerates weight gain.

In states of insulin resistance, beta cells in the pancreas increase their production of insulin. This causes high blood insulin (hyperinsulinemia) to compensate for the high blood glucose. During this compensated phase of insulin resistance, beta cell function is upregulated, insulin levels are higher, and blood glucose levels are still maintained. If compensatory insulin secretion fails, then either fasting (impaired fasting glucose) or postprandial (impaired glucose tolerance) glucose concentrations increase. Eventually, type 2 diabetes occurs when glucose levels become higher as the resistance increases and compensatory insulin secretion fails. The inability of the β-cells to produce sufficient insulin in a condition of hyperglycemia is what characterizes the transition from insulin resistance to type 2 diabetes.

Insulin resistance is strongly associated with intestinal-derived apoB-48 production rate in insulin-resistant subjects and type 2 diabetics. Insulin resistance often is found in people with visceral adiposity, hypertension, hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia involving elevated triglycerides, small dense low-density lipoprotein (sdLDL) particles, and decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels. With respect to visceral adiposity, a great deal of evidence suggests two strong links with insulin resistance. First, unlike subcutaneous adipose tissue, visceral adipose cells produce significant amounts of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), and Interleukins-1 and −6, etc. In numerous experimental models, these proinflammatory cytokines disrupt normal insulin action in fat and muscle cells and may be a major factor in causing the whole-body insulin resistance observed in patients with visceral adiposity. Much of the attention on production of proinflammatory cytokines has focused on the IKK-beta/NF-kappa-B pathway, a protein network that enhances transcription of inflammatory markers and mediators that may cause insulin resistance. Second, visceral adiposity is related to an accumulation of fat in the liver, a condition known as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). The result of NAFLD is an excessive release of free fatty acids into the bloodstream (due to increased lipolysis), and an increase in hepatic breakdown of glycogen stores into glucose (glycogenolysis), both of which have the effect of exacerbating peripheral insulin resistance and increasing the likelihood of Type 2 diabetes mellitus.

The excessive expansion of adipose tissue that tends to occur under sustainedly positive energy balance (as in overeating) has been postulated by Vidal-Puig to induce lipotoxic and inflammatory effects that may contribute to causing insulin resistance and its accompanying disease states.

Also, insulin resistance often is associated with a hypercoagulable state (impaired fibrinolysis) and increased inflammatory cytokine levels. 

=== Molecular mechanism ===
At the molecular level, a cell senses insulin through insulin receptors, with the signal propagating through a signaling cascade collectively known as PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. Recent studies suggested that the pathway may operate as a bistable switch under physiologic conditions for certain types of cells, and insulin response may well be a threshold phenomenon. The pathway&#x27;s sensitivity to insulin may be blunted by many factors such as lipolysis of free fatty acids, causing insulin resistance. From a broader perspective, however, sensitivity tuning (including sensitivity reduction) is a common practice for an organism to adapt to the changing environment or metabolic conditions. Pregnancy, for example, entails significant metabolic changes, during which the mother must decrease the insulin sensitivity of her muscles to conserve more glucose for both the maternal and fetal brains. This adaptation can occur by elevating the response threshold, thereby delaying the onset of sensitivity. This is achieved through the secretion of placental growth factor, which interferes with the interaction between insulin receptor substrate (IRS) and PI3K. This concept forms the basis of the adjustable threshold hypothesis of insulin resistance.

Insulin resistance has been proposed to be a reaction to excess nutrition by superoxide dismutase in cell mitochondria that acts as an antioxidant defense mechanism. This link seems to exist under diverse causes of insulin resistance. It also is based on the finding that insulin resistance may be reversed rapidly by exposing cells to mitochondrial uncouplers, electron transport chain inhibitors, or mitochondrial superoxide dismutase mimetics.

==Diagnosis==
===Glucose tolerance testing===
During a glucose tolerance test (GTT), which may be used to diagnose diabetes mellitus, a fasting patient takes a 75 gram oral dose of glucose. Then blood glucose levels are measured over the following two hours.

Interpretation is based on WHO guidelines. After two hours a glycemia less than 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL) is considered normal, a glycemia of between 7.8 and 11.0 mmol/L (140 to 197 mg/dL) is considered as impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), and a glycemia of greater than or equal to 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) is considered diabetes mellitus.

An oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) may be normal or mildly abnormal in simple insulin resistance. Often, there are raised glucose levels in the early measurements, reflecting the loss of a postprandial peak (after the meal) in insulin production. Extension of the testing (for several more hours) may reveal a hypoglycemic &quot;dip,&quot; that is a result of an overshoot in insulin production after the failure of the physiologic postprandial insulin response.

===Fasting insulin levels===
A fasting serum insulin level greater than 29 microIU/mL or 174 pmol/L indicates insulin resistance. The same levels apply three hours after the last meal.

===Hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp===
The gold standard for investigating and quantifying insulin resistance is the &quot;hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp,&quot; so-called because it measures the amount of glucose necessary to compensate for an increased insulin level without causing hypoglycemia. It is a type of glucose clamp technique. The test is rarely performed in clinical care, but is used in medical research, for example, to assess the effects of different medications. The rate of glucose infusion commonly is referred to in diabetes literature as the GINF value.

The procedure takes about two hours. Through a peripheral vein, insulin is infused at 10–120 mU per m2 per minute. In order to compensate for the insulin infusion, glucose 20% is infused to maintain blood sugar levels between 5 and 5.5 mmol/L. The rate of glucose infusion is determined by checking the blood sugar levels every five to ten minutes.

The insulin sensitivity is determined by the rate of glucose infusion during the last thirty minutes of the test. If high levels (7.5 mg/min or higher) are needed, the patient is considered insulin-sensitive. Conversely, very low levels (4.0 mg/min or lower) indicate insulin resistance. Levels falling between 4.0 and 7.5 mg/min are not conclusive and suggest &quot;impaired glucose tolerance,&quot; which is an early indication of insulin resistance.

This fundamental technique can be greatly enhanced through the utilization of glucose tracers. Glucose can be labeled with either stable or radioactive atoms. Commonly employed tracers include 3-3H glucose (radioactive), 6,6 2H-glucose (stable), and 1-13C glucose (stable). Prior to initiating the hyperinsulinemic phase, a 3-hour tracer infusion allows for the determination of the basal rate of glucose production. Throughout the clamp, the plasma tracer concentrations facilitate the computation of whole-body insulin-stimulated glucose metabolism, as well as the production of glucose by the body. (i.e., endogenous glucose production).

===Modified insulin suppression test===
Another measure of insulin resistance is the modified insulin suppression test developed by Gerald Reaven at Stanford University. The test correlates well with the euglycemic clamp, with less operator-dependent error. This test has been used to advance the large body of research relating to the metabolic syndrome.

Patients initially receive 25 μg of octreotide (Sandostatin) in 5 mL of normal saline over 3 to 5 minutes via intravenous infusion (IV) as an initial bolus, and then, are infused continuously with an intravenous infusion of somatostatin (0.27 μg/m2/min) to suppress endogenous insulin and glucose secretion. Next, insulin and 20% glucose are infused at rates of 32 and 267 mg/m2/min, respectively. Blood glucose is checked at zero, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes, and thereafter, every 10 minutes for the last half-hour of the test. These last four values are averaged to determine the steady-state plasma glucose level (SSPG). Subjects with an SSPG greater than 150 mg/dL are considered to be insulin-resistant.

===Static function tests===
Given the complicated nature of the &quot;clamp&quot; technique (and the potential dangers of hypoglycemia in some patients), alternatives have been sought to simplify the measurement of insulin resistance. The first was the Homeostatic Model Assessment (HOMA), and more recent methods include the Quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUICKI) and SPINA-GR, a measure for insulin sensitivity. All of these calculated markers employ fasting insulin and glucose levels to calculate insulin resistance, and all correlate reasonably with the results of clamping studies.

====Interpretation of results====
** HOMA-IR &lt; 2: normal insulin sensitivity
** HOMA-IR &gt; 2: possible insulin resistance
** HOMA-IR &gt; 2,5: probable insulin resistance
** HOMA-IR &gt; 5: typical results for type 2 diabetes
** SPINA-GR 1,41–9,00 mol/s: normal insulin sensitivity
** SPINA-GR ≤ 1,40 mol/s: insulin resistance
** SPINA-GR &lt; 1,35 mol/s: typical results for type 2 diabetes

==Prevention and management==
Maintaining a healthy body weight and engaging in regular physical activity can help mitigate the risk of developing insulin resistance.

The primary treatment for insulin resistance is exercise and weight loss. Both metformin and thiazolidinediones improve insulin sensitivity. Metformin is approved for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes and has become one of the more commonly prescribed medications for insulin resistance.

The &quot;Diabetes Prevention Program&quot; (DPP) showed that exercise and diet were nearly twice as effective as metformin at reducing the risk of progressing to type 2 diabetes. However, the participants in the DPP trial regained about 40% of the weight that they had lost at the end of 2.8 years, resulting in a similar incidence of diabetes development in both the lifestyle intervention and the control arms of the trial. In epidemiological studies, higher levels of physical activity (more than 90 minutes per day) reduce the risk of diabetes by 28%.

Furthermore, physical training has also generally been seen to be an effective antagonist of insulin resistance in obese or overweight children and adolescents (under the age of 19). As per the 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis conducted by Marson et al., aerobic exercise is associated with fasting insulin reduction; however, resistance and combined exercise are not. The authors caution against demeaning the importance of resistance and combined exercise, as this type of training is generally less researched than aerobic training. Overall, physical training can be used in both adolescents and adults to prevent the progression of insulin resistance and future possible metabolic and cardiovascular disease.

Resistant starch from high-amylose corn, amylomaize, has been shown to reduce insulin resistance in healthy individuals, in individuals with insulin resistance, and in individuals with type 2 diabetes.

Some types of polyunsaturated fatty acids (omega-3) may moderate the progression of insulin resistance into type 2 diabetes, however, omega-3 fatty acids appear to have limited ability to reverse insulin resistance, and they cease to be efficacious once type 2 diabetes is established.

==History==
The concept that insulin resistance may be the underlying cause of diabetes mellitus type 2 was first advanced by Professor Wilhelm Falta and published in Vienna in 1931, and confirmed as contributory by Sir Harold Percival Himsworth of the University College Hospital Medical Centre in London in 1936; however, type 2 diabetes does not occur unless there is concurrent failure of compensatory insulin secretion.

=== Adaptive explanations ===
Some scholars go as far as to claim that neither insulin resistance, nor obesity really are metabolic disorders &quot;per se&quot;, but simply adaptive responses to sustained caloric surplus, intended to protect bodily organs from lipotoxicity (unsafe levels of lipids in the bloodstream and tissues): &quot;Obesity should therefore not be regarded as a pathology or disease, but rather as the normal, physiologic response to sustained caloric surplus... As a consequence of the high level of lipid accumulation in insulin target tissues including skeletal muscle and liver, it has been suggested that exclusion of glucose from lipid-laden cells is a compensatory defense against further accumulation of lipogenic substrate.&quot;

Other prevailing thoughts that insulin resistance can be an evolutionary adaptation include the thrifty gene hypothesis. This hypothesis raises the point that if there is a genetic component to insulin resistance and Type 2 diabetes, these phenotypes should be selected against. Yet, there has been an increase in mean insulin resistance in both the normoglycemic population as well as the diabetic population.

J.V. Neel posits that in ancient human ancestors, during periods of heightened famine, genes facilitating increased glucose storage would have conferred an advantage. However, in today&#x27;s modern environment, this is no longer the case.

Evidence contradicts Neel&#x27;s hypothesis in studies of the Pima Indians, which suggest that individuals with higher insulin sensitivity tended to have higher weights, whereas those with insulin resistance tended to weigh less on average within this demographic.

Modern hypotheses propose that insulin metabolism serves as a socio-ecological adaptation, with insulin serving as the mechanism for allocating energy to different body components and insulin sensitivity being an adaptation to regulate this energy allocation. The Behavioral Switch Hypothesis suggests that insulin resistance leads to two methods of altering reproductive and behavioral strategies. These strategies are termed &quot;r to K&quot; and &quot;soldier to diplomat.&quot; The &quot;r to K&quot; strategy involves directing insulin through the placenta to the fetus, resulting in weight gain in the fetus but not the mother, indicating an increase in parental investment (K strategy). In the &quot;soldier to diplomat&quot; strategy, the insensitivity of skeletal muscle to insulin could redirect glucose to the brain, which does not require insulin receptors. This has been shown to enhance cognitive development across various studies.

== See also ==

* Pancreatic beta cell function
* Chronic Somogyi rebound
* Hyperinsulinemia
* Resistin
* Chronic stress
* Systemic inflammation
* Circadian rhythm disruption
* Advanced glycation end-products
* Polycystic ovary syndrome
==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1053470" start="0" end="18" title="Insulin resistance" label="Insulin resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053470" start="20" end="22" title="Insulin resistance" label="IR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="29" end="41" title="pathological" label="pathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="61" end="66" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="148" end="155" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q224527" start="159" end="171" title="downregulation" label="downregulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422579" start="180" end="189" title="Insulin receptor" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q14375936" start="205" end="221" title="hyperinsulinemia" label="hyperinsulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="237" end="244" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="327" end="340" title="blood glucose" label="blood glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="383" end="391" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="407" end="420" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="685" end="696" title="Risk factor (epidemiology)" label="Risk factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="729" end="736" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="738" end="757" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="777" end="785" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q657193" start="891" end="909" title="metabolic syndrome" label="metabolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="1344" end="1363" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q500816" start="1537" end="1562" title="polycystic ovary syndrome" label="polycystic ovary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q29220409" start="1574" end="1638" title="National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases" label="National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q273924" start="2451" end="2467" title="Glycemic index" label="glycemic indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q123051125" start="2509" end="2523" title="hyperpalatable" label="hyperpalatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q657193" start="2673" end="2691" title="metabolic syndrome" label="metabolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q970537" start="2773" end="2782" title="saturated fats" label="saturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="2834" end="2861" title="polyunsaturated fatty acids" label="polyunsaturated fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="3151" end="3160" title="Vitamin D" label="Vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="3309" end="3324" title="Epidemiology" label="epidemiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="3521" end="3537" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="3641" end="3657" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712607" start="3693" end="3718" title="circadian rhythm disorder" label="circadian rhythm disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="3886" end="3901" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="4000" end="4014" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q55761529" start="4017" end="4036" title="protease inhibitors" label="protease inhibitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q758295" start="4067" end="4089" title="atypical antipsychotic" label="atypical antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="4304" end="4312" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="4314" end="4328" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21154415" start="4334" end="4358" title="human placental lactogen" label="human placental lactogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="4382" end="4389" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191835" start="4424" end="4439" title="gluconeogenesis" label="gluconeogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q420277" start="4566" end="4585" title="glucose transporter" label="glucose transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768727" start="4599" end="4604" title="GLUT4" label="GLUT4"/>
<link wikidata="Q357503" start="4705" end="4722" title="bariatric surgery" label="bariatric surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="4761" end="4769" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="4831" end="4837" title="mucosa" label="mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223739" start="5146" end="5152" title="Leptin" label="Leptin"/>
<link wikidata="Q500816" start="5410" end="5435" title="PCOS" label="Polycystic ovary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546498" start="5440" end="5481" title="NAFLD" label="non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="5522" end="5533" title="Hepatitis C" label="Hepatitis C"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="5753" end="5765" title="Mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="5894" end="5917" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="6296" end="6301" title="tumor necrosis factor-alpha" label="TNF-α"/>
<link wikidata="Q898489" start="6365" end="6374" title="lipolysis" label="lipolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q728309" start="6969" end="6989" title="Islets of Langerhans" label="Islets of Langerhans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="7006" end="7014" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="7127" end="7133" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="7141" end="7148" title="adipose" label="adipose"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="7161" end="7166" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="7175" end="7182" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="7716" end="7719" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="7724" end="7730" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="7874" end="7879" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="8163" end="8172" title="adipose tissue" label="fat cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="8235" end="8245" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="8256" end="8268" title="triglyceride" label="triglyceride"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="8299" end="8309" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="8318" end="8330" title="blood plasma" label="blood plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q357519" start="8443" end="8452" title="fat cells" label="fat cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767180" start="8675" end="8684" title="beta cell" label="beta cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="8693" end="8701" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14375936" start="8752" end="8770" title="hyperinsulinemia" label="high blood insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q116972071" start="8885" end="8903" title="Pancreatic beta cell function" label="beta cell function"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890615" start="9538" end="9545" title="Apolipoprotein B" label="apoB-48"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476525" start="9716" end="9728" title="dyslipidemia" label="dyslipidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28749" start="9775" end="9798" title="low-density lipoprotein" label="low-density lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q410020" start="9832" end="9856" title="high-density lipoprotein" label="high-density lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="10108" end="10117" title="cytokines" label="cytokines"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="10155" end="10160" title="TNF-a" label="TNF-a"/>
<link wikidata="Q194908" start="10167" end="10179" title="Interleukins" label="Interleukins"/>
<link wikidata="Q411114" start="10524" end="10534" title="NF-kappa-B" label="NF-kappa-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546498" start="10762" end="10795" title="non-alcoholic fatty liver disease" label="non-alcoholic fatty liver disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q680603" start="10990" end="11004" title="glycogenolysis" label="glycogenolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="11116" end="11140" title="T2DM" label="Type 2 diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q61080073" start="11289" end="11299" title="Antonio Vidal-Puig" label="Vidal-Puig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570013" start="11485" end="11506" title="hypercoagulable state" label="hypercoagulable state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410794" start="11517" end="11529" title="fibrinolysis" label="fibrinolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119288" start="11756" end="11787" title="PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway" label="PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11848" end="11856" title="Bistability#In biological and chemical systems" label="bistable"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030500" start="12660" end="12683" title="placental growth factor" label="placental growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101433828" start="12731" end="12757" title="insulin receptor substrate" label="insulin receptor substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410776" start="12943" end="12963" title="superoxide dismutase" label="superoxide dismutase"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="12972" end="12984" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="13228" end="13252" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111307" start="13282" end="13311" title="superoxide dismutase mimetics" label="superoxide dismutase mimetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501412" start="13369" end="13391" title="glucose tolerance test" label="glucose tolerance test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="13601" end="13604" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="13635" end="13643" title="blood sugar" label="glycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087205" start="13777" end="13803" title="impaired glucose tolerance" label="impaired glucose tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="13892" end="13909" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501412" start="13915" end="13942" title="oral glucose tolerance test" label="oral glucose tolerance test"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="14225" end="14237" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q514654" start="14609" end="14622" title="gold standard (test)" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="14774" end="14781" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="14823" end="14830" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="14853" end="14865" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975183" start="14883" end="14906" title="glucose clamp technique" label="glucose clamp technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168696" start="15192" end="15207" title="peripheral vein" label="peripheral vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="15209" end="15216" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727" start="15252" end="15258" title="minute" label="minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="15299" end="15307" title="intravenous" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="15309" end="15316" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="15448" end="15459" title="blood sugar" label="blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488818" start="16723" end="16736" title="Gerald Reaven" label="Gerald Reaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q419935" start="16984" end="16994" title="octreotide" label="octreotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407166" start="17172" end="17184" title="somatostatin" label="somatostatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="17781" end="17793" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889863" start="17912" end="17940" title="homeostatic model assessment" label="Homeostatic Model Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268928" start="17985" end="18029" title="Quantitative insulin sensitivity check index" label="Quantitative insulin sensitivity check index"/>
<link wikidata="Q114895375" start="18043" end="18051" title="SPINA-GR" label="SPINA-GR"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="18127" end="18134" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="18135" end="18142" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="18147" end="18154" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="18877" end="18885" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q718113" start="18890" end="18901" title="weight loss" label="weight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q19484" start="18908" end="18917" title="metformin" label="metformin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393556" start="18922" end="18939" title="thiazolidinedione" label="thiazolidinedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q19484" start="19230" end="19239" title="metformin" label="metformin"/>
<link wikidata="Q574416" start="20396" end="20412" title="Resistant starch" label="Resistant starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749550" start="20437" end="20447" title="amylomaize" label="amylomaize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="20613" end="20640" title="Polyunsaturated fat" label="polyunsaturated fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="20642" end="20649" title="omega-3" label="omega-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="20965" end="20982" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585907" start="21106" end="21131" title="Harold Percival Himsworth" label="Harold Percival Himsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556772" start="21573" end="21585" title="lipotoxicity" label="lipotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="21696" end="21705" title="pathology" label="pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759725" start="22170" end="22193" title="thrifty gene hypothesis" label="thrifty gene hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="23032" end="23042" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116972071" start="23960" end="23989" title="Pancreatic beta cell function" label="Pancreatic beta cell function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467170" start="23992" end="24015" title="Chronic Somogyi rebound" label="Chronic Somogyi rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q14375936" start="24018" end="24034" title="Hyperinsulinemia" label="Hyperinsulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419499" start="24037" end="24045" title="Resistin" label="Resistin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305232" start="24048" end="24062" title="Chronic stress" label="Chronic stress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24065" end="24086" title="Inflammation#Interleukins and obesity" label="Systemic inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24089" end="24116" title="Circadian rhythm#Obesity and diabetes" label="Circadian rhythm disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556837" start="24119" end="24150" title="Advanced glycation end-products" label="Advanced glycation end-products"/>
<link wikidata="Q500816" start="24153" end="24178" title="Polycystic ovary syndrome" label="Polycystic ovary syndrome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54449" wikidata="Q193673" url="?curid=54449" title="Muzio Clementi">
<text>Muzio Filippo Vincenzo Francesco Saverio Clementi (23 January 1752 – 10 March 1832) was an Italian-British composer, virtuoso pianist, pedagogue, conductor, music publisher, editor, and piano manufacturer, who was mostly active in England.

Encouraged to study music by his father, he was sponsored as a young composer by Sir Peter Beckford who took him to England to advance his studies. Later, he toured Europe numerous times from his long-standing base in London. It was on one of these occasions, in 1781, that he engaged in a piano competition with Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.

Influenced by Domenico Scarlatti&#x27;s harpsichord school and Joseph Haydn&#x27;s classical school and by the &quot;stile Galante&quot; of Johann Christian Bach and Ignazio Cirri, Clementi developed a fluent and technical legato style, which he passed on to a generation of pianists, including John Field, Johann Baptist Cramer, Ignaz Moscheles, Giacomo Meyerbeer, Friedrich Kalkbrenner, Johann Nepomuk Hummel, and Carl Czerny. He was a notable influence on Ludwig van Beethoven and Frédéric Chopin.

Clementi also produced and promoted his own brand of pianos and was a notable music publisher. Because of this activity, many compositions by Clementi&#x27;s contemporaries and earlier artists have stayed in the repertoire. Though the reputation of Clementi was exceeded only by Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and Rossini in his day, his popularity languished for much of the 19th and 20th centuries.

==Life==
===Childhood===
Muzio Filippo Vincenzo Francesco Saverio Clementi (baptized Mutius Philippus Vincentius Franciscus Xaverius) was born in Rome, Papal States, on 23 January 1752, and baptized the following day at San Lorenzo in Damaso. He was the eldest of the seven children of Nicolò Clementi, a silversmith, and Madalena, (Magdalena Kaiser). Nicolò soon recognised Muzio&#x27;s musical talent and arranged for private musical instruction with a relative, Antonio Baroni, the maestro di cappella at St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica.

===Education===
At the age of seven, Clementi began studies in figured bass with the organist S. Giovanni Cordicelli, followed by voice lessons from Giuseppe Santarelli. A few years later, probably when he was 11 or 12, he was given counterpoint lessons by . By the age of 13 Clementi had already composed an oratorio, &quot;Martirio de&#x27; gloriosi Santi Giuliano e Celso&quot;, and a mass. When he was 14, in January 1766, he became organist of the parish church of San Lorenzo in Dámaso.

===Move to England===
In 1766 Sir Peter Beckford, a wealthy Englishman, nephew of William Beckford (twice Lord Mayor of London, and father of the novelist William Thomas Beckford), visited Rome. He was impressed by the young Clementi&#x27;s musical talent and negotiated with his father to take him to his estate, Stepleton House, north of Blandford Forum in Dorset, England. Beckford agreed to provide quarterly payments to sponsor the boy&#x27;s musical education until he reached the age of 21. In return, he was expected to provide musical entertainment. For the next seven years, Clementi lived, performed, and studied at the estate in Dorset. During this period, it appears, Clementi spent eight hours a day at the harpsichord, practicing and studying the works of Johann Sebastian Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, George Frideric Handel, Arcangelo Corelli, Domenico Scarlatti, Alessandro Scarlatti, and Bernardo Pasquini. His only compositions dated to this period are the Sonatas Op. 13 and 14 and the &quot;Sei Sonate per clavicembalo o pianoforte&quot;, Op. 1.

In 1770 Clementi made his first public performance as an organist. The audience was reported to be impressed with his playing, thus beginning one of the outstandingly successful concert pianist careers of the period.

In 1774 Clementi was freed from his obligations to Peter Beckford. During the winter of 1774–1775 he moved to London, making his first appearance as a harpsichordist in a benefit concert on 3 April 1775. He made several public appearances in London as a solo harpsichordist at benefit concerts for two local musicians, a singer and a harpist, and served as conductor (from the keyboard) at the King&#x27;s Theatre (now His Majesty&#x27;s Theatre), Haymarket, for at least part of this time.

===Mozart===
Clementi started a three-year European tour in 1780, traveling to Paris, France, where he performed for Queen Marie Antoinette; Munich, Germany; and Salzburg, Austria. In Vienna, he agreed to enter a musical contest with Mozart for the entertainment of Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II and his guests on 24 December 1781, at the Viennese court. The composers were called upon to improvise and to perform selections from their own compositions. The Emperor diplomatically declared a tie.

On 12 January 1782, Mozart reported to his father: &quot;Clementi plays well, as far as execution with the right-hand goes. His greatest strength lies in his passages in 3rds. Apart from that, he has not a kreuzer&#x27;s worth of taste or feeling – in short, he is a mere mechanic.&quot; In a subsequent letter, he wrote: &quot;Clementi is a charlatan, like all Italians. He marks a piece presto but plays only allegro.&quot;

Clementi&#x27;s impressions of Mozart, by contrast, were enthusiastic. Much later, the pianist Ludwig Berger recalled him saying of Mozart: &quot;Until then I had never heard anyone play with such spirit and grace. I was particularly overwhelmed by an adagio and by several of his extempore variations for which the Emperor had chosen the theme, and which we were to devise alternately.&quot;

Despite later attempts to portray the two as rivals, there is no evidence that their meeting was not cordial. At the time, Clementi was exploring a more virtuosic and flamboyant style, and this might explain Mozart&#x27;s disparaging attitude. One of the pieces he performed was his Op. 11 toccata, a display piece full of parallel thirds. It would appear that Mozart&#x27;s opinion might later have changed somewhat. As noted by Hermann Abert in his 1920 biography &quot;W. A. Mozart&quot;, the set of variations K. 500 of 1786 &quot;includes a handful of novel pianistic effects that are foreign to Mozart&#x27;s earlier style and that clearly reflect the influence of Clementi&quot;.

Mozart used the opening motif of Clementi&#x27;s B-flat major sonata (Op. 24, No. 2) in his overture for &quot;The Magic Flute&quot;. It was not unusual for composers to borrow from one another, and this might be considered a compliment. Though Clementi noted in subsequent publications of his sonata that it had been written ten years before Mozart&#x27;s opera—presumably to make clear who was borrowing from whom—Clementi retained an admiration for Mozart, as reflected in the large number of transcriptions he made of Mozart&#x27;s music, among which is a piano solo version of the &quot;Magic Flute&quot; overture.

===Teaching===
From 1783, and for the next twenty years, Clementi stayed in England, playing the piano, conducting, and teaching. Several of his students include Johann Baptist Cramer, Thomas Paul Chipp, Ignaz Moscheles, Therese Jansen Bartolozzi, Johann Nepomuk Hummel, Ludwig Berger (who went on to teach Felix Mendelssohn), and John Field (who, in his turn, would become a major influence on Frédéric Chopin).

===Publishing and piano manufacturing===

In 1798, Clementi took over the firm Longman and Broderip at 26 Cheapside (then the most prestigious shopping street in London), initially with James Longman, who left in 1801. Clementi also had offices at 195 Tottenham Court Road from 1806. The publication line, &quot;Clementi &amp; Co, &amp; Clementi, Cheapside&quot; appears on a lithograph, &quot;Music&quot; by William Sharp after John Wood (1801–1870), circa 1830s.

Clementi also began manufacturing pianos, but on 20 March 1807, a fire destroyed the firm&#x27;s warehouses in Rotten Road, resulting in a loss of about £40,000. That same year, Clementi made an agreement with Ludwig van Beethoven (one of his greatest admirers), which gave him full publishing rights to all of Beethoven&#x27;s music in England. He edited and interpreted Beethoven&#x27;s music but has received criticism for editorial work such as making harmonic &quot;corrections&quot; to some of Beethoven&#x27;s scores.

In 1810, Clementi stopped performing in order to devote his time to composition and to piano making. On 24 January 1813, together with a group of prominent professional musicians in England, he founded the &quot;Philharmonic Society of London&quot;, which became the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1912. In 1813 Clementi was appointed a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music.

Meanwhile, his piano business had flourished, affording him an increasingly elegant lifestyle. As an inventor and skilled mechanic, he made important improvements in the construction of the piano, some of which have become standard.

===Final years===

At the end of 1816, Clementi made another trip to the continent to introduce his new works, particularly at the Concerts Spirituels in Paris. He returned to London in June 1818, after stopping off in Frankfurt. In 1821 he once again returned to Paris, conducting his symphonies in Munich and Leipzig. In London, in 1824 his symphonies were featured in five of the six programs at the &#x27;Concerts of Ancient and Modern Music&#x27; at the King&#x27;s Theatre.

In 1826 Clementi completed his collection of keyboard studies, &quot;Gradus ad Parnassum&quot;, and set off for Paris with the intention of publishing the third volume of the work simultaneously in Paris, London, and Leipzig. After staying in Baden and most likely making another visit to Italy, he returned to London in the autumn of 1827.

On 17 December 1827, a large banquet was organised by Johann Baptist Cramer and Ignaz Moscheles in his honour at the Hotel Albion. Moscheles, in his diary, says that on that occasion Clementi improvised at the piano on a theme by George Frideric Handel. In 1828 he made his last public appearance at the opening concert of the Philharmonic Society. In 1830 he retired from the Society.

Clementi moved with his wife Emma (née Gisborne) and his family to the outskirts of Lichfield, Staffordshire and rented &#x27;Lincroft House&#x27; on the Earl of Lichfield&#x27;s Estate from Lady Day 1828 until late 1831. He then moved to Evesham where he died on 10 March 1832, after a short illness, aged eighty. On 29 March 1832, he was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. Accompanying his body were three of his students: Johann Baptist Cramer, John Field and Ignaz Moscheles. He had five children; by his first wife, Caroline (née Lehmann), he had a son who died soon after his birth; by his wife Emma he had two sons and two daughters. Among his descendants are the British colonial administrators Sir Cecil Clementi Smith and Sir Cecil Clementi, Air Vice Marshal Cresswell Clementi of the RAF, Sir David Clementi who was a deputy-governor of the Bank of England, and Marjorie Clementi (1927–1997), a pianist and piano teacher who became Professor of the Piano at the Royal Northern College of Music. Amongst his descendants in Italy was Rodolfo Graziani, Marshal of Italy and Viceroy of Ethiopia during the Fascist period, who was related to the composer via his mother, Adelia Clementi.

==Music==
=== Piano works ===
As a composer of classical piano sonatas, Clementi was among the first to create keyboard works expressly for the capabilities of the piano. He has been called &quot;Father of the Piano&quot;.

Of Clementi&#x27;s playing in his youth, Moscheles wrote that it was &quot;marked by a most beautiful legato, a supple touch in lively passages, and a most unfailing technique.&quot; Mozart may be said to have closed the old—and Clementi to have founded the newer—school of technique on the piano.
Clementi composed almost 110 piano sonatas. Some of the earlier and easier ones were later classified as sonatinas after the success of his Sonatinas Op. 36.

=== Symphonic works ===
Clementi&#x27;s symphonies are less well known. Though many of his manuscripts have been lost, autograph portions of his unpublished symphonies, which include everything from sketches to complete movements, are in the Library of Congress and the British Library. From these autographs, scholars have been able to reconstruct four symphonies. Clementi also published two symphonies as Op. 18 in 1787, the first in B-flat major and the second in D major. Clementi successfully performed his symphonies in London and other cities in Europe, predominantly from 1813 to 1828. Based on performance reports, scholars estimate that he composed approximately twenty symphonies in total during his life. Clementi used the theme to &quot;God Save the King&quot; in his Symphony No. 3 in G major often called the &quot;Great National Symphony&quot;, cataloged as WoO 34.

In 2002, for the 250th anniversary of his birth, scholars published new research about Clementi&#x27;s life and works. Ut Orpheus is publishing the 61-volume set of Clementi&#x27;s complete works, which will include new editions of his symphonies.

=== Influence ===
Clementi&#x27;s influence extended well into the 19th century, with composers using his sonatas as models for their keyboard compositions. Ludwig van Beethoven, in particular, had the highest regard for Clementi. Beethoven often played Clementi sonatas and often a volume of them was on his music stand. Beethoven recommended these works to many people including his nephew Karl. A description of Beethoven&#x27;s regard for Clementi&#x27;s music can be found in the testimony of his assistant, Anton Schindler, who wrote &quot;He [Beethoven] had the greatest admiration for these sonatas, considering them the most beautiful, the most pianistic of works, both for their lovely, pleasing, original melodies and for the consistent, easily followed form of each movement. The musical education of his beloved nephew was confined for many years almost exclusively to the playing of Clementi sonatas&quot;. Schindler continues with reference to Beethoven&#x27;s fondness for Clementi&#x27;s piano sonatas: &quot;For these, he had the greatest preference and placed them in the front rank of pieces appropriate to the development of fine piano playing, as much for their lovely, pleasing, fresh melodies as for the well-knit, fluent forms of all the movements.&quot; Moscheles&#x27; edition of Schindler&#x27;s biography quotes the latter as follows: &quot;Among all the masters who have written for piano, Beethoven assigned to Clementi the very foremost rank. He considered his works excellent as studies for practise, for the formation of a pure taste, and as truly beautiful subjects for performance. Beethoven used to say: &#x27;They who thoroughly study Clementi, at the same time make themselves acquainted with Mozart and other composers; but the converse is not the fact.

Mozart, who wrote in a letter to his sister Marianne that he would prefer her not to play Clementi&#x27;s sonatas due to their jumped runs, and wide stretches and chords, which he thought might ruin the natural lightness of her hand.

Erik Satie, a contemporary of Debussy, would later parody these sonatinas (specifically the Sonatina Op. 36, No. 1) in his &quot;Sonatine bureaucratique&quot;.

Carl Czerny also had the highest regard for Clementi&#x27;s piano sonatas and used them successfully in his teaching of Franz Liszt. Czerny referred to Clementi as &quot;the foremost pianist of his time.&quot;

Frédéric Chopin would often require his pupils to practice Clementi&#x27;s preludes and exercises because of the exceptional virtues he attributed to them.

Vladimir Horowitz developed a special fondness for Clementi&#x27;s work after his wife, Wanda Toscanini, bought him Clementi&#x27;s complete works. He recorded five of Clementi&#x27;s Sonatas along with shorter pieces.

By a ministerial decree dated 20 March 2008, the Opera Omnia of Muzio Clementi was promoted to the status of Italian National Edition. The steering committee of the National Edition consisting of the scholars Andrea Coen (Rome), Roberto De Caro (Bologna), Roberto Illiano (Lucca — President), Leon Plantinga (New Haven, Connecticut), David Rowland (Milton Keynes, UK), Luca Lévi Sala (Paris/Poitiers, Secretary, and Treasurer), Massimiliano Sala (Pistoia, Vice-President), Rohan H. Stewart-MacDonald (Cambridge, UK) and Valeria Tarsetti (Bologna).

==References==
==Further reading==
* R. Illiano, L. L. Sala, M. Sala (eds.): &quot;Muzio Clementi. Studies and Prospects&quot; (Bologna 2002)
*
* L. L. Sala, &quot;Muzio Clementi, Concerto per cembalo e orchestra / Concerto for Piano and Orchestra Op-sn 30&quot;, Critical Edition, Bologna, Ut Orpheus Edizioni (Opera Omnia, Italian National Edition, vol. II.5—CCE 2), 2012, pp. xxxix, 65. .
* L. L. Sala and Rohan H. Steward-MacDonald, &quot;Muzio Clementi, Sonatas for Harpsichord or Piano Opp. 7–10&quot;, Critical Edition, Bologna, Ut Orpheus, (Opera Omnia, Italian National Edition, Vol: VIII.2-CCE 3), 2018, , .
* L. L. Sala and Rohan H. Steward-MacDonald (eds.), &quot;Muzio Clementi and British Musical Culture. Sources, Performance Practice, Style&quot;, New York, Routledge, 2019, (hbk) (ebk).
* M. Sala, R. Bösel (eds.): &quot;Muzio Clementi Cosmopolita della Musica&quot; (Bologna 2004)

==External links==
*www.MuzioClementi.com (English)
*Muzio Clementi Society website
*Free scores at the Mutopia Project
* Complete contents of Clementi&#x27;s &quot;Gradus ad Parnassum&quot; with comparisons to similar studies by Domenico Scarlatti and Robert Schumann&#x27;s list of valuable studies]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193673" start="0" end="49" title="Muzio Clementi" label="Muzio Filippo Vincenzo Francesco Saverio Clementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="107" end="115" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="126" end="133" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="135" end="144" title="pedagogue" label="pedagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="146" end="155" title="conductor (music)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172746" start="326" end="340" title="Peter Beckford (hunter)" label="Peter Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="554" end="577" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q167837" start="594" end="612" title="Domenico Scarlatti" label="Domenico Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="643" end="655" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="663" end="679" title="classical period (music)" label="classical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141686" start="691" end="716" title="Galant music" label="&amp;quot;stile Galante&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q106641" start="720" end="741" title="Johann Christian Bach" label="Johann Christian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792312" start="746" end="759" title="Ignazio Cirri" label="Ignazio Cirri"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="803" end="809" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="Q209684" start="875" end="885" title="John Field (composer)" label="John Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="887" end="908" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="910" end="925" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="927" end="944" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170270" start="946" end="967" title="Friedrich Kalkbrenner" label="Friedrich Kalkbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q151953" start="969" end="990" title="Johann Nepomuk Hummel" label="Johann Nepomuk Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215333" start="996" end="1007" title="Carl Czerny" label="Carl Czerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="1039" end="1059" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="1064" end="1079" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="1160" end="1175" title="Music publisher (popular music)" label="music publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="1391" end="1398" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1625" end="1629" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886229" start="1699" end="1720" title="San Lorenzo in Damaso" label="San Lorenzo in Damaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216340" start="1784" end="1795" title="silversmith" label="silversmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776438" start="1944" end="1958" title="Antonio Baroni" label="Antonio Baroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="1964" end="1983" title="Kapellmeister" label="maestro di cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="1987" end="2012" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="2078" end="2090" title="figured bass" label="figured bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565524" start="2164" end="2183" title="Giuseppe Santarelli" label="Giuseppe Santarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="2324" end="2332" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217295" start="2403" end="2407" title="Mass (music)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886229" start="2485" end="2506" title="San Lorenzo in Damaso" label="San Lorenzo in Dámaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172746" start="2543" end="2557" title="Peter Beckford (hunter)" label="Peter Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q333240" start="2591" end="2607" title="William Beckford (politician)" label="William Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11902879" start="2615" end="2625" title="Lord Mayor" label="Lord Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q361026" start="2664" end="2687" title="William Thomas Beckford" label="William Thomas Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17531200" start="2823" end="2838" title="Stepleton House" label="Stepleton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="2849" end="2864" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="2868" end="2874" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="3230" end="3241" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="3280" end="3301" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q76428" start="3303" end="3328" title="Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach" label="Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="3330" end="3352" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q164475" start="3354" end="3371" title="Arcangelo Corelli" label="Arcangelo Corelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q167837" start="3373" end="3391" title="Domenico Scarlatti" label="Domenico Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q183087" start="3393" end="3413" title="Alessandro Scarlatti" label="Alessandro Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q355191" start="3419" end="3436" title="Bernardo Pasquini" label="Bernardo Pasquini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13591396" start="3489" end="3510" title="List of compositions by Muzio Clementi" label="Sonatas Op. 13 and 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q765778" start="3638" end="3646" title="organist" label="organist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850936" start="3970" end="3985" title="benefit concert" label="benefit concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="4133" end="4140" title="harpist" label="harpist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="4218" end="4244" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, London" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q893034" start="4247" end="4256" title="Haymarket, London" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="4414" end="4430" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="4453" end="4461" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4475" end="4481" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="4525" end="4531" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="4557" end="4585" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q18776" start="4994" end="5001" title="kreuzer" label="kreuzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430956" start="5130" end="5139" title="charlatan" label="charlatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q452414" start="5310" end="5323" title="Ludwig Berger (composer)" label="Ludwig Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q140544" start="5899" end="5906" title="toccata" label="toccata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784746" start="5932" end="5947" title="Third (chord)" label="parallel thirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q61275" start="6039" end="6052" title="Hermann Abert" label="Hermann Abert"/>
<link wikidata="Q162478" start="6123" end="6125" title="Köchel catalogue" label="K."/>
<link wikidata="Q5064" start="6408" end="6423" title="The Magic Flute" label="The Magic Flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="7080" end="7101" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529003" start="7103" end="7120" title="Thomas Paul Chipp" label="Thomas Paul Chipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="7122" end="7137" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782920" start="7139" end="7164" title="Therese Jansen Bartolozzi" label="Therese Jansen Bartolozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151953" start="7166" end="7187" title="Johann Nepomuk Hummel" label="Johann Nepomuk Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q452414" start="7189" end="7202" title="Ludwig Berger (composer)" label="Ludwig Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="7225" end="7242" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q209684" start="7249" end="7259" title="John Field (composer)" label="John Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="7313" end="7328" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068693" start="7438" end="7447" title="Cheapside" label="Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647486" start="7584" end="7604" title="Tottenham Court Road" label="Tottenham Court Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018327" start="7741" end="7754" title="William Sharp (lithographer)" label="William Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="8008" end="8028" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224389" start="8147" end="8153" title="copy editing" label="edited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292443" start="8591" end="8617" title="Royal Philharmonic Society" label="Royal Philharmonic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541450" start="8674" end="8704" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Music" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123913" start="9072" end="9091" title="Concert Spirituel" label="Concerts Spirituels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="9160" end="9169" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="9241" end="9247" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="9252" end="9259" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q491491" start="9491" end="9510" title="Gradus ad Parnassum" label="Gradus ad Parnassum"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="9818" end="9839" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="9844" end="9859" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="9994" end="10016" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="10235" end="10244" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="10246" end="10259" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="10518" end="10535" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209684" start="10610" end="10620" title="John Field (composer)" label="John Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056012" start="10869" end="10889" title="Cecil Clementi Smith" label="Cecil Clementi Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q839225" start="10898" end="10912" title="Cecil Clementi" label="Cecil Clementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184521" start="10931" end="10949" title="Cresswell Clementi" label="Cresswell Clementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="10957" end="10960" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232415" start="10966" end="10980" title="David Clementi" label="David Clementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="11014" end="11029" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544384" start="11135" end="11166" title="Royal Northern College of Music" label="Royal Northern College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q319156" start="11205" end="11221" title="Rodolfo Graziani" label="Rodolfo Graziani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546995" start="11908" end="11920" title="piano sonata" label="piano sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045984" start="11984" end="11992" title="sonatina" label="sonatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="12280" end="12299" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="12308" end="12323" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="12789" end="12806" title="God Save the King" label="God Save the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="12820" end="12828" title="Symphony" label="Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728362" start="12838" end="12845" title="G major" label="G major"/>
<link wikidata="Q616043" start="12913" end="12916" title="WoO" label="WoO"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="13328" end="13348" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q15823075" start="13563" end="13567" title="Karl van Beethoven" label="Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q64862" start="13684" end="13699" title="Anton Schindler" label="Anton Schindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q157928" start="15010" end="15018" title="Maria Anna Mozart" label="Marianne"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="15201" end="15211" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="15231" end="15238" title="Debussy" label="Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560849" start="15330" end="15353" title="Sonatine bureaucratique" label="Sonatine bureaucratique"/>
<link wikidata="Q215333" start="15362" end="15373" title="Carl Czerny" label="Carl Czerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="15482" end="15493" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="15573" end="15588" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192506" start="15730" end="15747" title="Vladimir Horowitz" label="Vladimir Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430812" start="15818" end="15833" title="Wanda Toscanini" label="Wanda Toscanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524828" start="16243" end="16257" title="Leon Plantinga" label="Leon Plantinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542831" start="17503" end="17518" title="Mutopia Project" label="Mutopia Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q167837" start="17629" end="17647" title="Domenico Scarlatti" label="Domenico Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="17652" end="17667" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54450" wikidata="Q224338" url="?curid=54450" title="Adams County">
<text>Adams County is the name of twelve counties in the United States. Most are named for one of two presidents, John Adams or his son, John Quincy Adams:

*Adams County, Colorado
*Adams County, Idaho 
*Adams County, Illinois 
*Adams County, Indiana 
*Adams County, Iowa 
*Adams County, Mississippi 
*Adams County, Nebraska 
*Adams County, North Dakota 
*Adams County, Ohio 
*Adams County, Pennsylvania 
*Adams County, Washington 
*Adams County, Wisconsin </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="108" end="118" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="131" end="148" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q112807" start="152" end="174" title="Adams County, Colorado" label="Adams County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q109815" start="176" end="195" title="Adams County, Idaho" label="Adams County, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q108798" start="198" end="220" title="Adams County, Illinois" label="Adams County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q351808" start="223" end="244" title="Adams County, Indiana" label="Adams County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q110768" start="247" end="265" title="Adams County, Iowa" label="Adams County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q108788" start="268" end="293" title="Adams County, Mississippi" label="Adams County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q112823" start="296" end="318" title="Adams County, Nebraska" label="Adams County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q28316" start="321" end="347" title="Adams County, North Dakota" label="Adams County, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q109969" start="350" end="368" title="Adams County, Ohio" label="Adams County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q351865" start="371" end="397" title="Adams County, Pennsylvania" label="Adams County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q156273" start="400" end="424" title="Adams County, Washington" label="Adams County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q351887" start="427" end="450" title="Adams County, Wisconsin" label="Adams County, Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54451" wikidata="Q56151" url="?curid=54451" title="Warren County, New York">
<text>Warren County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 65,737. The county seat is Queensbury. The county was established in 1813 and is named in honor of General Joseph Warren, an American Revolutionary War hero of the Battle of Bunker Hill. The county is part of the Capital District region of the state.

==History==

When counties were established in the Province of New York in 1683, the present Warren County was part of Albany County. The county was enormous, covering the northern part of New York State, all of the present State of Vermont, and, in theory, extended westward to the Pacific Ocean. It was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont. On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Charlotte County (named for the British queen Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz), contained the eastern portion.

In 1778, the name Charlotte County was changed to Washington County to honor George Washington, the American Revolutionary War general and later President of the United States of America.

In 1788, Washington County was reduced in size by the splitting-off of Clinton County. This was a much larger area than the present Clinton County, including several other counties or county parts of the present New York State. Washington County was slightly enlarged by the transfer of the Town of Cambridge from Albany County to Washington County in 1791.

In 1813, Warren County was split off from Washington County, receiving its name in honor of General Joseph Warren. County officials first met in the Lake George Coffee House in the hamlet of Caldwell (known today as Lake George Village). James Caldwell, a patenee of the Town of Caldwell, donated land within the hamlet to serve as the county seat beginning in 1819.
Lake George is the site of a YMCA conference center, the Silver Bay YMCA, founded in 1900 and one of only a few of its type in the United States. The Silver Bay Inn was built in 1904 and is on the National Register of Historic Places.

In 1963, the courthouse in Lake George village was closed and operations moved several miles south to its present-day location at the Warren County Municipal Center main campus in Queensbury.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (6.9%) is water.

Warren County is situated in the eastern portion of New York State in the Adirondack Mountains. The eastern border is Washington County. The highest peak in the county is Gore Mountain at an elevation of . It is typically included as the northern part of the Capital District although it is sometimes included as part of the North Country.

===Adjacent counties===
* Essex County - north
* Washington County - east
* Saratoga County - south
* Hamilton County - west

===Climate===
The climate of Warren County is humid continental, as is most of New York State. In the winter, bouts of cold, dry air arrive from Canada, and interior sections of North America. In the summer, the Gulf Stream can bring days of hot, moist, humid air to the county. Extratropical storms often affect the county; in the winter, Nor&#x27;easters bring heavy snow and rain, and sometimes high wind. Fall and spring are generally relatively mild and pleasant, with fall foliage regarded as some of the most stunning in the country. In the summer and fall, back door cold fronts move in from the north and bring thunderstorms, sometimes severe.

==Government and politics==


















Warren County has been heavily supportive of Republican candidates since the Civil War. Both of Warren County&#x27;s representatives in the state legislature, Elizabeth O&#x27;C. Little in the Senate and Teresa Sayward in the Assembly are Republicans. Currently Republicans constitute 51% of registered voters in Warren County, while Democrats account for 23%.

Democrats have been steadily making inroads in recent years; Senator Charles Schumer won the county by 56% in his re-election bid in 2004, and the Democrats recently gained a majority on the Glens Falls City Council. John Hall, a Democrat, picked up the county judgeship position in 2003. In 2006 Republican John E. Sweeney was unseated in the district by Kirsten Gillibrand as Member of Congress. In 2009 Congresswoman Kirsten Gillibrand was selected by Governor David Paterson to replace Hillary Clinton as New York&#x27;s junior Senator. Democrat Scott Murphy was elected to replace Gillibrand in a special election for the NY 20th congressional district.

In the 2008 presidential election, Barack Obama narrowly carried Warren County over John McCain, with Obama receiving 16,281 votes countywide to McCain&#x27;s total of 15,424 votes. This was only the second time since 1964 that Warren County had voted for the Democratic nominee, the other being 1996, when Bill Clinton won with a plurality. In 2012, Obama won again by a similar margin over Republican nominee Mitt Romney. In 2016, Donald Trump flipped the county back to the Republicans, with an 8.5 percent margin of victory over Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. In 2020, Warren County voted for Trump again by a very narrow margin of just 57 votes, despite moving 8 points towards the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joe Biden and junior California senator Kamala Harris. Warren is one of six New York counties that Trump won by less than 500 votes.

Warren County has 20 county supervisors, which represent 11 of the county&#x27;s towns and the City of Glens Falls:
* Bolton: Ronald F. Conover
* Chester: Craig R. Leggett
* Glens Falls
** Ward 1: Jack Diamond
** Ward 2: Peter V. McDevitt
** Ward 3: Claudia Knudsen Braymer
** Ward 4: Daniel Bruno
** Ward 5: Bennett F. Driscoll Jr.
* Hague: Edna A. Frasier
* Horicon: Matthew Simpson
* Johnsburg: Andrea Hogan
* Lake George: Dennis L. Dickinson
* Lake Luzerne: Eugene J. Merlino
* Queensbury
** County:
*** Michael Wild
*** Douglas Beaty
*** Brad Magowan
*** Rachel Seeber
** Town: John Strough
* Stony Creek: Frank E. Thomas
* Thurman: Susan Shepler
* Warrensburg: Kevin Geraghty

The board of supervisors control weighted votes for county matters, based on the population of the towns they represent, with the Queensbury Town Supervisor and county supervisors having the largest number of votes on the board.

The current Warren County sheriff is James LaFarr. The sheriff&#x27;s office is structured around three divisions; Administrative Services, Law Enforcement and Correction. The Law Enforcement Division includes both Investigative Services, Patrol Services and the Communications Center. Patrol Services have specialized units that operate under the control of the Division Commander. The sheriff&#x27;s office provides boat patrols on Lake George and Schroon Lake.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 63,303 people, 25,726 households, and 17,056 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 34,852 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.48% White, 0.62% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 0.55% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.23% from other races, and 0.91% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.05% of the population. 17.9% were of Irish, 12.7% English, 11.4% Italian, 11.1% French, 10.6% German and 9.0% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 96.3% spoke English, 1.4% Spanish and 1.0% French as their first language.

There were 25,726 households, out of which 30.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.90% were married couples living together, 10.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.70% were non-families. 27.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.93.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 24.00% under the age of 18, 7.50% from 18 to 24, 28.20% from 25 to 44, 25.10% from 45 to 64, and 15.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 94.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.00 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $39,198, and the median income for a family was $46,793. Males had a median income of $32,922 versus $22,279 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,727. About 7.20% of families and 9.70% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.10% of those under age 18 and 5.90% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===
==Economy==
Throughout the county, annual retail sales totals up to $1,010,937,000. General merchandise sales is $101,762,000. Apparel store&#x27;s annual sales are $98,221,000 while annual food sales is $162,890,000. Health and drug store sales total up to $44,841,000.

The county contains the highest concentrated area of medical manufacturers in New York state, with many medical inventions originating in the county. Norman Jekyll and David Sheridan introduced the medical device industry to the Glens Falls area. In the 1940s, they produced products that were from materials supplied by war-torn Europe. One of the primary manufacturers is AngioDynamics Inc., which is located in Queensbury, and is a producer of medical devices used in minimally invasive, image-guided procedures to treat peripheral vascular disease. Another major manufacturer of medical devices is Boston Scientific Corp., which is located in Glens Falls.

==Education==
In Warren County, there are 16 public elementary schools, with the largest being the Queensbury Elementary School, serving 1,150 students and the smallest being the Abraham Wing School, serving 146 students. There are nine middle schools, with the largest being Queensbury Middle School, serving 945 students and the smallest being the Bolton Central School, serving 285 students. There are also 11 high schools, with the largest being the Queensbury Senior High School, serving 1,301 students, and the smallest being the Bolton Central School, serving 285 students. In addition, there is one major private secondary school: the St. Mary&#x27;s - St. Alphonsus Regional Catholic School, which is located in Glens Falls.

SUNY Adirondack is the site of post-secondary education in Warren County. Located in Queensbury, the college provides an extensive program of degrees and certificate programs. SUNY Plattsburgh, based in Clinton County, offers bachelor and master-degree programs at the SUNY Adirondack campus.

==Healthcare==
The primary healthcare center in Warren County is the Glens Falls Hospital, which is located in Glens Falls. Providing 410 beds, its most common procedure is miscellaneous diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.

==Transportation==

===Bus===
Regular bus service from Queensbury to Glens Falls is provided by CDTA. These also include trolleys that run on the road. The trolleys go from Bolton Landing (four times a day) and usually turn around just north of Hearthstone Point Campground on Route 9N.

===Roads===

There are several state and county maintained roads in Warren County, making up a total of of roadway. The only U.S. Route is U.S. Route 9, which traverses the eastern portion of the county. The only interstate is Interstate 87, also known as the Adirondack Northway.

====South of Lake George Village====
Only New York State Route 9N traverses the Lake Luzerne region of Warren County. There are two state-maintained routes in Glens Falls: Route 9L, which terminates in the city, while the second is New York State Route 32, which leaves Warren for Washington County, where it terminates at New York State Route 196. Also, on the eastern side of the city, there is County Route 79 (Boulevard), a former alignment of NY 32. There is New York State Route 149, a long road that traverses Warren and nearby Washington counties. There is also New York State Route 254, a road in southern part of the town and enters Washington County as well. The third and final state maintained route is New York State Route 9L, which traverses down the central portion of the town. Several county routes traverse through Stony Creek. These include County Route 3, County Route 12, County Route 22, and County Route 76.

====Lake George Village====
There are several major routes in the town and village of Lake George. There is New York State Route 9N, which traverses north to south through the county. There is also County Routes 6 (Fort George Boulevard) and 59 (Bloody Pond Road). The latter is a continuation of New York State Route 9L and heads to terminate in Queensbury. In this town includes New York State Route 912Q, which is the Exit 22 connector/park &amp; ride on the Northway.

====North of Lake George Village====

Although the region for Bolton and Bolton Landing is large, there is only one state-maintained route, Route 9N, and there is County Route 11 (Bolton-Riverbank Road), which is a connector to Exit 24 on the Northway. Only two county or higher-level maintained roads traverse the hamlet of Diamond Point, Route 9N and County Route 35 (Diamond Point Road), which connects 9N to the Northway (Exit 23) and U.S. Route 9 in Warrensburg. New York State Route 8 enters the county at Johnsburg, entering into the Town of Chester, where it merges with U.S. Route 9 for almost four miles, splitting off at the Landon Hill/Route 8/Route 9 intersection. New York State Route 8 terminates at an intersection with New York State Route 9N in the center of Hague. There are several state-maintained and county-maintained roads in the Warrensburg area. These include the termini of both New York State Route 28 and New York State Route 418 at US 9. There are also a few county routes, including County Route 4 in Athol and County Route 10 (Horicon Road) in Warrensburg. Route 10 continues eastward, terminating in Bolton Landing.

===Trains===
The Fort Edward Amtrak station is located southeast of Glens Falls. Amtrak serves the station via its Adirondack and Ethan Allen Express daily routes, which allow easy access to Montréal, Albany, New York City, and Rutland, Vermont, among many other towns and cities.

The Whitehall Amtrak station is located northeast of Glens Falls and is serviced by the Adirondack route.

===Airport===
Floyd Bennett Memorial Airport (FAA: GFL) is a county-owned, public-use airport located 3 nautical miles (6 km) northeast of Glens Falls, in the Town of Queensbury.

==Arts and culture==
Warren County is home to several music centers, including the Luzerne Music Center, which is a summer camp focused on teaching music, in the foothills of the Adirondacks. In July, it holds an annual Chamber Music Festival which is open for public viewing. The Upper Hudson Musical Arts is also a popular attraction, bringing concerts by professional chamber music ensembles and soloists to the Adirondacks throughout the year. Concerts are held at the Tannery Pond Community Center in North Creek. In addition, the Charles R. Wood Theater home to Adirondack Theatre Festival is a year-round professional theater in Glens Falls.

In Warren County, New York on Lake George at Bolton Landing, Golden Heart Farm art colony the summer residence of Thomas and Wilhelmina Weber Furlong of the Art Students League of New York opened in the summer of 1921. The historically important art colony and artists in residence program were at the center of the American modernist movement as important artists like David Smith, John Graham, and Dorothy Dehner from Manhattan traveled to Warren County to escape the city and study with the couple. A New York State historic marker was placed for the Warren County Bicentennial honoring Weber Furlong On July 23, 2013, at City Hall in Glens Falls.

==Points of interest==

===Lake George===
Warren County is the primary area of tourism related to Lake George. Lake George is a lake located in the Adirondack Mountains. Popular activities on the lake include river tubing, swimming, kayaking and boating. There are several large points of interest in the Lake George region. These include Prospect Mountain just outside town, Steel Pier along Beach Road which serves several tour boats. The village is a popular tourist spot and is home to many stores and novelty shops. There is the Lake George Battleground on the edge of the village along County Route 6.

To the north, there are several hotels and motels to serve tourists visiting the lake. There are several campgrounds around the region including Hearthstone Point on Route 9N and Lake George Battleground south of the village. There are also several campgrounds on islands on the lake. These include Long Island, which serves 88 campsites. All island campgrounds and land-locked grounds are maintained by the New York Department of Environmental Conservation.
===Historic sites===

One of the premiere historic sites in Warren County is the Fredella, Joseph J., House and Garage, which was constructed in 1900, and is significant for its architectural detail. It is on the list of National Register of Historic Places. Another popular historic site is the Wreck of the 1758 radeau LAND TORTOISE, a shipwreck site which occurred in 1758 of European-American origin. Other historic sites include:
* Chapman Historical Museum
* Marcella Sembrich Opera Museum
* Edward Eggleston Estate
* First Presbyterian Church of Glens Falls
* Fredella Street Historic District (Glens Falls)
* Three Squares Historic District (Glens Falls)
* The Hyde Collection(Glens Falls)
* Warrensburg Mills Historic District
* Wiawaka Bateaux Site
* Wiawaka Holiday House
* List of Historic Markers in Warren County

==Communities==
===Larger Settlements===
===Towns===

* Bolton
* Chester
* Hague
* Horicon
* Johnsburg
* Lake George
* Lake Luzerne
* Queensbury (county seat)
* Stony Creek
* Thurman
* Warrensburg
===Hamlets===

* Brant Lake
* East Lake George
* Kattskill Bay
* North River
* Oneida Corners
* Riparius
* Silver Bay
* Wevertown
* Pottersville
==See also==

* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Warren County, New York

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Official Warren County website
* Warren County, New York: Genealogy and History
* History of Warren County, edited by H. P. Smith - Chapter XVI: To the Present Time
* Early history of Warren County
* Archives of historical newspapers in Warren County</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56151" start="0" end="13" title="Warren County, New York" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19" end="25" title="Administrative divisions of New York#County" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="33" end="43" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="47" end="55" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="67" end="78" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="111" end="122" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414040" start="126" end="136" title="Queensbury, New York" label="Queensbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q590644" start="206" end="219" title="Joseph Warren" label="Joseph Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="224" end="250" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="263" end="284" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320597" start="312" end="328" title="Capital District (New York)" label="Capital District"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="402" end="422" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="470" end="483" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="584" end="591" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193860" start="708" end="725" title="Cumberland County, New York" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572034" start="777" end="794" title="Gloucester County, New York" label="Gloucester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085894" start="985" end="1001" title="Charlotte County, Province of New York" label="Charlotte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="1031" end="1064" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56149" start="1149" end="1166" title="Washington County, New York" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1176" end="1193" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1199" end="1225" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1244" end="1285" title="President of the United States of America" label="President of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q114884" start="1359" end="1373" title="Clinton County, New York" label="Clinton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151861" start="1579" end="1596" title="Cambridge (town), New York" label="Town of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q590644" start="1747" end="1760" title="Joseph Warren" label="Joseph Warren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1828" end="1834" title="Administrative divisions of New York#Hamlet" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980661" start="1863" end="1882" title="Lake George (village), New York" label="Lake George Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624801" start="1918" end="1934" title="Lake George (town), New York" label="Town of Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624801" start="2014" end="2025" title="Lake George (town), New York" label="Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515834" start="2164" end="2178" title="Silver Bay Association Complex" label="Silver Bay Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2211" end="2247" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2474" end="2492" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="2640" end="2660" title="Adirondack Mountains" label="Adirondack Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q56149" start="2684" end="2701" title="Washington County, New York" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586117" start="2737" end="2750" title="Gore Mountain (New York)" label="Gore Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320597" start="2825" end="2841" title="Capital District, New York" label="Capital District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054928" start="2891" end="2904" title="North Country (New York)" label="North Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q114992" start="2933" end="2945" title="Essex County, New York" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q56149" start="2956" end="2973" title="Washington County, New York" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q487605" start="2983" end="2998" title="Saratoga County, New York" label="Saratoga County"/>
<link wikidata="Q114948" start="3009" end="3024" title="Hamilton County, New York" label="Hamilton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="3245" end="3256" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001587" start="3373" end="3388" title="Nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="Nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="3608" end="3618" title="cold front" label="cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3778" end="3788" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898893" start="3892" end="3918" title="Elizabeth O&amp;#x27;C. Little" label="Elizabeth O&amp;#x27;C. Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702217" start="3937" end="3951" title="Teresa Sayward" label="Teresa Sayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="4164" end="4179" title="Charles Schumer" label="Charles Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379621" start="4286" end="4297" title="Glens Falls" label="Glens Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199983" start="4403" end="4418" title="John E. Sweeney" label="John E. Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22222" start="4451" end="4469" title="Kirsten Gillibrand" label="Kirsten Gillibrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q290602" start="4645" end="4657" title="Scott Murphy" label="Scott Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="4790" end="4802" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="4839" end="4850" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="5062" end="5074" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="5166" end="5177" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="5188" end="5200" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="5307" end="5322" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="5490" end="5499" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="5530" end="5543" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278288" start="6563" end="6570" title="Sheriffs in the United States" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7029" end="7035" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7265" end="7270" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7278" end="7283" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7287" end="7303" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7311" end="7326" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7334" end="7339" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7347" end="7363" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7376" end="7387" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7423" end="7431" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7435" end="7441" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="7498" end="7503" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="7511" end="7518" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="7526" end="7533" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="7541" end="7547" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="7555" end="7561" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="7571" end="7579" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="7602" end="7613" title="Census 2000" label="Census 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7627" end="7634" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="7641" end="7648" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7658" end="7664" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8630" end="8647" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8743" end="8755" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270858" start="10237" end="10266" title="Queensbury High School" label="Queensbury Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379621" start="10504" end="10515" title="Glens Falls, New York" label="Glens Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395009" start="10518" end="10533" title="SUNY Adirondack" label="SUNY Adirondack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603626" start="10694" end="10710" title="SUNY Plattsburgh" label="SUNY Plattsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q114884" start="10721" end="10735" title="Clinton County, New York" label="Clinton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="10839" end="10849" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569313" start="10881" end="10901" title="Glens Falls Hospital" label="Glens Falls Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035551" start="11135" end="11139" title="Capital District Transportation Authority" label="CDTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487028" start="11466" end="11478" title="U.S. Route 9 in New York" label="U.S. Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q94940" start="11554" end="11567" title="Interstate 87 (New York)" label="Interstate 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485920" start="11651" end="11674" title="New York State Route 9N" label="New York State Route 9N"/>
<link wikidata="Q451807" start="11841" end="11864" title="New York State Route 32" label="New York State Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486407" start="11932" end="11956" title="New York State Route 196" label="New York State Route 196"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486319" start="12073" end="12097" title="New York State Route 149" label="New York State Route 149"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486524" start="12179" end="12203" title="New York State Route 254" label="New York State Route 254"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485918" start="12325" end="12348" title="New York State Route 9L" label="New York State Route 9L"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485920" start="12650" end="12673" title="New York State Route 9N" label="New York State Route 9N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485918" start="12839" end="12862" title="New York State Route 9L" label="New York State Route 9L"/>
<link wikidata="Q94940" start="12923" end="12948" title="New York State Route 912Q" label="New York State Route 912Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485902" start="13483" end="13505" title="New York State Route 8" label="New York State Route 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709023" start="13527" end="13536" title="Johnsburg, New York" label="Johnsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487028" start="13594" end="13606" title="U.S. Route 9 in New York" label="U.S. Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485902" start="13693" end="13715" title="New York State Route 8" label="New York State Route 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485920" start="13751" end="13774" title="New York State Route 9N" label="New York State Route 9N"/>
<link wikidata="Q451746" start="13921" end="13944" title="New York State Route 28" label="New York State Route 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486827" start="13949" end="13973" title="New York State Route 418" label="New York State Route 418"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096460" start="14182" end="14193" title="Fort Edward station" label="Fort Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="14194" end="14200" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379621" start="14233" end="14244" title="Glens Falls" label="Glens Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q504115" start="14280" end="14290" title="Adirondack (train)" label="Adirondack"/>
<link wikidata="Q254597" start="14295" end="14314" title="Ethan Allen Express" label="Ethan Allen Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="14356" end="14364" title="Montréal" label="Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="14366" end="14372" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14374" end="14387" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q25893" start="14393" end="14409" title="Rutland (city), Vermont" label="Rutland, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098080" start="14451" end="14460" title="Whitehall station" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462388" start="14568" end="14598" title="Floyd Bennett Memorial Airport" label="Floyd Bennett Memorial Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="14658" end="14671" title="nautical mile" label="nautical mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="14676" end="14678" title="kilometre" label="km"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379621" start="14693" end="14704" title="Glens Falls, New York" label="Glens Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414040" start="14713" end="14731" title="Queensbury, New York" label="Town of Queensbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931569" start="14817" end="14837" title="Luzerne Music Center" label="Luzerne Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="14913" end="14924" title="Adirondacks" label="Adirondacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940203" start="15429" end="15443" title="Bolton Landing" label="Bolton Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579544" start="15445" end="15462" title="Golden Heart Farm" label="Golden Heart Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002379" start="15509" end="15533" title="Wilhelmina Weber Furlong" label="Wilhelmina Weber Furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="15541" end="15560" title="Art Students League" label="Art Students League"/>
<link wikidata="Q726169" start="15754" end="15765" title="David Smith (sculptor)" label="David Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089948" start="15767" end="15778" title="John D. Graham" label="John Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164544" start="15784" end="15798" title="Dorothy Dehner" label="Dorothy Dehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592031" start="15888" end="15918" title="List of New York State Historic Markers in Warren County, New York" label="New York State historic marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495651" start="16134" end="16145" title="Lake George (lake), New York" label="Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="16184" end="16204" title="Adirondack Mountains" label="Adirondack Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16375" end="16392" title="Prospect Mountain (New York)" label="Prospect Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339061" start="17053" end="17102" title="New York Department of Environmental Conservation" label="New York Department of Environmental Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="17325" end="17361" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073290" start="17541" end="17566" title="Chapman Historical Museum" label="Chapman Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741188" start="17769" end="17788" title="The Hyde Collection" label="The Hyde Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592031" start="17889" end="17930" title="List of New York State Historic Markers in Warren County, New York" label="List of Historic Markers in Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835003" start="17988" end="17994" title="Bolton, New York" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490784" start="17997" end="18004" title="Chester, Warren County, New York" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501630" start="18007" end="18012" title="Hague, New York" label="Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708215" start="18015" end="18022" title="Horicon, New York" label="Horicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709023" start="18025" end="18034" title="Johnsburg, New York" label="Johnsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624801" start="18037" end="18048" title="Lake George (town), New York" label="Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708445" start="18051" end="18063" title="Lake Luzerne, New York" label="Lake Luzerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414040" start="18066" end="18076" title="Queensbury, New York" label="Queensbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708819" start="18093" end="18104" title="Stony Creek, New York" label="Stony Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q946177" start="18107" end="18114" title="Thurman, New York" label="Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506095" start="18117" end="18128" title="Warrensburg (town), New York" label="Warrensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q59543234" start="18146" end="18156" title="Brant Lake, New York" label="Brant Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328771" start="18159" end="18175" title="East Lake George, New York" label="East Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378364" start="18178" end="18191" title="Kattskill Bay, New York" label="Kattskill Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707113" start="18194" end="18205" title="North River, New York" label="North River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093659" start="18208" end="18222" title="Oneida Corners, New York" label="Oneida Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335566" start="18225" end="18233" title="Riparius, New York" label="Riparius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515831" start="18236" end="18246" title="Silver Bay, New York" label="Silver Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990216" start="18249" end="18258" title="Wevertown, New York" label="Wevertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q22074938" start="18261" end="18273" title="Pottersville, New York" label="Pottersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="18290" end="18318" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977754" start="18321" end="18393" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Warren County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Warren County, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54453" wikidata="Q156566" url="?curid=54453" title="Rensselaer County, New York">
<text>Rensselaer County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 161,130. Its county seat is Troy. The county is named in honor of the family of Kiliaen van Rensselaer, the original Dutch owner of the land in the area. The county is part of the Capital District region of the state.

Rensselaer County is part of the Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==

The area that is now Rensselaer County was inhabited by the Algonquian-speaking Mohican Indian tribe at the time of European encounter. Kiliaen van Rensselaer, a Dutch jeweler and merchant, purchased the area in 1630 and incorporated it in his patroonship Rensselaerswyck. (It was part of the Dutch colony New Netherland).

The land passed into English rule in 1664; the Dutch regained control in 1673, but the English took it back in 1674. Until 1776, the year of American independence, the county was under English or British control. The county was not organized as a legal entity until after the Revolution, in 1791, when it was created from an area that was originally part of the very large Albany County.

In 1807, in a county re-organization, the rural sections of Troy were set off as Towns, and the city was incorporated. The two towns created were Brunswick (named for Duke Friedrich Wilhelm of Braunschweig-Lüneburg) and Grafton (named for Henry FitzRoy, 5th Duke of Grafton). A third town, Philipstown, was set off in 1806. In 1808, it was renamed Nassau after the duke of that area.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.9%) is water.

Rensselaer County is located in the far eastern part of New York State. The eastern boundary of the county runs along the New York–Vermont and New York–Massachusetts borders.

The terrain runs from level and flat near the Hudson and then rises into the Rensselaer Plateau around Poestenkill and Sand Lake, then to the Taconic Mountains along the Massachusetts state line.

The highest point is Berlin Mountain, above sea level, in the town of Berlin. The lowest point is above sea level at the Hudson River&#x27;s southernmost extent in the county.

The Hoosic River, a tributary of the Hudson River, is in the northern part of the county.

Depending on precise location within the county, road travel distance to New York City ranges between .

==Adjacent counties==
* Washington County — north
* Bennington County, Vermont — northeast
* Berkshire County, Massachusetts — east
* Columbia County — south
* Greene County — southwest
* Albany County — west
* Saratoga County — northwest

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2010, there were 159,429 people, 62,694 households, and 39,989 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 69,120 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 88.73% White, 7.14% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 1.71% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.89% from other races, and 1.34% from two or more races. 5.01% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 22.3% were of Irish, 14.7% Italian, 12.8% German, 7.5% English, 6.2% French, 5.3% American and 2.3% Puerto Rican ancestry according to Census 2010. 95.4% spoke English and 2.7% Spanish as their first language.

There were 61,094 households, out of which 33.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.80% were married couples living together, 12.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.80% were non-families. 27.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.02.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 24.20% under the age of 18, 10.10% from 18 to 24, 29.10% from 25 to 44, 23.00% from 45 to 64, and 13.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 95.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.70 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $42,905, and the median income for a family was $52,864. Males had a median income of $36,666 versus $28,153 for females. The per capita income for the county was $21,095. About 6.70% of families and 9.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.90% of those under age 18 and 6.60% of those age 65 or over.

=== 2020 census ===
==Government and politics==













|}

From 1884 through the 1988 campaign, voters in 
Rensselaer County chiefly supported the Republican candidate. Donald Trump carried the county in 2016.

Beginning in 1791, Rensselaer County was governed by a Board of Supervisors, which acted as the Legislature, with the chairman of the board serving as a &quot;de facto&quot; Executive. The Board of Supervisors form of government was terminated as a result of a class action lawsuit brought by Troy attorney Marvin I. Honig on behalf of his wife, Nedda, during March 1968. Mr. Honig brought this lawsuit to declare that the Board of Supervisors, as constituted, violated the &quot;one man, one vote&quot; principal declared by the United States Supreme Court. Mr. Honig&#x27;s motive in bringing the lawsuit was to punish the Rensselaer County Republican Party chairman and certain members of the Board of Supervisors for defaulting on an agreement with him. The NY Supreme Court ruled in Honig&#x27;s favor, and ordered the creation of a legislative body. Several plans were offered, but a plan proposed by Honig was adopted by the Court, and its decision was affirmed by the Appellate Division and Court of Appeals. The first &quot;Honig Plan&quot; was drawn to favor the Democratic party, which had not had control of the county government in decades. That plan, which controlled the 1969 election, resulted in the Democrats winning control of the new Rensselaer County Legislature. Thereafter, following a change of leadership in the Republican party, Honig brought a new plan, drawn to favor Republican candidates, to the court, which adopted his revised plan. The second &quot;Honig Plan&quot; was affirmed by the Appellate Division and the Court of Appeals. The Republican candidates won back the County Legislature in the 1971 election, and Honig became the Renssselaer County Attorney, a position he held for well over a decade. A full explanation of the creation of the Rensselaer County Legislature can be found at http://nassau-stories.blogspot.com/2006/04/reapportionment.html. See also: The Troy Record, July 8, 1971, page 1.

In 1970, the Rensselaer County Legislature was created, which elected Edward J. &quot;Ned&quot; Quinn as chairman. The chairman served as the equivalent to an executive until the office of County Executive was created in 1972. Since its creation, Democrats have never won the office, although they controlled the Legislature until 1994. One notable candidate for Executive was Edward Pattison who was later elected to Congress, and whose son Mark served two terms as Mayor of Troy. The current county executive is Steve McLaughlin (R).

Legislative authority is vested in the County Legislature, which consists of 19 members representing 17 different communities, separated into six districts. The current composition of the Legislature is as follows (ten Republicans, six Democrats, two Conservatives who caucus with the Republicans, and one Independent who caucuses with the Republicans):

District 1 – City of Troy:
* Cynthia B. Doran (D), Deputy Minority Leader
* Mark J. Fleming (D)
* Peter D. Grimm (D), Minority Leader
* Nina M. Nichols (D)
* Carole C. Weaver (D)
* Ken Zalewski (D)

District 2 – East Greenbush, North Greenbush, and Poestenkill:
* Robert W. Bayly (R), Vice Chairperson for Finance
* Leon B. Fiacco (R)
* Thomas Grant (R)
* Kelly Hoffman (C), Chairwoman

District 3 – Brunswick, Pittstown, and Schaghticoke:
* Dan Casale (R)
* Kenneth H. Herrington (R), Majority Leader
* William Maloney (R)

District 4 – Nassau, Sand Lake, and Schodack:
* Wayne Gendron (R)
* Thomas Choquette (B)
* Robert R. Loveridge (R), Vice Chairperson

District 5 – Berlin, Grafton, Hoosick, Hoosick Falls, Petersburgh, and Stephentown:
* Bruce Patire (R)
* Jeffrey Wysocki (R)

District 6 – City of Rensselaer:
* Brian Stall (C)

 the current sheriff is Patrick A. Russo. Notably, Russo was the only sheriff in the state to embrace Immigration and Nationality Act Section 287(g), which authorizes local and county law enforcement to detain undocumented immigrants.

==Education==
The county is serviced by 16 school districts. Some are completely contained in the county while some cross county lines into other counties. No school districts cross either the Vermont or Massachusetts state borders. Below is a table that shows the districts within the county, which BOCES they belong to, and which other counties they may serve.


The county is also home to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the oldest operating technological college in America.

==Communities==
===Cities===
* Rensselaer
* Troy (county seat)

===Towns===

* Berlin
* Brunswick
* East Greenbush
* Grafton
* Hoosick
* Nassau
* North Greenbush
* Petersburgh
* Pittstown
* Poestenkill
* Sand Lake
* Schaghticoke
* Schodack
* Stephentown
===Villages===
* Castleton-on-Hudson (Castleton)
* East Nassau
* Hoosick Falls
* Nassau
* Schaghticoke
* Valley Falls

===Census-designated places===
* Averill Park
* East Greenbush
* Hampton Manor
* Nassau Lake
* Poestenkill
* West Sand Lake
* Wynantskill

===Hamlets===

* Cherry Plain
* Cropseyville
* Defreestville
* Eagle Bridge
* East Schodack
* Johnsonville
* Melrose
* Schodack Center
* Speigletown
* Taborton
* Wyomanock
==See also==

* List of counties in New York
* List of county routes in Rensselaer County, New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Rensselaer County, New York

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* Rensselaer County homepage
* &quot;Hudson Valley Directory&quot;, listings pertaining to Rensselaer County, New York
* Rensselaer County Sheriff&#x27;s Department</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156566" start="0" end="17" title="Rensselaer County, New York" label="Rensselaer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="23" end="29" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="37" end="47" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="51" end="59" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="71" end="82" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="116" end="127" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="131" end="135" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q513339" start="183" end="205" title="Kiliaen van Rensselaer (merchant)" label="Kiliaen van Rensselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="220" end="225" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056821" start="239" end="255" title="Rensselaerswyck" label="land in the area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320597" start="283" end="299" title="Capital District (New York)" label="Capital District"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="355" end="361" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="362" end="373" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320597" start="383" end="412" title="Capital District, New York" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="488" end="498" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q776280" start="508" end="515" title="Mohican" label="Mohican"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885585" start="516" end="528" title="Indian tribe" label="Indian tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q513339" start="564" end="586" title="Kiliaen van Rensselaer (Dutch merchant)" label="Kiliaen van Rensselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="590" end="595" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326031" start="672" end="683" title="patroonship" label="patroonship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056821" start="684" end="699" title="Rensselaerswyck" label="Rensselaerswyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="721" end="733" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="734" end="748" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="773" end="780" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="893" end="914" title="American independence" label="American independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="937" end="944" title="English Crown" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="948" end="955" title="British Crown" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="1125" end="1138" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="1201" end="1205" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q994132" start="1287" end="1296" title="Brunswick, New York" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q62029" start="1313" end="1330" title="Frederick William, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel" label="Friedrich Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="1334" end="1355" title="Duchy of Braunschweig-Lüneburg" label="Braunschweig-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411279" start="1361" end="1368" title="Grafton, New York" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q337872" start="1380" end="1414" title="Henry FitzRoy, 5th Duke of Grafton" label="Henry FitzRoy, 5th Duke of Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695104" start="1489" end="1495" title="Nassau (town), New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q214040" start="1506" end="1510" title="Frederick Augustus, Duke of Nassau" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="1514" end="1523" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="that area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1557" end="1575" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1771" end="1779" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="1780" end="1787" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1792" end="1800" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1801" end="1814" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313484" start="1902" end="1920" title="Rensselaer Plateau" label="Rensselaer Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207410" start="1928" end="1939" title="Poestenkill (town), New York" label="Poestenkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708689" start="1944" end="1953" title="Sand Lake, New York" label="Sand Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477664" start="1967" end="1984" title="Taconic Mountains" label="Taconic Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892445" start="2043" end="2058" title="Berlin Mountain" label="Berlin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133035" start="2203" end="2215" title="Hoosic River" label="Hoosic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="2236" end="2248" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2363" end="2376" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q56149" start="2419" end="2436" title="Washington County, New York" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q511647" start="2447" end="2473" title="Bennington County, Vermont" label="Bennington County, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q54165" start="2488" end="2519" title="Berkshire County, Massachusetts" label="Berkshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q115200" start="2529" end="2544" title="Columbia County, New York" label="Columbia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q115216" start="2555" end="2568" title="Greene County, New York" label="Greene County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108408" start="2583" end="2596" title="Albany County, New York" label="Albany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q487605" start="2606" end="2621" title="Saratoga County, New York" label="Saratoga County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2662" end="2668" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2899" end="2904" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2912" end="2917" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2921" end="2937" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2945" end="2960" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2968" end="2973" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2981" end="2997" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3010" end="3021" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3086" end="3094" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3098" end="3104" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="3132" end="3137" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="3145" end="3152" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="3160" end="3166" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="3173" end="3180" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="3187" end="3193" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3200" end="3208" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="3218" end="3230" title="Puerto Rican People" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3253" end="3264" title="2010 United States Census" label="Census 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3278" end="3285" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3295" end="3302" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3442" end="3457" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4269" end="4286" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4382" end="4394" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q699139" start="4541" end="4545" title="1884 United States presidential election" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="4558" end="4571" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="4646" end="4658" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="4681" end="4685" title="2016 United States Presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="4784" end="4795" title="Legislature" label="Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998914" start="6817" end="6833" title="County Executive" label="County Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345753" start="7005" end="7020" title="Edward Pattison" label="Edward Pattison"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="7104" end="7108" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="7533" end="7545" title="Troy, New York" label="City of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q986308" start="7732" end="7746" title="East Greenbush (town), New York" label="East Greenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709311" start="7748" end="7763" title="North Greenbush" label="North Greenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207410" start="7769" end="7780" title="Poestenkill (town), New York" label="Poestenkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q994132" start="7920" end="7929" title="Brunswick, New York" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605439" start="7931" end="7940" title="Pittstown, New York" label="Pittstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q989452" start="7946" end="7958" title="Schaghticoke (town), New York" label="Schaghticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695104" start="8058" end="8064" title="Nassau (town), New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708689" start="8066" end="8075" title="Sand Lake, New York" label="Sand Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710635" start="8081" end="8089" title="Schodack" label="Schodack"/>
<link wikidata="Q821215" start="8192" end="8198" title="Berlin, New York" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411279" start="8200" end="8207" title="Grafton, New York" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708212" start="8209" end="8216" title="Hoosick, New York" label="Hoosick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004012" start="8218" end="8231" title="Hoosick Falls" label="Hoosick Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708464" start="8233" end="8244" title="Petersburgh, New York" label="Petersburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888146" start="8250" end="8261" title="Stephentown" label="Stephentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380769" start="8318" end="8336" title="Rensselaer, New York" label="City of Rensselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005060" start="8459" end="8505" title="Immigration and Nationality Act Section 287(g)" label="Immigration and Nationality Act Section 287(g)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="8786" end="8793" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="8797" end="8810" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931445" start="8893" end="8898" title="Board of Cooperative Educational Services" label="BOCES"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="8985" end="9017" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380769" start="9106" end="9116" title="Rensselaer, New York" label="Rensselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="9119" end="9123" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q821215" start="9154" end="9160" title="Berlin, New York" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q994132" start="9163" end="9172" title="Brunswick, New York" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q986308" start="9175" end="9189" title="East Greenbush, New York" label="East Greenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411279" start="9192" end="9199" title="Grafton, New York" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708212" start="9202" end="9209" title="Hoosick, New York" label="Hoosick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695104" start="9212" end="9218" title="Nassau (town), New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709311" start="9221" end="9236" title="North Greenbush, New York" label="North Greenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708464" start="9239" end="9250" title="Petersburgh, New York" label="Petersburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605439" start="9253" end="9262" title="Pittstown, New York" label="Pittstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207410" start="9265" end="9276" title="Poestenkill (town), New York" label="Poestenkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708689" start="9279" end="9288" title="Sand Lake, New York" label="Sand Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q989452" start="9291" end="9303" title="Schaghticoke (town), New York" label="Schaghticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710635" start="9306" end="9314" title="Schodack, New York" label="Schodack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888146" start="9317" end="9328" title="Stephentown, New York" label="Stephentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458130" start="9346" end="9377" title="Castleton-on-Hudson, New York" label="Castleton-on-Hudson (Castleton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458103" start="9380" end="9391" title="East Nassau, New York" label="East Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004012" start="9394" end="9407" title="Hoosick Falls, New York" label="Hoosick Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461963" start="9410" end="9416" title="Nassau (village), New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011399" start="9419" end="9431" title="Schaghticoke (village), New York" label="Schaghticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898631" start="9434" end="9446" title="Valley Falls, New York" label="Valley Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460564" start="9481" end="9493" title="Averill Park, New York" label="Averill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460456" start="9496" end="9510" title="East Greenbush (CDP), New York" label="East Greenbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460378" start="9513" end="9526" title="Hampton Manor, New York" label="Hampton Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084190" start="9529" end="9540" title="Nassau Lake, New York" label="Nassau Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462089" start="9543" end="9554" title="Poestenkill (CDP), New York" label="Poestenkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460116" start="9557" end="9571" title="West Sand Lake, New York" label="West Sand Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460087" start="9574" end="9585" title="Wynantskill, New York" label="Wynantskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092443" start="9604" end="9616" title="Cherry Plain, New York" label="Cherry Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187993" start="9619" end="9631" title="Cropseyville, New York" label="Cropseyville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709311" start="9634" end="9647" title="North Greenbush, New York" label="Defreestville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325033" start="9650" end="9662" title="Eagle Bridge, New York" label="Eagle Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329330" start="9665" end="9678" title="East Schodack, New York" label="East Schodack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268557" start="9681" end="9693" title="Johnsonville, New York" label="Johnsonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965393" start="9696" end="9703" title="Melrose, New York" label="Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431935" start="9706" end="9721" title="Schodack Center, New York" label="Schodack Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575770" start="9724" end="9735" title="Speigletown, New York" label="Speigletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858406" start="9738" end="9746" title="Taborton, New York" label="Taborton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888146" start="9749" end="9758" title="Wyomanock, New York" label="Wyomanock"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="9775" end="9803" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487589" start="9806" end="9858" title="List of county routes in Rensselaer County, New York" label="List of county routes in Rensselaer County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977303" start="9861" end="9937" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rensselaer County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rensselaer County, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54454" wikidata="Q115266" url="?curid=54454" title="Putnam County, New York">
<text>Putnam County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 97,668. The county seat is Carmel, within one of the county&#x27;s six towns. The county is part of the Hudson Valley region of the state.

Putnam County is bordered by Dutchess County to the north, Connecticut and its county of Fairfield to the east, Westchester County to the south, and the Hudson River and Orange County to the west. Midtown Manhattan is around a one-hour drive, and the county is included in the New York–Newark–Jersey City, NY–NJ–PA Metropolitan Statistical Area.

Putnam County was formed in 1812 from Dutchess County and is named for Israel Putnam, a hero in the French and Indian War and a general in the American Revolutionary War.

It is one of the most affluent counties in America, ranked 21st by median household income, and 43rd by per-capita income, according to the 2012 American Community Survey and 2009–2013 American Community Survey, respectively.

==History==

In 1609, the Wappinger Native American people inhabited the east bank of the Hudson River. They farmed, hunted, and fished throughout their range, often encountering Dutch fur traders. They obtained metal tools and goods such as alcohol and firearms in exchange for furs.

The colonial Province of New York and the Connecticut Colony negotiated an agreement on November 28, 1683, establishing their border as east of the Hudson River, and north to Massachusetts. Dutchess county was organized as one of New York&#x27;s twelve counties. It included all of today&#x27;s Putnam County and two towns in the present Columbia county. Until 1713, Dutchess was administered by Ulster county.

In 1691, a group of Dutch traders purchased a tract of land from the Wappingers that spanned from the Hudson River to the Connecticut border. Six years later they sold it to wealthy Dutch-American merchant Adolphus Philipse, who obtained a Royal sanction for a &quot;Highland Patent&quot; (later to be known as the Philipse Patent) that encompassed most of today&#x27;s Putnam County. Unknown at that time was a northwest veer in the river&#x27;s path at the Hudson Highlands. This generated a dispute over a roughly 2-mile-wide section of border between northern Westchester County, then-Dutchess County, and the Connecticut Colony, which came to be known as &quot;The Oblong&quot;.

In 1737, the New York Colonial Assembly designated the Philipse Patent as the South Precinct of Dutchess County. The Philipses began leasing farms to migrants from Massachusetts, Connecticut, Long Island, and lower Westchester. After Adolph Philipse&#x27;s death, the Patent was divided in 1754 into nine lots granted to three heirs: Mary Philipse, Philip Philipse, and Susannah Philipse Robinson. During the French and Indian War, many of the Wappinger went to Stockbridge, Massachusetts.

Compared to other parts of the Hudson Valley, Putnam County had slow settlement. It was privately owned and settlement was limited to tenant farmers willing to pay the Philipse family for leases. Secondly, it was mostly hilly and rocky, making it unappealing to men looking for tillable cropland. Its use was generally limited to dairy farming and wood cutting. The first non-tenant settlers in the county were along its eastern edge. The ambiguous border with Connecticut attracted farmers from New England. They assumed that Philipse did not own the disputed area.

Among early settlers were the Hayt family, which built a farm called The Elm in 1720. Jacob Haviland settled in the Oblong in 1731 in what became known as Haviland Hollow. The first village in the county was Fredericksburg, now the hamlet of Patterson.

During the American Revolution, the Philipses stayed loyal to the Crown. As a consequence, their lands were confiscated by the New York government. It sold the Philipse Patent along with the rest of their holdings. The dispute over The Oblong was resolved in the aftermath of the war, with the heavily settled tract being incorporated as the first of two versions of the Town of Southeast. Also resolved were two &quot;Gores&quot;, the Beekman Gore and the Rombout Gore, which being geographically similar to the Livingston and Beekman patents they abutted, were ceded by the Philipses to Dutchess County in 1758 and 1771 respectively.

Due to the increasing population of the Southern Precinct of Dutchess County and the great distance of these communities from the county seat in Poughkeepsie, Putnam was split from Dutchess in 1812 and organized as an independent county. It encompassed all of the Philipse Patent and the Oblong abutting it, less a triangular area in the farthest northwest reach of the Patent. There, a lowland near Fishkill Creek isolated from the rest of Putnam County and its adjacent upland drainage leading into the Hudson Highlands to the south, were ceded to Dutchess.

Putnam travelers mostly used boats and ships along the Hudson River. Boats transporting goods traveled up the Hudson to ports, mainly at Peekskill, New York. They were transported by road into Putnam County, or goods were unloaded in Putnam County at Cold Spring, New York. Such transport suffered in winter, when the river froze. At that time, little food or goods could be shipped to the county.

The Philipstown Turnpike was created in 1815 as a toll road from Cold Spring to Connecticut. The wagons that traveled the road would transport produce from eastern Putnam County and iron ore from the mines. The route of the turnpike can roughly be traced today: Rt 301 from Cold Spring to Farmers Mills Road, to White Pond Road to Pecksville, then Holmes Rd to Patterson, then Quaker Hill Rd to Connecticut. Transportation improved with the advent of the railroad, namely the Harlem Line, which was built in the 1840s, connecting Putnam by rail to New York City. Originally there were four stations on the Harlem line in Putnam County: Brewster, Dykeman&#x27;s, Towner&#x27;s, and Patterson. Today only the Brewster and Patterson stops remain; a new one called Southeast was added in modern times.

Putnam County played an important role in the Civil War. One third of the county&#x27;s men between the ages of 15 and 55 served in the military during the war years. During the post-Civil War years, industry and agriculture suffered losses as the economy contracted. Iron, which was produced in the Highland Mountains, could be found elsewhere. Agriculture was also affected greatly. The increasing need for drinking water in New York City led the city to search for sources in the Hudson Valley. In Putnam County, much of the farmland was flooded to create reservoirs as part of New York City&#x27;s Croton Watershed. The abandoning of farms, the creation of reservoirs, and the preservation of the remaining open land resulted in scenic lands that drew large amounts of tourism from New York City.

By the 20th century, improved roads brought vacationers from New York City. The Taconic State Parkway was constructed during the Great Depression as one of numerous infrastructure projects in the state and country. This brought more vacationers from the city, who were attracted to the scenic lands and the inexpensive hotels, inns, and summer houses. Putnam County&#x27;s population doubled during the summer months.

After World War II, Putnam County became an exurb of New York City. Rapid residential development occurred and the county became a bedroom community. However, the prevalent rocky uplands and protection of Putnam county&#x27;s reservoirs inherently limited development, as much of the land in the county is close to wetlands or reservoirs.

==Government and politics==
Governmental operations in Putnam County are set forth in the County Charter, which was approved by the voters of the County in November 1977.

The law-making and policy-making body of the county is an elected nine-member County Legislature. County laws, policies and regulations are administered on behalf of the County Legislature by an elected County Executive.

The current County Executive is Republican Kevin M. Byrne (R) After serving the state of New York for 6 years as the Assemblyman of the 94th district, he won the Republican nomination for Putnam County Executive and then went unopposed in the general election.

Prior to the Charter form of government, the county&#x27;s affairs were governed by a Board of Supervisors, with one Supervisor from each of the county&#x27;s six towns having an equal vote. Since the towns had varying populations and such variance violated the principle of &quot;one man, one vote&quot;, a system of weighted voting among the Board of Supervisors was implemented, but proved to be unwieldy. It was this imbalance which, among others factors, inspired the reorganization of County government under a charter form.

===County Legislature===
The current members of the county legislature for the 2025 session include 8 Republicans and 1 Democrat:
* District 1 - Nancy Montgomery (D)
* District 2 - William Gouldman (R)
* District 3 - Toni Addonizio (R)
* District 4 - Laura Russo (R)
* District 5 - Greg Ellner (R)
* District 6 - Paul Jonke (R), Chair
* District 7 - Daniel G. Birmingham (R)
* District 8 - Amy Sayegh (R), Deputy Chair
* District 9 - Erin L. Crowley (R)

County Legislators are elected to three-year terms. Each single-member district contains approximately 10,500 people. Any person elected to the County Legislature on or after February 1, 2014, is limited to four three-year terms in office (without taking into account any previous terms held by such person prior to February 1, 2014). Legislative terms are staggered so that one-third of the members of the County Legislature is elected each year.
* * The County Charter took effect on January 1, 1979, and the County Legislature was established on that day. The County Board of Supervisors was dissolved on the previous day and members of the County Legislature for the year 1979 were the supervisors of each of the six towns. Ethel Forkell was Supervisor of the Town of Kent and was elected by her colleagues as the first Chair of the County Legislature.

===County Executives===
The county has had six County Executives:
===County Courts===
There are three types of general trial courts in Putnam County: the New York Supreme Court, the County Court and the Justice Courts. The Supreme Court is the trial level court of the New York State Unified Court System, which presents some confusion as the Supreme Court is the highest court of appeals in the federal system as well as in most states, whereas the Court of Appeals is the highest court in New York. The Supreme Court has broad authority over all categories of cases, both civil and criminal. Generally the Supreme Court in Putnam hears civil cases involving claims in excess of $25,000. While the Supreme Court has jurisdiction over criminal cases in most counties this is handled by the County Courts. In Putnam, however, the Supreme Court does exercise jurisdiction over some criminal cases.

The County Court is authorized to hear all criminal cases that have occurred in the county as well as limited jurisdiction over civil cases. The County Court handles felony cases exclusively and shares jurisdiction with the town and village justice courts on misdemeanor cases and other minor offenses and violations. The County Court&#x27;s jurisdiction on civil cases is limited to those involving less than $25,000.

The Historic Putnam County Courthouse is located in the town of Carmel. Built in 1814 in Greek Revival style, it is the second oldest working courthouse in New York, second to the one in Johnstown. Portico and pillars were added to the structure in the 1840s. It was recently extensively remodeled to preserve the structure and adapt it for use as the Surrogate&#x27;s Court.

The new Putnam County Courthouse opened on January 2, 2008. It was constructed at a cost of $22.8 million. Jury assembly, court clerks and a public law library are located on the first floor. The second floor includes a Family Court and hearing room. On all floors are judges&#x27; chambers, jury deliberation rooms, prisoner cells and conference rooms. The third floor has two courtrooms for the County Court. The Supreme Court and a law library occupy the fourth floor.

===Law enforcement===
Law enforcement is providing by the following departments:

* State-side: K Troop, New York State Police (Zone 2, based on Route 22, at the Brewster Barracks)
* County-side: Putnam County Sheriff&#x27;s Department
* Town/Village-side: Philipstown: (Village of Cold Spring Police Department), Southeast: (Village of Brewster Police Department), Town of Carmel Police Department, Town of Kent Police Department, and the Putnam County Probation Department.
The Putnam County Sheriff&#x27;s Office includes a Civil Bureau, patrol division, a marine unit, a motorcycle unit, a school resource unit, and a narcotics enforcement unit.

===County Sheriff===
The current Sheriff, Kevin McConville (Republican Party) was elected on November 3, 2021. The Sheriff&#x27;s Department includes a Civil Bureau, patrol division, a marine unit, a motorcycle unit, a school resource unit, and a narcotics enforcement unit.

===State and national government===












|}
Putnam County is part of the 94th State Assembly District (Towns of Carmel, Patterson, Putnam Valley and Southeast), represented by Matt Slater (R), and the 95th State Assembly District (Towns of Kent and Phillipstown), represented by Dana Levenberg (D).

Putnam County is part of the 40th State Senate District (Towns of Carmel, Patterson, and Southeast), represented by Peter Harckham (D), and the 41st State Senate District (Towns of Kent, Phillipstown and Putnam Valley), represented by Democrat Michelle Hinchey.

Putnam County is located in the 17th congressional district and has been represented by Republican Mike Lawler since 2023.

Putnam County has voted consistently for Republican presidential candidates, largely bucking the Democratic trend in the New York City suburbs. From 1828 to 1868, Putnam was a Democratic stronghold, but since 1872, the only Democratic presidential nominees to carry Putnam County have been Woodrow Wilson in 1912 and Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964.

==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (6.5%) is water.

Putnam County is situated in the lower Hudson Valley in the southeastern part of New York, between the Hudson River on its west and the New York-Connecticut border on its east.
Putnam is southeast of Newburgh, and it is north of White Plains. Depending on precise location within the county, road travel distance to New York City ranges between .

The terrain of the county is generally hilly. The region of the county nearest the Hudson River is especially so, and is part of the Hudson Highlands. The highest point in Putnam County is Scofield Ridge, with four summits at approximately above sea level. The lowest point is sea level along the Hudson.
The Hudson River, named for Henry Hudson, has provided transportation of goods from New York City, north to the Hudson Valley, throughout history. Between the hills and glacial moraine, Putnam County&#x27;s valleys contain numerous wetlands (including part of the Great Swamp), creeks, ponds, lakes (including the 583 acre Lake Mahopac, and reservoirs.

===Reservoirs===
Putnam County is known for its many pristine reservoirs, part of the New York City water supply system&#x27;s Croton Watershed. These include Bog Brook in Southeast; Croton Falls Reservoir in Carmel and Southeast; Diverting Reservoir in Southeast; East Branch in Brewster; Middle Branch Reservoir in Southeast; West Branch in Kent and Carmel, and Boyds Corner Reservoir in Kent. There are also three controlled lakes in the system in the town of Carmel, Kirk, Gilead, and Gleneida.

===Adjacent counties===
* Dutchess County (north)
* Fairfield County, Connecticut (east)
* Westchester County (south)
* Rockland County (southwest)
* Orange County (west)

===Climate===
The climate of Putnam County is humid continental, as is most of New York. In the winter, bouts of cold, dry air arrive from Canada, and interior sections of North America. In the summer, the Gulf Stream brings hot, moist, humid air to the county. Extratropical storms often affect the county; in the winter, Nor&#x27;easters bring heavy snow and rain, and sometimes high wind. In the summer and fall, back door cold fronts move in from the north and bring thunderstorms, sometimes severe. Putnam County receives on average 36 inches of snowfall a year.

==Demographics==
According to the 2020 Census, there were 97,668 people and 38,713 households in the county, with 2.76 persons per household. The population density was . 50.1% of the population was female. The racial makeup of the county was 77.1% White alone, not Hispanic or Latino, 3.9% Black or African American, 0.5% Native American, 2.3% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 3.0% from other races, 1.8% from two or more races and 16.4% Hispanic or Latino of any race. 12.9% of the population was foreign born.

4.5% of the population was under the age of 5, 19.4% under the age of 18, and 18.0% were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43.4 years.

The median income for a household in the county was $104,486, and the per capita income was $47,448. 5.2% of the population was in poverty.

93% of the population at least 25 years old had a high school degree or higher, and 39.6% had a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher.

There were 38,713 housing units, 81.8% of which were owner occupied. As of Q4 2021, the median value of all homes in Putnam County was $419,890, an increase of 12.1% from the prior year.

===2020 Census===
==Education==
The county has the following public school districts:
* Brewster Central School District
* Carmel Central School District
* Garrison Union Free School District
* Haldane Central School District
* Lakeland Central School District
* Mahopac Central School District
* North Salem Central School District
* Pawling Central School District
* Putnam Valley Central School District

Mahopac is the largest school district in Putnam County, educating more than 5,000 students in four elementary schools, a middle school, and a high school (1600 students).

Saint Basil Academy, a private boarding facility, functioned as a private school with in-house instruction until 1997.

The library system consists of eight libraries; the Brewster Public Library in Brewster; the Kent Public Library in Kent; the Reed Memorial Library in Carmel; the Julia L. Butterfield Memorial Library in Cold Spring; the Alice Curtis Desmond and Hamilton Fish Library in Garrison; the Mahopac Public Library in Mahopac; the Patterson Library in Patterson, and the Putnam Valley Free Library in Putnam Valley.

 SUNY Westchester Community College holds some general education classes at Mahopac High School.

==Infrastructure==
Putnam County was provided with the majority of its electricity by the nuclear Indian Point Energy Center in Westchester County until April 30, 2021.

Water is supplied from wells, lakes, or the Hudson River.

The Putnam Hospital Center, located in Carmel, serves the eastern county. Western Putnam County is mainly served by hospitals in Dutchess or Westchester counties.

==Transportation==

The county has several passenger trains that serve the county. The Harlem Line and the Hudson Line of the Metro-North Railroad run north–south in Putnam. The Harlem Line makes stops at Brewster, Southeast, and Patterson. The Hudson Line makes stops at Manitou, Garrison, Cold Spring, and Breakneck Ridge. A connection to Amtrak can be made to the south at Croton-Harmon in upper Westchester County or to the north at Poughkeepsie in Dutchess County, both on the Hudson Line. Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan is roughly a one-hour train ride.

Until May 1958, a third commuter line, the New York Central&#x27;s Putnam Division, operating between the Bronx and points in the county, served the region. With no direct connection to Grand Central Terminal (a transfer was required in the Bronx), ridership on the line was weak compared to its counterparts. Freight service was also scant. The line was eventually abandoned in waves between 1962 and 1980. The former railbed has been converted to trails, and now serves as the South County Trailway, North County Trailway, and Putnam County Trailway rail trails.

Putnam Transit, operated by the county, provides local public transportation.

In contrast to the surrounding counties, Putnam has no airport.

===Major roadways===

Putnam has two interstate highways. The east–west Interstate 84 comes in from the north near Ludingtonville, and connects to the southbound Interstate 684 in Southeast toward the Connecticut border. The Taconic State Parkway runs north–south through central Putnam. Three of the region&#x27;s major east–west routes traverse the eastern half of the county. NY 52 enters alongside I-84 from Dutchess County, to end at US 6 south of Carmel. East of Brewster, US 6 joins US 202 and the routes leave the county and state concurrently aside the interstate.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Points of interest==

Chuang Yen Monastery, located in Kent, is home to the largest indoor Buddha statue in the Western Hemisphere. It has the only library in the United States specializing in Buddhist history.

Clarence Fahnestock State Park is a natural area containing over 50 miles of trails for walking and hiking, including nine miles of the Appalachian Trail. Donald J. Trump State Park (currently closed) is a park located in Putnam and Westchester counties. A small ski resort, Thunder Ridge Ski Area, with 30 trails and three lifts is located in the town of Patterson.

==Media==
&quot;The Journal News&quot; serves the region known as the Lower Hudson Valley, which comprises Westchester County, Rockland County, and Putnam County. &quot;The Journal News&quot; is owned by Gannett Company, Inc. Before Gannett merged its local dailies into the &quot;Journal News&quot;, Putnam County was served by an edition of the &quot;Reporter Dispatch&quot;.

Putnam County newsreaders were served for generations by the &quot;Putnam County News and Recorder&quot;, formerly an independently owned newspaper devoted to local affairs. The oversized broadsheet – measuring seventeen by twenty inches – was first published in Cold Spring as &quot;The Recorder&quot; in 1866. In July 2008, the local ownership sold the paper to Roger Ailes, chairman of Fox News, who named his wife Elizabeth as the new publisher. The paper altered its editorial content substantially, generating local controversy. In 2009 the Ailes family also purchased the &quot;Putnam County Courier&quot;, when it was shut down by Journal Register Co. (The first issue after publication resumed listed Roger Ailes as owner and chairman, but Elizabeth Ailes has since been identified as the owner). &quot;The Courier&quot; was first established as the &quot;Putnam County Democrat&quot; in 1841. Under Ailes ownership, the &quot;Courier&quot; closed its Carmel office. The &quot;News and Recorder&quot; remained a full broadsheet, with a 17-inch-wide front page, until 2017. Both newspapers are now standard-sized broadsheets. The two newspapers share an editor and many of the same stories appear in both. Douglas Cunningham, editor-in-chief of the &quot;Courier&quot; and &quot;News and Recorder&quot; since 2011, purchased the two papers from the Ailes in December 2016 and became publisher.

Two other weeklies are the &quot;Putnam County Times&quot; (historically &quot;Times &amp; Republican&quot;) and &quot;Putnam County Press&quot;, virtually identical except that the former is distributed free. Both have been owned since 1958 by Don Hall. Hall and Roger Ailes, though both Republicans, are bitter rivals. Hall had long derided Ailes as a part-time resident. When Ailes faced harassment allegations, leading to his ouster from &quot;Fox News&quot;, his Putnam County connection contributed to his being featured on the front pages of the &quot;Times&quot; and &quot;Press&quot;.

In 2010, Gordon Stewart, a businessman living in Garrison, launched a news website to compete with the Ailes-owned &quot;PCNR&quot; called Philipstown.info. In 2012 a print version was launched called &quot;The Paper&quot;. Shortly Stewart&#x27;s death in 2014, the publication became a nonprofit led by a board of directors. It changed its name in 2016 to &quot;The Highlands Current&quot; to reflect its coverage of neighboring Beacon.

==Communities==
There are six towns and three incorporated villages in Putnam County. There are no cities:

===Towns===
====Carmel====

Carmel is the largest town of Putnam County, with a population of 33,576. The Town of Carmel includes the hamlets of the county seat Carmel, Carmel Hills, Field Corners, Hopkins Corners, Mahopac, Mahopac Falls, Secor Corners, Tilly Foster, and West Mahopac. Carmel is along the southern border of Putnam County.

Carmel is known for its historic courthouse and high school, which serves grades 9–12. Carmel was taken in 1795 from Frederickstown, a town which encompassed the present towns of Kent, Patterson, and Carmel.

====Kent====
Kent is a town located along the northern border of Putnam with a population of 12,900. Coles Mills was settled in 1747 at the outlet of Barrett Pond into the West Branch of the Croton River. Kent contains the hamlets of Lake Carmel, Kent Corners, Kent Hills, and Ludingtonville. Kent was the last remaining section of Frederickstown, after the towns of Carmel and Patterson were divided from it in 1795. Frederickstown was founded in 1788.

====Patterson====
The Town of Patterson is located in the northeast area of Putnam County and has a population of 11,541. Patterson, originally named Franklin, was divided from the former town of Frederickstown, in 1795. Patterson contains the hamlets of Patterson, Barnum Corners, Camp Brady, Fields Corners, Haines Corners, Haviland Hollow, Putnam Lake, Steinbeck Corners, Towners, and West Patterson.

====Philipstown====
Philipstown is a town located along the western end of Putnam County and it has a population of 9,831. Philipstown contains the villages and hamlets of Cold Spring, Forsonville, Garrison, Garrison Four Corners, Glenclyffe, Manitou, McKeel Corners, Nelsonville, North Highlands, Storm King, and the north side of Continental Village. It was founded in 1788. West Point (in Orange County) is located across the Hudson River from the village of Cold Spring.
It has three stations on the Metro North Railroad Hudson line: in Garrison, Cold Spring and Manitou, which has limited train service.

Two public libraries are located in Philipstown: the Desmond-Fish Library in Garrison and the Julia L. Butterfield Library in Cold Spring.

====Putnam Valley====

Putnam Valley is a town located on the southern border of Putnam County with a population of 11,762. It is the third largest town in the county. Putnam Valley contains the hamlets of Adams Corners, Christian Corners, Gilbert Corners, Lake Peekskill, Oscawana Corners, Putnam Valley, Tompkins Corners, Sunnybrook.

Putnam Valley was created in 1835 as the Town Of Quincy, taking its current name the following year. The town was created by splitting off from Philipstown. Putnam Valley is home to the Clarence Fahnestock State Park, which covers much of Putnam County and some of Dutchess County.

====Southeast====

The Town of Southeast is located in the southeastern corner of Putnam County, with a population of 18,058. It was founded in 1788 as one of the three original towns in what would later become Putnam County. Its shape changed greatly in 1795, when it lost its northern half to Patterson and gained a great amount on its western side.

It is the second-largest town in Putnam County, second only to Carmel. The crossroads of Interstate highways 684 and 84; State Routes 22 and 312; and US Highways 6 and 202 are located here. Metro-North Railroad&#x27;s Harlem Line has two stops that service the area, at Brewster Village and Southeast Station (formerly Brewster North) off Route 312. Southeast contains the village of Brewster, and the hamlets of Brewster Hill, Brewster Heights, Deans Corners, DeForest Corners, Drewville Heights, Dykemans, Milltown, Peach Lake, Sears Corners, and Sodom.

===Villages===
====Brewster====
Brewster is an incorporated village within the Town of Southeast.

====Cold Spring====
Cold Spring is an incorporated village within Town of Philipstown and the village of Nelsonville.

====Nelsonville====
Nelsonville is an incorporated village within the Town of Philipstown and the village of Cold Spring.

===Census-designated places===
* Brewster Heights
* Brewster Hill
* Carmel
* Lake Carmel
* Mahopac
* Peach Lake (shared with Westchester County)
* Putnam Lake

===Other hamlets===
* Dykemans
* Farmers Mills
* Garrison
* Gayville
* Lake Peekskill
* Ludingtonville
* Milltown
* Sodom
* Tompkins Corners

===Ghost towns===
* Coles Mills
* Dicktown
* Doanesburgh
* Towners

==See also==

* &quot;The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee&quot;
* Downstate New York
* Hudson Valley
* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Putnam County, New York
* New York metropolitan area
* Putnam Transit

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Putnam County, New York site
* Summary early history of Putnam County
* The Highlands Current (newspaper)
* Cold Spring Visitor Guide 
* Fishkill Creek Watershed Committee
* Southeast Museum Brewster, NY
* Friends of Tilly Foster, Southeast NY
* Historic Patterson, the History of the Town of Patterson, Putnam County, NY
* Desmond-Fish Library, Garrison, Putnam County, NY 
* The Manitou School, Garrison
* &quot;Hudson Valley Directory&quot;, listings pertaining to Putnam County, New York</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115266" start="0" end="13" title="Putnam County, New York" label="Putnam County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47682" start="19" end="25" title="County (New York)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="33" end="43" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="47" end="55" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="67" end="78" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="111" end="122" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043287" start="126" end="132" title="Carmel (hamlet), New York" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="203" end="216" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="268" end="283" title="Dutchess County" label="Dutchess County"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="298" end="309" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q54231" start="328" end="337" title="Fairfield County, Connecticut" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="351" end="369" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="392" end="404" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q108618" start="409" end="422" title="Orange County, New York" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="436" end="453" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="516" end="524" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="525" end="531" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="532" end="543" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="548" end="550" title="New Jersey" label="NJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="551" end="553" title="Pennsylvania" label="PA"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="554" end="583" title="New York metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q622130" start="657" end="670" title="Israel Putnam" label="Israel Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="686" end="707" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="729" end="755" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622417" start="825" end="848" title="Highest-income counties in the United States" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865326" start="862" end="879" title="List of United States counties by per capita income" label="per-capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="903" end="928" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865326" start="933" end="968" title="List of United States counties by per capita income" label="2009–2013 American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811930" start="1011" end="1020" title="Wappinger" label="Wappinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="1075" end="1087" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="1164" end="1169" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="1284" end="1304" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="1313" end="1331" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="1461" end="1469" title="Dutchess County, New York" label="Dutchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q115200" start="1609" end="1617" title="Columbia County, New York" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56152" start="1667" end="1673" title="Ulster County, New York" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729928" start="1889" end="1906" title="Adolphus Philipse" label="Adolphus Philipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657564" start="1998" end="2013" title="Philipse Patent" label="Philipse Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q284639" start="2142" end="2158" title="Hudson Highlands" label="Hudson Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="2247" end="2265" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q608636" start="2349" end="2359" title="The Oblong" label="The Oblong"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="2532" end="2545" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="2547" end="2558" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="2560" end="2571" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="2777" end="2798" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="2830" end="2856" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="2890" end="2903" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="3692" end="3711" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="4194" end="4204" title="Livingston Patent" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="4209" end="4216" title="Beekman Patent" label="Beekman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="4463" end="4475" title="Poughkeepsie (city), New York" label="Poughkeepsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073034" start="4718" end="4732" title="Fishkill Creek" label="Fishkill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="5016" end="5035" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016615" start="5130" end="5151" title="Cold Spring, New York" label="Cold Spring, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="5328" end="5337" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="5460" end="5468" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962733" start="5914" end="5922" title="Brewster station" label="Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318676" start="5924" end="5938" title="Dykeman&amp;#x27;s station" label="Dykeman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830106" start="5940" end="5953" title="Towner&amp;#x27;s station" label="Towner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148429" start="5959" end="5968" title="Patterson station (Metro-North)" label="Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6123" end="6132" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040300" start="6679" end="6695" title="Croton Watershed" label="Croton Watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488301" start="6959" end="6980" title="Taconic State Parkway" label="Taconic State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7008" end="7024" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398029" start="7342" end="7347" title="exurb" label="exurb"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="7429" end="7446" title="bedroom community" label="bedroom community"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8064" end="8074" title="Republican Party United States" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q28131685" start="8075" end="8089" title="Kevin Byrne (New York politician)" label="Kevin M. Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="8575" end="8592" title="one man, one vote" label="one man, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="10293" end="10315" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303129" start="10408" end="10443" title="New York State Unified Court System" label="New York State Unified Court System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="10644" end="10657" title="New York Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="10856" end="10868" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="11040" end="11052" title="New York Supreme Court" label="County Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377991" start="11643" end="11652" title="Johnstown (city), New York" label="Johnstown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12402" end="12409" title="New York State Police#Troops" label="K Troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057860" start="12411" end="12432" title="New York State Police" label="New York State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q451274" start="12451" end="12459" title="New York State Route 22" label="Route 22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12502" end="12541" title="Putnam County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Putnam County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708246" start="12563" end="12574" title="Philipstown, New York" label="Philipstown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12577" end="12617" title="Village of Cold Spring Police Department" label="Village of Cold Spring Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708420" start="12620" end="12629" title="Southeast, New York" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12632" end="12669" title="Village of Brewster Police Department" label="Village of Brewster Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013504" start="12672" end="12704" title="Town of Carmel Police Department (New York)" label="Town of Carmel Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12706" end="12736" title="Town of Kent Police Department" label="Town of Kent Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="13017" end="13033" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q115957349" start="13416" end="13427" title="Matt Slater (politician)" label="Matt Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035652" start="13519" end="13533" title="Dana Levenberg" label="Dana Levenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58975475" start="13656" end="13670" title="Peter Harckham" label="Peter Harckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q104398424" start="13784" end="13800" title="Michelle Hinchey" label="Michelle Hinchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012789" start="13835" end="13862" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 17th congressional district" label="17th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q105179052" start="13902" end="13913" title="Mike Lawler" label="Mike Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="13968" end="13978" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="14024" end="14034" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="14217" end="14231" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100837" start="14232" end="14239" title="1912 United States presidential election in New York" label="in 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="14244" end="14261" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100877" start="14262" end="14269" title="1964 United States presidential election in New York" label="in 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="14304" end="14322" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="14435" end="14448" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="14499" end="14511" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="14532" end="14540" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="14541" end="14552" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044808" start="14596" end="14604" title="Newburgh (city), New York" label="Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q462177" start="14625" end="14637" title="White Plains, New York" label="White Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14712" end="14725" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q284639" start="14877" end="14893" title="Hudson Highlands" label="Hudson Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q179167" start="15077" end="15089" title="Henry Hudson" label="Henry Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="15218" end="15233" title="glacial moraine" label="glacial moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600056" start="15313" end="15324" title="Great Swamp (New York)" label="Great Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460520" start="15372" end="15384" title="Lake Mahopac" label="Lake Mahopac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15489" end="15529" title="New York City water supply system#Reservoirs and aqueducts" label="New York City water supply system&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040300" start="15530" end="15546" title="Croton Watershed" label="Croton Watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937306" start="15562" end="15571" title="Bog Brook Reservoir" label="Bog Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188984" start="15586" end="15608" title="Croton Falls Reservoir" label="Croton Falls Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283980" start="15634" end="15653" title="Diverting Reservoir" label="Diverting Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327926" start="15668" end="15679" title="East Branch Reservoir" label="East Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841239" start="15693" end="15716" title="Middle Branch Reservoir" label="Middle Branch Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336728" start="15731" end="15742" title="West Branch Reservoir" label="West Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952419" start="15767" end="15789" title="Boyds Corner Reservoir" label="Boyds Corner Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15820" end="15836" title="Controlled lake#New York City watershed" label="controlled lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35718606" start="15874" end="15878" title="Kirk Lake (New York)" label="Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475994" start="15880" end="15886" title="Lake Gilead" label="Gilead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476002" start="15892" end="15900" title="Lake Gleneida" label="Gleneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="15929" end="15944" title="Dutchess County, New York" label="Dutchess County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54231" start="15955" end="15984" title="Fairfield County, Connecticut" label="Fairfield County, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="15994" end="16012" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q111098" start="16023" end="16038" title="Rockland County, New York" label="Rockland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108618" start="16053" end="16066" title="Orange County, New York" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="16121" end="16138" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="16281" end="16292" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001587" start="16398" end="16413" title="Nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="Nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16491" end="16512" title="back door cold fronts" label="back door cold fronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="16893" end="16928" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White alone, not Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="16935" end="16940" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="16944" end="16960" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="16967" end="16982" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="16989" end="16994" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17001" end="17017" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17029" end="17040" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17080" end="17088" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17092" end="17098" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962744" start="17850" end="17882" title="Brewster Central School District" label="Brewster Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17885" end="17915" title="Carmel Central School District" label="Carmel Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524062" start="17918" end="17953" title="Garrison Union Free School District" label="Garrison Union Free School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17956" end="17987" title="Haldane Central School District" label="Haldane Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478772" start="17990" end="18022" title="Lakeland Central School District" label="Lakeland Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783227" start="18025" end="18056" title="Mahopac Central School District" label="Mahopac Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18059" end="18094" title="North Salem Central School District" label="North Salem Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18097" end="18128" title="Pawling Central School District" label="Pawling Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18131" end="18168" title="Putnam Valley Central School District" label="Putnam Valley Central School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707260" start="18343" end="18362" title="Saint Basil Academy (Garrison, New York)" label="Saint Basil Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18515" end="18538" title="Brewster Public Library" label="Brewster Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306674" start="18589" end="18610" title="Reed Memorial Library" label="Reed Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18626" end="18663" title="Julia L. Butterfield Memorial Library" label="Julia L. Butterfield Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987232" start="18874" end="18908" title="SUNY Westchester Community College" label="SUNY Westchester Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783227" start="18949" end="18968" title="Mahopac High School" label="Mahopac High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516614" start="19069" end="19095" title="Indian Point Energy Center" label="Indian Point Energy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="19185" end="19197" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658559" start="19451" end="19462" title="Harlem Line" label="Harlem Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102121" start="19471" end="19482" title="Hudson Line (Metro-North)" label="Hudson Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="19490" end="19510" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962733" start="19569" end="19577" title="Brewster (Metro-North station)" label="Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569280" start="19579" end="19588" title="Southeast (Metro-North station)" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148429" start="19594" end="19603" title="Patterson (Metro-North station)" label="Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100162" start="19636" end="19643" title="Manitou (Metro-North station)" label="Manitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524013" start="19645" end="19653" title="Garrison (Metro-North station)" label="Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142348" start="19655" end="19666" title="Cold Spring (Metro-North station)" label="Cold Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100216" start="19672" end="19687" title="Breakneck Ridge (Metro-North station)" label="Breakneck Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19705" end="19711" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096334" start="19740" end="19753" title="Croton-Harmon (Metro-North station)" label="Croton-Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="19763" end="19781" title="Westchester County" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097340" start="19801" end="19813" title="Poughkeepsie (Metro-North station)" label="Poughkeepsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="19817" end="19832" title="Dutchess County" label="Dutchess County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="19973" end="19989" title="New York Central" label="New York Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014902" start="19997" end="20012" title="New York and Putnam Railroad" label="Putnam Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566914" start="20409" end="20430" title="South County Trailway" label="South County Trailway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054955" start="20432" end="20453" title="North County Trailway" label="North County Trailway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262335" start="20459" end="20481" title="Putnam County Trailway" label="Putnam County Trailway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="20482" end="20493" title="rail trails" label="rail trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262355" start="20496" end="20510" title="Putnam Transit" label="Putnam Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="20630" end="20637" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447756" start="20712" end="20725" title="Interstate 84 in New York" label="Interstate 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263203" start="20802" end="20816" title="Interstate 684" label="Interstate 684"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488301" start="20865" end="20886" title="Taconic State Parkway" label="Taconic State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486106" start="21019" end="21024" title="New York State Route 52" label="NY 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485894" start="21079" end="21083" title="U.S. Route 6 in New York" label="US 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q303037" start="21119" end="21123" title="US 6" label="US 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="21130" end="21136" title="U.S. Route 202" label="US 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544829" start="21265" end="21285" title="Chuang yen monastery" label="Chuang Yen Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363978" start="21455" end="21485" title="Clarence Fahnestock State Park" label="Clarence Fahnestock State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294586" start="21610" end="21636" title="Donald J. Trump State Park" label="Donald J. Trump State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799013" start="21730" end="21752" title="Thunder Ridge Ski Area" label="Thunder Ridge Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059324" start="21839" end="21855" title="The Journal News" label="The Journal News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="21893" end="21912" title="Lower Hudson Valley" label="Lower Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="21930" end="21948" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q111098" start="21950" end="21965" title="Rockland County, New York" label="Rockland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345971" start="22027" end="22048" title="Gannett" label="Gannett Company, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q983981" start="22566" end="22577" title="Roger Ailes" label="Roger Ailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="22591" end="22599" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294673" start="22841" end="22861" title="Journal Register Co." label="Journal Register Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1013504" start="24861" end="24867" title="Carmel, New York" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043287" start="24908" end="24914" title="Carmel Hamlet" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460520" start="24962" end="24969" title="Mahopac, New York" label="Mahopac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460520" start="24971" end="24984" title="Mahopac Falls, New York" label="Mahopac Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708897" start="25310" end="25314" title="Kent, New York" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q118944561" start="25398" end="25409" title="Coles Mills, New York" label="Coles Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188989" start="25488" end="25500" title="Croton River" label="Croton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461701" start="25531" end="25542" title="Lake Carmel, New York" label="Lake Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461860" start="26095" end="26106" title="Putnam Lake, New York" label="Putnam Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016615" start="26329" end="26340" title="Cold Spring, New York" label="Cold Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524005" start="26355" end="26363" title="Garrison, New York" label="Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452708" start="26425" end="26436" title="Nelsonville, New York" label="Nelsonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q114921740" start="26438" end="26453" title="North Highlands, New York" label="North Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="26534" end="26544" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q108618" start="26549" end="26562" title="Orange County, New York" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363978" start="27430" end="27460" title="Clarence Fahnestock State Park" label="Clarence Fahnestock State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q911442" start="28264" end="28272" title="Brewster, New York" label="Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460874" start="28293" end="28306" title="Brewster Hill, New York" label="Brewster Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969550" start="28308" end="28324" title="Brewster Heights, New York" label="Brewster Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q122565339" start="28378" end="28386" title="Dykemans, New York" label="Dykemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q120569186" start="28388" end="28396" title="Milltown, New York" label="Milltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q926058" start="28398" end="28408" title="Peach Lake, New York" label="Peach Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q54888483" start="28429" end="28434" title="Sodom, New York" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q911442" start="28469" end="28477" title="Brewster, New York" label="Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016615" start="28556" end="28567" title="Cold Spring, New York" label="Cold Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452708" start="28675" end="28686" title="Nelsonville, New York" label="Nelsonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969550" start="28811" end="28827" title="Brewster Heights, New York" label="Brewster Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460874" start="28830" end="28843" title="Brewster Hill, New York" label="Brewster Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043287" start="28846" end="28852" title="Carmel (hamlet), New York" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461701" start="28855" end="28866" title="Lake Carmel, New York" label="Lake Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460520" start="28869" end="28876" title="Mahopac, New York" label="Mahopac"/>
<link wikidata="Q926058" start="28879" end="28889" title="Peach Lake, New York" label="Peach Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461860" start="28925" end="28936" title="Putnam Lake, New York" label="Putnam Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q122565339" start="28960" end="28968" title="Dykemans, New York" label="Dykemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q54888482" start="28971" end="28984" title="Farmers Mills, Putnam County, New York" label="Farmers Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524005" start="28987" end="28995" title="Garrison, New York" label="Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880549" start="28998" end="29006" title="Gayville, Putnam County, New York" label="Gayville"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249735" start="29009" end="29023" title="Lake Peekskill, New York" label="Lake Peekskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q30622813" start="29026" end="29040" title="Ludingtonville, New York" label="Ludingtonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q120569186" start="29043" end="29051" title="Milltown, New York" label="Milltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q54888483" start="29054" end="29059" title="Sodom, New York" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54888452" start="29062" end="29078" title="Tompkins Corners, New York" label="Tompkins Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q118944561" start="29100" end="29111" title="Coles Mills, New York" label="Coles Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953737" start="29114" end="29122" title="Dicktown, New York" label="Dicktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953758" start="29125" end="29136" title="Doanesburgh, New York" label="Doanesburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709168" start="29139" end="29146" title="Towners, New York" label="Towners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16547558" start="29170" end="29212" title="The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee" label="The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303293" start="29221" end="29239" title="Downstate New York" label="Downstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="29242" end="29255" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q762726" start="29258" end="29286" title="List of counties in New York" label="List of counties in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063243" start="29289" end="29361" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Putnam County, New York" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Putnam County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="29364" end="29390" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262355" start="29393" end="29407" title="Putnam Transit" label="Putnam Transit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54458" wikidata="Q1113529" url="?curid=54458" title="S-expression">
<text>In computer programming, an S-expression (or symbolic expression, abbreviated as sexpr or sexp) is an expression in a like-named notation for nested list (tree-structured) data. S-expressions were invented for, and popularized by, the programming language Lisp, which uses them for source code as well as data.

== Characteristics ==

In the usual parenthesized syntax of Lisp, an S-expression is classically defined as

# an atom of the form codice_1, or
# an expression of the form codice_2 where &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are S-expressions.

This definition reflects LISP&#x27;s representation of a list as a series of &quot;cells&quot;, each one an ordered pair. In plain lists, &quot;y&quot; points to the next cell (if any), thus forming a list. The recursive clause of the definition means that both this representation and the S-expression notation can represent any binary tree. However, the representation can in principle allow circular references, in which case the structure is not a tree at all, but a cyclic graph, and cannot be represented in classical S-expression notation
unless a convention for cross-reference is provided (analogous to SQL foreign keys, SGML/XML IDREFs, etc.). Modern Lisp dialects such as Common Lisp and Scheme provide such syntax via &quot;datum labels&quot;, with which objects can be marked, which can then recur elsewhere, indicating shared rather than duplicated structure, enabling the reader or printer to detect and thus trigger evaluation or display of cycles without infinitely recursing

: codice_3

The definition of an atom varies per context; in the original definition by John McCarthy, it was assumed that there existed &quot;an infinite set of distinguishable atomic symbols&quot; represented as &quot;strings of capital Latin letters and digits with single embedded blanks&quot; (a subset of character string and numeric literals).

Most modern sexpr notations allow more general quoted strings (for example including punctuation or full Unicode), and use an abbreviated notation to represent lists with more than 2 members, so that

: codice_4

stands for

: codice_5

codice_6 is the special end-of-list object (alternatively written codice_7, which is the only representation in Scheme).

In the Lisp family of programming languages, S-expressions are used to represent both source code and data. Other uses of S-expressions are in Lisp-derived languages such as DSSSL, and as mark-up in communication protocols like IMAP and John McCarthy&#x27;s CBCL. It is also used as text representation of WebAssembly. The details of the syntax and supported data types vary in the different languages, but the most common feature among these languages is the use of S-expressions and prefix notation.

==Datatypes and syntax==
There are many variants of the S-expression format, supporting a variety of different syntaxes for different datatypes. The most widely supported are:
* &quot;Lists and pairs&quot;: codice_8
* &quot;Symbols&quot;: codice_9 codice_10 codice_11
* &quot;Strings&quot;: codice_12
* &quot;Integers&quot;: codice_13
* &quot;Floating-point numbers&quot;: codice_14 codice_15 codice_16

The character codice_17 is often used to prefix extensions to the syntax, e.g. codice_18 for hexadecimal integers, or codice_19 for characters.

==Use in Lisp==
When representing source code in Lisp, the first element of an S-expression is commonly an operator or function name and any remaining elements are treated as arguments. This is called &quot;prefix notation&quot; or &quot;Polish notation&quot;. As an example, the Boolean expression written codice_20 in C, is represented as codice_21 in Lisp&#x27;s s-expr-based prefix notation.

As noted above, the precise definition of &quot;atom&quot; varies across LISP-like languages. A quoted string can typically contain anything but a quote, while
an unquoted identifier atom can typically contain anything but quotes, whitespace characters, parentheses, brackets, braces, backslashes, and semicolons. In either case, a prohibited character can typically be included by escaping it with a preceding backslash. Unicode support varies.

The recursive case of the s-expr definition is traditionally implemented using cons cells.

S-expressions were originally intended only for data to be manipulated by M-expressions, but the first implementation of Lisp was an interpreter of S-expression encodings of M-expressions, and Lisp programmers soon became accustomed to using S-expressions for both code and data.
This means that Lisp is homoiconic; that is, the primary representation of programs is also a data structure in a primitive type of the language itself.

Nested lists can be written as S-expressions: codice_22 is a two-element S-expression whose elements are also two-element S-expressions. The whitespace-separated notation used in Lisp (and this article) is typical. Line breaks (newline characters) usually qualify as separators. This is a simple context-free grammar for a tiny subset of English written as an S-expression (Gazdar/Melish, Natural Language Processing in Lisp), where S=sentence, NP=Noun Phrase, VP=Verb Phrase, V=Verb:
(((S) (NP VP))
 ((VP) (V))
 ((VP) (V NP))
 ((V) died)
 ((V) employed)
 ((NP) nurses)
 ((NP) patients)
 ((NP) Medicenter)
 ((NP) &quot;Dr Chan&quot;))
Program code can be written in S-expressions, usually using prefix notation. Example in Common Lisp:
(defun factorial (x)
 (if (zerop x)
 1
 (* x (factorial (- x 1)))))
S-expressions can be read in Lisp using the function READ. READ reads the textual representation of an S-expression and returns Lisp data. The function PRINT can be used to output an S-expression. The output then can be read with the function READ, when all printed data objects have a readable representation. Lisp has readable representations for numbers, strings, symbols, lists and many other data types. Program code can be formatted as pretty printed S-expressions using the function PPRINT (note: with two Ps, short for &quot;pretty&quot;-print).

Lisp programs are valid S-expressions, but not all S-expressions are valid Lisp programs. codice_23 is a valid S-expression, but not a valid Lisp program, since Lisp uses prefix notation and a floating point number (here 1.0) is not valid as an operation (the first element of the expression).

An S-expression preceded by a single quotation mark, as in codice_24, is syntactic sugar for a quoted S-expression, in this case codice_25.

== Parsing ==
S-expressions are often compared to XML: one key difference is that S-expressions have just one form of containment, the dotted pair, while XML tags can contain simple attributes, other tags, or CDATA, each using different syntax. Another is that S-expressions do not define a reference mechanism, whereas XML provides a notion of unique identifiers and references to them. For simple use cases, S-expressions are simpler than XML, but for more advanced use cases, XML has a query language called XPath which many tools and third party libraries use to simplify the handling of XML data.

== Standardization ==
Standards for some Lisp-derived programming languages include a specification for their S-expression syntax. These include Common Lisp (ANSI standard document ANSI INCITS 226-1994 (R2004)), Scheme (R5RS and R6RS), and ISLISP.

In May 1997, Ron Rivest submitted an Internet Draft to be considered for publication as an RFC. The draft defined a syntax based on Lisp S-expressions but intended for general-purpose data storage and exchange (similar to XML) rather than specifically for programming. It was never approved as an RFC, but it has since been cited and used by other RFCs (e.g. RFC 2693) and several other publications. It was originally intended for use in SPKI.

Rivest&#x27;s format defines an S-expression as being either an octet-string (a series of bytes) or a finite list of other S-expressions. It describes three interchange formats for expressing this structure. One is the &quot;advanced transport&quot;, which is very flexible in terms of formatting, and is syntactically similar to Lisp-style expressions, but they are not identical. The advanced transport, for example, allows octet-strings to be represented verbatim (the string&#x27;s length followed by a colon and the entire raw string), a quoted form allowing escape characters, hexadecimal, Base64, or placed directly as a &quot;token&quot; if it meets certain conditions. (Rivest&#x27;s tokens differ from Lisp tokens in that the former are just for convenience and aesthetics, and treated exactly like other strings, while the latter have specific syntactical meaning.)

Rivest&#x27;s draft defines a canonical representation &quot;for digital signature purposes&quot;. It is intended to be compact, easier to parse, and unique for any abstract S-expression. It only allows verbatim strings, and prohibits whitespace as formatting outside strings. Finally there is the &quot;basic transport representation&quot;, which is either the canonical form or the same encoded as Base64 and surrounded by braces, the latter intended to safely transport a canonically encoded S-expression in a system which might change spacing (e.g. an email system which has 80-character-wide lines and wraps anything longer than that).

This format has not been widely adapted for use outside of SPKI (some of the users being GnuPG, libgcrypt, Nettle, and GNU lsh). Rivest&#x27;s S-expressions web page provides C source code for a parser and generator (available under the MIT license), which could be adapted and embedded into other programs. In addition, there are no restrictions on independently implementing the format.

==See also==
* cons
* CAR and CDR
* Fexpr
* Lambda calculus
* M-expression
* Canonical S-expressions
* Comparison of data serialization formats

==References==
==External links==
* sfsexp the small, fast S-expression library for C/C++ on GitHub
* minilisp, by Léon Bottou.
* S-expressions on Rosettacode has implementations of readers and writers in many languages.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="3" end="23" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="28" end="40" title="S-expression" label="S-expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="45" end="64" title="S-expression" label="symbolic expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="81" end="86" title="S-expression" label="sexpr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="90" end="94" title="S-expression" label="sexp"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948" start="149" end="153" title="List (computing)" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="155" end="159" title="Tree (data structure)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="256" end="260" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="282" end="293" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="362" end="368" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="461" end="471" title="Expression (computer science)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="659" end="671" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="752" end="756" title="Linked list" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="762" end="771" title="Recursion" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q380172" start="881" end="892" title="binary tree" label="binary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q205808" start="945" end="963" title="circular reference" label="circular reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036238" start="1022" end="1034" title="cyclic graph" label="cyclic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056760" start="1167" end="1178" title="foreign key" label="foreign key"/>
<link wikidata="Q207819" start="1181" end="1185" title="SGML" label="SGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="1186" end="1189" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="1234" end="1245" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="1250" end="1256" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559094" start="1438" end="1444" title="Lisp reader" label="reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470012" start="1448" end="1455" title="Format (Common Lisp)" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="1633" end="1646" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661145" start="1723" end="1737" title="Symbol (programming)" label="atomic symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="1784" end="1796" title="Latin script" label="Latin letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="1856" end="1872" title="String (computing)" label="character string"/>
<link wikidata="Q121572" start="1885" end="1892" title="Literal (computer programming)" label="literal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="2002" end="2009" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="2170" end="2176" title="Object (computer science)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="2246" end="2252" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233980" start="2430" end="2435" title="Document Style Semantics and Specification Language" label="DSSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="2444" end="2451" title="Markup language" label="mark-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="2455" end="2477" title="communication protocol" label="communication protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q166936" start="2484" end="2488" title="Internet Message Access Protocol" label="IMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="2493" end="2506" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153298" start="2514" end="2518" title="Common Business Communication Language" label="CBCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q20155677" start="2562" end="2573" title="WebAssembly" label="WebAssembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="2615" end="2624" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q214510" start="3546" end="3561" title="Polish notation" label="Polish notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="3588" end="3595" title="Boolean logic" label="Boolean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="3628" end="3629" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4127" end="4134" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687178" start="4231" end="4240" title="cons cell" label="cons cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043323" start="4318" end="4330" title="M-expression" label="M-expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q925488" start="4548" end="4558" title="homoiconic" label="homoiconic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338047" start="4974" end="4994" title="context-free grammar" label="context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="5401" end="5412" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q734781" start="6405" end="6420" title="syntactic sugar" label="syntactic sugar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6427" end="6446" title="Lisp (programming language)#Self-evaluating forms and quoting" label="quoted S-expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="6523" end="6526" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q357626" start="6682" end="6687" title="CDATA" label="CDATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16340" start="6984" end="6989" title="XPath" label="XPath"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="7221" end="7232" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="7288" end="7294" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="7305" end="7309" title="R6RS" label="R6RS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974027" start="7316" end="7322" title="ISLISP" label="ISLISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q578036" start="7338" end="7348" title="Ron Rivest" label="Ron Rivest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421134" start="7362" end="7376" title="Internet Draft" label="Internet Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="7416" end="7419" title="Request for Comments" label="RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="7547" end="7550" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962327" start="7764" end="7768" title="Simple public key infrastructure" label="SPKI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="7861" end="7865" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="8354" end="8365" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q726780" start="8367" end="8373" title="Base64" label="Base64"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033356" start="8679" end="8703" title="Canonical S-expressions" label="canonical representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="9074" end="9080" title="Bracket" label="braces"/>
<link wikidata="Q223204" start="9380" end="9385" title="GnuPG" label="GnuPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000521" start="9398" end="9404" title="Nettle (cryptographic library)" label="Nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="9410" end="9413" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="9466" end="9467" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q334661" start="9528" end="9539" title="MIT license" label="MIT license"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687178" start="9696" end="9700" title="cons" label="cons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481471" start="9703" end="9714" title="CAR and CDR" label="CAR and CDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446116" start="9717" end="9722" title="Fexpr" label="Fexpr"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="9725" end="9740" title="Lambda calculus" label="Lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043323" start="9743" end="9755" title="M-expression" label="M-expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033356" start="9758" end="9781" title="Canonical S-expressions" label="Canonical S-expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155849" start="9784" end="9824" title="Comparison of data serialization formats" label="Comparison of data serialization formats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54460" wikidata="Q2534329" url="?curid=54460" title="Callitrichales">
<text>Callitrichales is a proposed order of flowering plants. As circumscribed by American botanist Arthur Cronquist in the Cronquist system (1981), the order included three families: 
* Hippuridaceae
* Callitrichaceae
* Hydrostachyaceae
A feature is the single stamen in the flower.

The order is not recognized by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group; the family Hydrostachyaceae is placed in the order Cornales and the plants making up the other two families are included in the family Plantaginaceae.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2534329" start="0" end="14" title="Callitrichales" label="Callitrichales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="29" end="34" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="38" end="53" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q362245" start="94" end="110" title="Arthur Cronquist" label="Arthur Cronquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="118" end="134" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="256" end="262" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="270" end="276" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="314" end="340" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21769" start="393" end="401" title="Cornales" label="Cornales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748235" start="477" end="491" title="Plantaginaceae" label="Plantaginaceae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54462" wikidata="Q2189522" url="?curid=54462" title="Calycerales">
<text>Calycerales is a historically recognized order of flowering plants. When accepted, it included the family Calyceraceae, which is now placed in the Asterales, with Calycerales treated as a synonym of Asterales.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2189522" start="0" end="11" title="Calycerales" label="Calycerales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="50" end="65" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q132299" start="106" end="118" title="Calyceraceae" label="Calyceraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21730" start="147" end="156" title="Asterales" label="Asterales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21730" start="199" end="208" title="Asterales" label="Asterales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54466" wikidata="Q1071303" url="?curid=54466" title="Campanulales">
<text>Campanulales is a valid botanic name for a plant order. It was used in the Cronquist system as an order within the subclass Asteridae in the class Magnoliopsida flowering plants. As then circumscribed it included the families:

* Pentaphragmataceae In Watson and Dallwitz this family has 1 genus, &quot;Pentaphragma&quot; with 30 species from southeast Asia.
* Sphenocleaceae - 1 genus
* Campanulaceae (harebells) - 28 genera
* Stylidiaceae In Watson and Dallwitz it has 5 genera and 150 species.
* Donatiaceae
* Brunoniaceae In Watson and Dallwitz there is only one species in the family, &quot;Brunonia australis&quot;
* Goodeniaceae (naupaka) - 1 genus

Campanulales is not recognized as an order in the APG II system, where the families are included in order Asterales, except for Sphenocleaceae in Solanales.

== References ==
* L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, information retrieval. https://web.archive.org/web/20070103200438/http://delta-intkey.com/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1071303" start="0" end="12" title="Campanulales" label="Campanulales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="24" end="36" title="botanic name" label="botanic name"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="75" end="91" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259422" start="124" end="133" title="Asteridae" label="Asteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307404" start="147" end="160" title="Magnoliopsida" label="Magnoliopsida"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="161" end="176" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q132791" start="230" end="248" title="Pentaphragmataceae" label="Pentaphragmataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148903" start="361" end="375" title="Sphenocleaceae" label="Sphenocleaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155802" start="388" end="401" title="Campanulaceae" label="Campanulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132216" start="428" end="440" title="Stylidiaceae" label="Stylidiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134836" start="499" end="510" title="Donatiaceae" label="Donatiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088792" start="513" end="525" title="Brunoniaceae" label="Brunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q547938" start="623" end="635" title="Goodeniaceae" label="Goodeniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="707" end="713" title="APG II" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21730" start="763" end="772" title="Asterales" label="Asterales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21723" start="803" end="812" title="Solanales" label="Solanales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54473" wikidata="Q2102991" url="?curid=54473" title="Rubiales (plant)">
<text>Rubiales was an order of flowering plants in the Cronquist system, including the families Rubiaceae and Theligonaceae. The latest APG system (2016) does not recognize this order and places the families within Gentianales.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2102991" start="0" end="8" title="Rubiales (plant)" label="Rubiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="16" end="21" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="25" end="40" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="49" end="65" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="90" end="99" title="Rubiaceae" label="Rubiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="104" end="117" title="Theligonaceae" label="Theligonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="130" end="147" title="APG IV system" label="APG system (2016)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21754" start="209" end="220" title="Gentianales" label="Gentianales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54474" wikidata="Q2481505" url="?curid=54474" title="Audio codec">
<text>An audio codec, or audio decoder is a device or computer program capable of encoding or decoding a digital data stream (a codec) that encodes or decodes audio. In software, an audio codec is a computer program implementing an algorithm that compresses and decompresses digital audio data according to a given audio file or streaming media audio coding format. The objective of the algorithm is to represent the high-fidelity audio signal with a minimum number of bits while retaining quality. This can effectively reduce the storage space and the bandwidth required for transmission of the stored audio file. Most software codecs are implemented as libraries which interface to one or more multimedia players. Most modern audio compression algorithms are based on modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT) coding and linear predictive coding (LPC).

In hardware, audio codec refers to a single device that encodes analog audio as digital signals and decodes digital back into analog. In other words, it contains both an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and digital-to-analog converter (DAC) running off the same clock signal. This is used in sound cards that support both audio in and out, for instance. Hardware audio codecs send and receive digital data using buses such as AC&#x27;97, SoundWire, I²S, SPI, I²C, etc. Most commonly the digital data is linear PCM, and this is the only format that most codecs support, but some legacy codecs support other formats such as G.711 for telephony.

==See also==
* Comparison of audio coding formats
* List of codecs
* List of open-source codecs
* Transcoding
* Video codec

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2481505" start="3" end="14" title="Audio codec" label="audio codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481505" start="19" end="32" title="Audio codec" label="audio decoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="122" end="127" title="codec" label="codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="241" end="268" title="Audio compression (data)" label="compresses and decompresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q758871" start="339" end="358" title="audio coding format" label="audio coding format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="547" end="556" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="649" end="658" title="Library (computing)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q210337" start="690" end="708" title="Media player (software)" label="multimedia players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268231" start="764" end="798" title="modified discrete cosine transform" label="modified discrete cosine transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826438" start="817" end="841" title="linear predictive coding" label="linear predictive coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="1020" end="1047" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="1058" end="1085" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="1113" end="1125" title="clock signal" label="clock signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="1143" end="1153" title="sound card" label="sound card"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="1263" end="1268" title="Bus (computing)" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q289839" start="1277" end="1287" title="AC&amp;#x27;97" label="AC&amp;#x27;97"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886878" start="1289" end="1298" title="SoundWire" label="SoundWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q677818" start="1300" end="1303" title="I²S" label="I²S"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="1305" end="1308" title="Serial Peripheral Interface Bus" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q750469" start="1310" end="1313" title="I²C" label="I²C"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="1354" end="1364" title="linear PCM" label="linear PCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q952898" start="1473" end="1478" title="G.711" label="G.711"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438347" start="1510" end="1544" title="Comparison of audio coding formats" label="Comparison of audio coding formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q604974" start="1547" end="1561" title="List of codecs" label="List of codecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293466" start="1564" end="1590" title="List of open-source codecs" label="List of open-source codecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888734" start="1593" end="1604" title="Transcoding" label="Transcoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q240831" start="1607" end="1618" title="Video codec" label="Video codec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54475" wikidata="Q240831" url="?curid=54475" title="Video codec">
<text>A video codec is software or hardware that compresses and decompresses digital video. In the context of video compression, &quot;codec&quot; is a portmanteau of &quot;encoder&quot; and &quot;decoder&quot;, while a device that only compresses is typically called an &quot;encoder&quot;, and one that only decompresses is a &quot;decoder&quot;.

The compressed data format usually conforms to a standard video coding format. The compression is typically lossy, meaning that the compressed video lacks some information present in the original video. A consequence of this is that decompressed video has lower quality than the original, uncompressed video because there is insufficient information to accurately reconstruct the original video.

There are complex relationships between the video quality, the amount of data used to represent the video (determined by the bit rate), the complexity of the encoding and decoding algorithms, sensitivity to data losses and errors, ease of editing, random access, and end-to-end delay (latency).

==History==
Historically, video was stored as an analog signal on magnetic tape. Around the time when the compact disc entered the market as a digital-format replacement for analog audio, it became feasible to also store and convey video in digital form. Because of the large amount of storage and bandwidth needed to record and convey raw video, a method was needed to reduce the amount of data used to represent the raw video. Since then, engineers and mathematicians have developed a number of solutions for achieving this goal that involve compressing the digital video data.

In 1974, discrete cosine transform (DCT) compression was introduced by Nasir Ahmed, T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao. During the late 1980s, a number of companies began experimenting with DCT lossy compression for video coding, leading to the development of the H.261 standard. H.261 was the first practical video coding standard, and was developed by a number of companies, including Hitachi, PictureTel, NTT, BT, and Toshiba, among others. Since H.261, DCT compression has been adopted by all the major video coding standards that followed.

The most popular video coding standards used for codecs have been the MPEG standards. MPEG-1 was developed by the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG) in 1991, and it was designed to compress VHS-quality video. It was succeeded in 1994 by MPEG-2/H.262, which was developed by a number of companies, primarily Sony, Thomson and Mitsubishi Electric. MPEG-2 became the standard video format for DVD and SD digital television. In 1999, it was followed by MPEG-4/H.263, which was a major leap forward for video compression technology. It was developed by a number of companies, primarily Mitsubishi Electric, Hitachi and Panasonic.

The most widely used video coding format, as of 2016, is H.264/MPEG-4 AVC. It was developed in 2003 by a number of organizations, primarily Panasonic, Godo Kaisha IP Bridge and LG Electronics. H.264 is the main video encoding standard for Blu-ray Discs, and is widely used by streaming internet services such as YouTube, Netflix, Vimeo, and iTunes Store, web software such as Adobe Flash Player and Microsoft Silverlight, and various HDTV broadcasts over terrestrial and satellite television.

AVC has been succeeded by HEVC (H.265), developed in 2013. It is heavily patented, with the majority of patents belonging to Samsung Electronics, GE, NTT and JVC Kenwood. The adoption of HEVC has been hampered by its complex licensing structure. HEVC is in turn succeeded by Versatile Video Coding (VVC).

There are also the open and free VP8, VP9 and AV1 video coding formats, used by YouTube, all of which were developed with involvement from Google.

== Applications ==
Video codecs are used in DVD players, Internet video, video on demand, digital cable, digital terrestrial television, videotelephony and a variety of other applications. In particular, they are widely used in applications that record or transmit video, which may not be feasible with the high data volumes and bandwidths of uncompressed video. For example, they are used in operating theaters to record surgical operations, in IP cameras in security systems, and in remotely operated underwater vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles. Any video stream or file can be encoded using a wide variety of live video format options. Here are some of the H.264 encoder settings that need to be set when streaming to an HTML5 video player.

== Video codec design ==
Video codecs seek to represent a fundamentally analog data set in a digital format. Because of the design of analog video signals, which represent luminance (luma) and color information (chrominance, chroma) separately, a common first step in image compression in codec design is to represent and store the image in a YCbCr color space. The conversion to YCbCr provides two benefits: first, it improves compressibility by providing decorrelation of the color signals; and second, it separates the luma signal, which is perceptually much more important, from the chroma signal, which is less perceptually important and which can be represented at lower resolution using chroma subsampling to achieve more efficient data compression. It is common to represent the ratios of information stored in these different channels in the following way Y:Cb:Cr. Different codecs use different chroma subsampling ratios as appropriate to their compression needs. Video compression schemes for Web and DVD make use of a 4:2:1 color sampling pattern, and the DV standard uses 4:1:1 sampling ratios. Professional video codecs designed to function at much higher bitrates and to record a greater amount of color information for post-production manipulation sample in 4:2:2 and 4:4:4 ratios. Examples of these codecs include Panasonic&#x27;s DVCPRO50 and DVCPROHD codecs (4:2:2), Sony&#x27;s HDCAM-SR (4:4:4), Panasonic&#x27;s HDD5 (4:2:2), Apple&#x27;s Prores HQ 422 (4:2:2).

It is also worth noting that video codecs can operate in RGB space as well. These codecs tend not to sample the red, green, and blue channels in different ratios, since there is less perceptual motivation for doing so—just the blue channel could be undersampled.

Some amount of spatial and temporal downsampling may also be used to reduce the raw data rate before the basic encoding process. The most popular encoding transform is the 8x8 DCT. Codecs that make use of a wavelet transform are also entering the market, especially in camera workflows that involve dealing with RAW image formatting in motion sequences. This process involves representing the video image as a set of macroblocks. For more information about this critical facet of video codec design, see B-frames.

The output of the transform is first quantized, then entropy encoding is applied to the quantized values. When a DCT has been used, the coefficients are typically scanned using a zig-zag scan order, and the entropy coding typically combines a number of consecutive zero-valued quantized coefficients with the value of the next non-zero quantized coefficient into a single symbol and also has special ways of indicating when all of the remaining quantized coefficient values are equal to zero. The entropy coding method typically uses variable-length coding tables. Some encoders compress the video in a multiple-step process called &quot;n-pass&quot; encoding (e.g. 2-pass), which performs a slower but potentially higher quality compression.

The decoding process consists of performing, to the extent possible, an inversion of each stage of the encoding process. The one stage that cannot be exactly inverted is the quantization stage. There, a best-effort approximation of inversion is performed. This part of the process is often called &quot;inverse quantization&quot; or &quot;dequantization&quot;, although quantization is an inherently non-invertible process.

Video codec designs are usually standardized or eventually become standardized—i.e., specified precisely in a published document. However, only the decoding process need be standardized to enable interoperability. The encoding process is typically not specified at all in a standard, and implementers are free to design their encoder however they want, as long as the video can be decoded in the specified manner. For this reason, the quality of the video produced by decoding the results of different encoders that use the same video codec standard can vary dramatically from one encoder implementation to another.

== Commonly used video codecs ==
A variety of video compression formats can be implemented on PCs and in consumer electronics equipment. It is therefore possible for multiple codecs to be available in the same product, reducing the need to choose a single dominant video compression format to achieve interoperability.

Standard video compression formats can be supported by multiple encoder and decoder implementations from multiple sources. For example, video encoded with a standard MPEG-4 Part 2 codec such as Xvid can be decoded using any other standard MPEG-4 Part 2 codec such as FFmpeg MPEG-4 or DivX Pro Codec, because they all use the same video format.

Codecs have their qualities and drawbacks. Comparisons are frequently published. The trade-off between compression power, speed, and fidelity (including artifacts) is usually considered the most important figure of technical merit.

==Codec packs==
Online video material is encoded by a variety of codecs, and this has led to the availability of codec packs — a pre-assembled set of commonly used codecs combined with an installer available as a software package for PCs, such as K-Lite Codec Pack, Perian and Combined Community Codec Pack.

== See also ==
* Bit rate
* Comparison of video codecs
* Display resolution
* Frame rate
* List of open-source codecs
* Multiplexing
* Sampling rate
* Subjective video quality
* Transcoding
* Video quality

== References ==
== External links ==
* Wyner-Ziv Coding of Video describes another algorithm for video compression that performs close to the Slepian–Wolf bound (with links to source code).
* AMD Media Codecs—optional download (formerly called ATI Avivo)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240831" start="2" end="13" title="Video codec" label="video codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="17" end="25" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="29" end="37" title="Computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="43" end="53" title="data compression" label="compresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011369" start="58" end="70" title="Uncompressed video" label="decompresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="71" end="84" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="129" end="134" title="codec" label="codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="146" end="157" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392830" start="271" end="278" title="Encoder (digital)" label="encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927899" start="402" end="421" title="video coding format" label="video coding format"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="452" end="457" title="lossy" label="lossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631256" start="785" end="798" title="video quality" label="video quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="866" end="874" title="bit rate" label="bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="1026" end="1033" title="Latency (engineering)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="1103" end="1116" title="magnetic tape" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1143" end="1155" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="1478" end="1487" title="engineers" label="engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="1492" end="1506" title="mathematicians" label="mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877" start="1627" end="1652" title="discrete cosine transform" label="discrete cosine transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951597" start="1689" end="1700" title="N. Ahmed" label="Nasir Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323842" start="1719" end="1728" title="K. R. Rao" label="K. R. Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="1804" end="1821" title="lossy compression" label="lossy compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148249" start="1874" end="1879" title="H.261" label="H.261"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="1997" end="2004" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191141" start="2006" end="2016" title="PictureTel" label="PictureTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054787" start="2018" end="2021" title="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone" label="NTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="2023" end="2025" title="BT plc" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="2031" end="2038" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927899" start="2173" end="2194" title="video coding standard" label="video coding standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273" start="2226" end="2230" title="MPEG" label="MPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q336284" start="2242" end="2248" title="MPEG-1" label="MPEG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273" start="2270" end="2298" title="Motion Picture Experts Group" label="Motion Picture Experts Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="2347" end="2350" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273902" start="2394" end="2400" title="MPEG-2" label="MPEG-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q922109" start="2401" end="2406" title="H.262" label="H.262"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="2464" end="2468" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365773" start="2470" end="2477" title="Technicolor SA" label="Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q53257" start="2482" end="2501" title="Mitsubishi Electric" label="Mitsubishi Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="2547" end="2550" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="2555" end="2576" title="SD digital television" label="SD digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q954973" start="2606" end="2612" title="MPEG-4 Visual" label="MPEG-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063983" start="2613" end="2618" title="H.263" label="H.263"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="2771" end="2780" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212633" start="2840" end="2856" title="H.264/MPEG-4 AVC" label="H.264/MPEG-4 AVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562410" start="2934" end="2955" title="Godo kaisha" label="Godo Kaisha IP Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q162345" start="2960" end="2974" title="LG Electronics" label="LG Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="3022" end="3034" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="3095" end="3102" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="3104" end="3111" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q156376" start="3113" end="3118" title="Vimeo" label="Vimeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="3124" end="3136" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q857177" start="3159" end="3177" title="Adobe Flash Player" label="Adobe Flash Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q489048" start="3182" end="3203" title="Microsoft Silverlight" label="Microsoft Silverlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="3217" end="3221" title="HDTV" label="HDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43664" start="3303" end="3307" title="HEVC" label="HEVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="3402" end="3421" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="3423" end="3425" title="GE" label="GE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676719" start="3435" end="3446" title="JVC Kenwood" label="JVC Kenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55517509" start="3552" end="3574" title="Versatile Video Coding" label="Versatile Video Coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063970" start="3616" end="3619" title="VP8" label="VP8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815169" start="3621" end="3624" title="VP9" label="VP9"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046105" start="3629" end="3632" title="AV1" label="AV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="3722" end="3728" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553613" start="3788" end="3802" title="Internet video" label="Internet video"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="3804" end="3819" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="3821" end="3834" title="digital cable" label="digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="3836" end="3866" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="3868" end="3882" title="videotelephony" label="videotelephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060822" start="4124" end="4141" title="operating theater" label="operating theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427360" start="4177" end="4186" title="IP camera" label="IP camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q618465" start="4216" end="4252" title="remotely operated underwater vehicle" label="remotely operated underwater vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="4258" end="4281" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q355293" start="4653" end="4662" title="Luminance (video)" label="luminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q355263" start="4674" end="4691" title="chrominance" label="color information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189998" start="4824" end="4829" title="YCbCr" label="YCbCr"/>
<link wikidata="Q355236" start="5175" end="5193" title="chroma subsampling" label="chroma subsampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796889" start="5549" end="5551" title="DV (video format)" label="DV"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="5928" end="5933" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253346" start="6265" end="6277" title="downsampling" label="downsampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q831390" start="6436" end="6443" title="wavelet" label="wavelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="6541" end="6544" title="Raw image format" label="RAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632668" start="6646" end="6657" title="macroblocks" label="macroblocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797012" start="6733" end="6741" title="B-frames" label="B-frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813668" start="6781" end="6790" title="Quantization (image processing)" label="quantized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345239" start="6797" end="6813" title="entropy encoding" label="entropy encoding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6923" end="6935" title="zig-zag scan" label="zig-zag scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981616" start="7278" end="7307" title="Variable-length code" label="variable-length coding tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="8831" end="8847" title="interoperability" label="interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927899" start="8859" end="8883" title="video compression format" label="video compression format"/>
<link wikidata="Q954973" start="9016" end="9029" title="MPEG-4 Part 2" label="MPEG-4 Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q622433" start="9044" end="9048" title="Xvid" label="Xvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q954973" start="9089" end="9102" title="MPEG-4 Part 2" label="MPEG-4 Part 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9117" end="9130" title="FFmpeg MPEG-4" label="FFmpeg MPEG-4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9134" end="9148" title="DivX Pro Codec" label="DivX Pro Codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121046" start="9238" end="9249" title="Comparison of video codecs" label="Comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097775" start="9348" end="9357" title="Compression artifact" label="artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449010" start="9675" end="9692" title="K-Lite Codec Pack" label="K-Lite Codec Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q379274" start="9694" end="9700" title="Perian" label="Perian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598915" start="9705" end="9734" title="Combined Community Codec Pack" label="Combined Community Codec Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="9754" end="9762" title="Bit rate" label="Bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121046" start="9765" end="9791" title="Comparison of video codecs" label="Comparison of video codecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538706" start="9794" end="9812" title="Display resolution" label="Display resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="9815" end="9825" title="Frame rate" label="Frame rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293466" start="9828" end="9854" title="List of open-source codecs" label="List of open-source codecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="9857" end="9869" title="Multiplexing" label="Multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="9872" end="9885" title="Sampling rate" label="Sampling rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631422" start="9888" end="9912" title="Subjective video quality" label="Subjective video quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888734" start="9915" end="9926" title="Transcoding" label="Transcoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631256" start="9929" end="9942" title="Video quality" label="Video quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540133" start="10087" end="10105" title="Slepian–Wolf bound" label="Slepian–Wolf bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q298929" start="10189" end="10198" title="ATI Avivo" label="ATI Avivo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54477" wikidata="Q18359031" url="?curid=54477" title="Video file format">
<text>A video file format is a type of file format for storing digital video data on a computer system. Video is almost always stored using lossy compression to reduce the file size.

A video file normally consists of a container (e.g. in the Matroska format) containing visual (video without audio) data in a video coding format (e.g. VP9) alongside audio data in an audio coding format (e.g. Opus). The container can also contain synchronization information, subtitles, and metadata such as title. A standardized (or in some cases de facto standard) video file type such as .webm is a profile specified by a restriction on which container format and which video and audio compression formats are allowed.

The coded video and audio inside a video file container (i.e. not headers, footers, and metadata) is called the essence. A program (or hardware) which can decode compressed video or audio is called a codec; playing or encoding a video file will sometimes require the user to install a codec library corresponding to the type of video and audio coding used in the file.

Good design normally dictates that a file extension enables the user to derive which program will open the file. That is the case with some video file formats, such as WebM (.webm), Windows Media Video (.wmv), Flash Video (.flv), and Ogg Video (.ogv), each of which can only contain a few well-defined subtypes of video and audio coding formats, making it relatively easy to know which codec will play the file. In contrast to that, some very general-purpose container types like AVI (.avi) and QuickTime (.mov) can contain video and audio in almost any format, and have file extensions named after the container type, making it very hard for the end user to use the file extension to derive which codec or program to use to play the files.

The free software FFmpeg project&#x27;s libraries have very wide support for encoding and decoding video file formats. For example, Google uses ffmpeg to support a wide range of upload video formats for YouTube. One widely used media player using the ffmpeg libraries is the free software VLC media player, which can play most video files that end users will encounter.

==List of video file formats==
==See also==
*Comparison of video container formats

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18359031" start="2" end="19" title="Video file format" label="video file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="33" end="44" title="file format" label="file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="57" end="70" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="81" end="89" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="134" end="151" title="lossy compression" label="lossy compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q167772" start="214" end="223" title="Digital container format" label="container"/>
<link wikidata="Q223535" start="237" end="245" title="Matroska" label="Matroska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927899" start="304" end="323" title="video coding format" label="video coding format"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815169" start="330" end="333" title="VP9" label="VP9"/>
<link wikidata="Q758871" start="362" end="381" title="audio coding format" label="audio coding format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466199" start="388" end="392" title="Opus (audio format)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="470" end="478" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="527" end="544" title="de facto standard" label="de facto standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q309440" start="570" end="575" title="WebM" label=".webm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117123" start="581" end="588" title="profile (engineering)" label="profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="814" end="821" title="essence (media)" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="902" end="907" title="codec" label="codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="1109" end="1123" title="file extension" label="file extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="1818" end="1831" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q847465" start="1832" end="1838" title="FFmpeg" label="FFmpeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171477" start="2103" end="2119" title="VLC media player" label="VLC media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438322" start="2230" end="2267" title="Comparison of video container formats" label="Comparison of video container formats"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54481" wikidata="Q273831" url="?curid=54481" title="Apron">
<text>An apron is a garment that is worn over other clothing to cover the front of the body. They may have several purposes, typically as a functional accessory that protects clothes and skin from stains and marks. However, other types of aprons may be worn as a decoration, for hygienic reasons, as part of a uniform, or as protection from certain dangers such as acid, allergens or excessive heat. It can also be used at work stations to hold extra tools and pieces or protect from dust and unwanted materials.

As a top layer that covers the front body, the apron is also worn as a uniform, adornment, ceremonial garb (e.g. Masonic apron) or fashion statement. Apron styles can be practical, fashionable, and sentimental.

The word comes from Old French &quot;napron&quot;, meaning a small piece of cloth. Over time &quot;a napron&quot; became &quot;an apron&quot; through a linguistic process called rebracketing.

==Styles==
There are many different apron forms depending on the purpose of the apron. A basic distinction is between waist aprons, which cover the body from the waist down, and bib aprons, which also cover the upper part of the body.

An apron is usually held in place by two ribbon-like strips of cloth that are tied at the back. A bib apron may either have a strap around the neck (perhaps the most widespread use today), or shoulder straps that criss-cross at the back and attach to the waistband. The advantage of the former design is that it makes it especially simple to put on the bib apron. The advantage of the shoulder strap design is that it makes the apron more comfortable to wear; a neck strap can slightly impair ease of movement.

Some modern-day aprons have humorous expressions, designs or corporate logos.

===Bib apron===
The bib apron (also known as the &quot;French chefs apron&quot; or a &quot;barbecue apron&quot;) has been worn for centuries. The garment&#x27;s history likely began when people used scraps of fabric to make a bib-like covering that slipped over the neck and tied at the back. The bib apron&#x27;s intuitive design and full coverage have made it a popular apron for tradesmen and people in low-economic classes since the 1880s—and maybe even earlier. In the 1960s—when women no longer wanted an apron that symbolized domestic ideals—the bib apron became the most-used apron and is now offered in a multitude of variations, colors, detailing and fabrications.

===Pinafore===

Pinafores may be worn by girls and women as a decorative garment or as a protective apron. A related term is &quot;pinafore dress&quot; (American English: jumper dress); it is a sleeveless dress intended to be worn over a top or blouse.

A pinafore is a full apron with two holes for the arms that is tied or buttoned in the back, usually just below the neck. Pinafores have complete front shaped over shoulder while aprons usually have no bib, or only a smaller one. A child&#x27;s garment to wear at school or for play would be a pinafore.

===Tabard===
A tabard (British English; cobbler apron in U.S. English) is a type of apron that covers both the front and back of the body. It is fastened with side ties or with waistbands that tie in the back. It covers most of the upper part of the body and is used in many occupations, like bakeries, hospitals, and large retail stores. The original cobbler&#x27;s apron was typically made of leather.

An alternative version uses snaps instead of ties and closes at the front. Such an apron is in effect like a vest and is more commonly sold for domestic rather than occupational use.

===Bungalow apron===
A bungalow apron is an item of women&#x27;s at-home clothing. Most bungalow aprons were extremely simple garments, often with kimono sleeves (sleeves cut in one piece with the body of the dress), little or no trim, and the fewest possible fasteners. Most date from the first half of the 20th century (roughly 1910 into the 1940s), when they evolved into or were replaced by the &quot;patio dress&quot; or Lounger available today.

In contrast to most aprons, they were intended to be worn as a stand-alone garment, not over another dress. They probably developed from the full-coverage wraparound or pullover aprons of the early years of the 20th century.

Bungalow aprons fell roughly between nightgowns or house coats and house-dresses; they were appropriate for morning in-home wear but would not have been worn outside of the house, as opposed to a true morning or house-dress, which might have been worn to the grocery store or in other informal situations.

===Clerical garment===
The term &quot;apron&quot; also refers to an item of clerical clothing, now largely obsolete, worn by Anglican bishops and archdeacons. The clerical apron resembles a short cassock reaching just above the knee, and is colored black for archdeacons and purple for bishops. The apron is worn with black breeches, reaching to just below the knee, and knee-length gaiters. The history behind the vesture is that it symbolically represents the mobility of bishops and archdeacons, who at one time would ride horses to visit various parts of a diocese or archdeaconry. In this sense, the apparel was much more practical than a clerical cassock would be. In latter years, this vesture was more symbolic than practical, and since the mid-twentieth century it has fallen out of favor.

==In the home==
The apron was traditionally viewed as an essential garment for anyone doing housework. Cheaper clothes and washing machines made aprons less common beginning in the mid-1960s in some countries such as the United States. However, the practice of wearing aprons remains strong in many places.

Today, the apron has enjoyed a minor renaissance in terms of both women and men now wearing them when performing household chores. For instance, an article in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; claimed in 2005 that the apron is &quot;enjoying a renaissance as a retro-chic fashion accessory&quot; in the United States. However, it still is not as prevalent as it was prior to the 1960s.

Aprons are nowadays considered equally appropriate for both women and men by most people. However, prevailing social norms ensure that women frequently wear more delicate clothing, and may therefore be more likely to want the protection an apron offers. This can also be because the apron is the traditional clothing for cooking and washing dishes, which was usually done by women.

When domestic workers are supplied a uniform by their employers, an apron is often included. The aprons are worn for hygienic as well as for identification purposes.

==Protective and fashionable aprons throughout history==
Since fabric was precious in the medieval and Renaissance eras, aprons then were little more than scraps of material tied around the waist with the intent of protecting the valuable clothing underneath.
In Europe during the Middle Ages, aprons were worn by blacksmiths, armor and weapon makers, gardeners, carvers, furniture makers, leather smiths, cobblers, tailors, jewelers, metal forgers, fishmongers, clock makers, homemakers, tradesmen, artisans and masons. Tradesmen in general were called &quot;apron men,&quot; as aprons were so common that distinguishing styles emerged between the various trades. For example, English barbers were known as &quot;checkered apron men.&quot; Cobblers wore black to protect garments from the black wax used on shoes. Butchers wore blue stripes. Butlers wore green aprons. Blue was commonly worn by weavers, spinners, and gardeners. Stonemasons wore white aprons as protection against the dust of their trade, and even in the twenty-first century, aprons survive as part of Masonic ceremonial attire. These aprons were long, coming down to below the knees, with a flap or bib to protect the chest. The Union of the Grand Lodge of England between the Ancient and Modern branches of English Freemasonry in 1813 brought into many effect many changes in dress and ritual which still prevail to this day. In respect to the Masonic apron it was felt necessary to have these standardised and the resulting effort are the aprons we have in use today. The Dutch wore aprons bordered with black and with a skull and crossbones on the flap. Scottish lodges each have their individual right to choose the design, colour and shape of their aprons; some employ a tartan, while many others have a circular rather than a triangular flap. Soldiers of the French Foreign Legion wore leather aprons as part of their ceremonial dress as early as the 18th century.

From these utilitarian beginnings, the modern apron got more stylish over time. During the Renaissance, more fanciful aprons crafted from finer fabrics began to appear—usually without bibs and often embroidered. Well-to-do women favored long dresses often with detachable sleeves, and to keep their expensive gowns clean, they wore washable aprons or overdresses in a range of embellishments and materials.
Aprons became a fashion statement in the 1500s, when women started adorning them with expensive lace and embroidery.

Politics ruled women&#x27;s fashion in 1650s England when Oliver Cromwell decreed that women and girls should dress properly. This sparked the Puritan look of a white apron covering a long black dress that reached from a woman&#x27;s neck to her toes.

At the height of the industrial revolution in Victorian England, the market was flooded with different types of aprons. The boom of factories and sewing machines meant that consumers had options: one could choose a full-body apron, a linen apron, a linen apron with ruffles or ruching or lace, a grosgrain apron with embroidery, or an apron with a flounce. Aprons were a way of indicating the difference in status between the employer and the employee, and the uniform of the staff was strictly regulated. For example, a housemaid might wear a print dress during the day and then change into a black dress and dress apron for the evening service.

In contemporary South Africa, young women wear beaded aprons to celebrate their coming of age.

===Ancient ceremonial aprons===
Examples of ancient gods wearing aprons can be found worldwide. Fertility goddess figurines may be the earliest depiction of women wearing aprons. These ancient snake goddess figurines excavated in Crete depicted how Minoan women may have dressed in 1600 BCE: a tight bodice, bare breasts, and an embroidered or woven apron covering a long dress. Monuments and wall paintings in Ancient Egypt depict a triangular-shaped apron with the point upward when the wearer is taking part in some kind of ceremony of initiation. In China, some of the ancient figures of the gods wear semi-circular aprons. In Central America the ancient gods are consistently sculpted wearing aprons. Tepoxtecatl (the preserver) is depicted wearing an apron with a triangular flap. Priests wore similar aprons as a sign of their allegiance to the gods and as a badge of their authority.

==In the United States==
Aprons have been used in North America throughout its recorded history by both the Native Americans and later peoples. The kitchen apron fell somewhat out of favor in the 1960s after its rise to celebrity in the 1950s when it became the post-war symbol for family and domesticity. People started doing their work without an apron entirely or they choose to wear a bib apron (its unisex, simple, boxy design represented the opposite of the 1950s housewife). The bib apron, also known as the &quot;French chef&#x27;s apron&quot; or &quot;barbecue apron&quot;, remains the dominant apron on the American market and is offered in a multitude of variations in colors, detailing and fabrics.

===Early American aprons===
Native American wore aprons for both practical and ceremonial purposes. Early female settlers wore plain, long white aprons. Later, Quaker women wore long and colorful silk aprons.

As cities in New England grew, more elaborate options began to appear. Upscale American women in the 18th century wore embroidered aprons that sometimes dipped at the front of the waist (so as to not obscure the bodice of a gown). 

=== 1800s ===
In England and the United States in the 1800s, both maids and wealthy women wore aprons. Servant aprons were traditionally white and were supposed to be &quot;clean, neat and appropriate.&quot; The maid&#x27;s clothing was meant to follow the fashion trends of the time while also representing her employer&#x27;s class status and wealth. Some aprons had lace, embroidery or pleating work on them to add a bit of sophistication if they were servants who regularly appeared in front of house guests.

Wealthy housewives of the time were also expected to show off their family&#x27;s status in society and their commitment to the domestic life. They did this by also wearing aprons, though the aprons were far more elegant and expensive than the maid&#x27;s white cotton apron. Popular materials included black lace, satin with chenille borders, shot silk, and satin. An apron of this caliber was necessary with a morning dress during the early nineteenth century for a woman of status. During this time, &quot;never was there a greater rage than for aprons (of satin and shot silk) for morning or afternoon.&quot; The elegant and colorful apron was also a symbol that a woman had the funds to be swindled by travelling merchants into purchasing &quot;a gaudy ribbon or shining pair scissors.&quot;

Another symbol which the extravagant apron represented was of the &quot;fig leaf,&quot; as worn by Eve in the Garden of Eden. Women termed their ornamental aprons &quot;fig leaves,&quot; thus drawing attention to their &quot;sexual region.&quot; Small decorated aprons were one example of &quot;suggestive fashion.&quot; According to at least one private journal entry, men of the time were reputed to loudly exclaim, &quot;Oh my!&quot; upon spotting a woman in a &quot;fig leaf&quot; apron, sometimes blushing profusely and fainting on the spot.

Aprons for both maids and housewives were not just worn in the home, but out on the town as well. The painting &quot;Scene in Frankfurt Fair, April 1835. Part of the Line of Stalls Extending Along the River Mayn&quot; by Mary Ellen Best shows a mother in a highly decorated and colorful apron and her daughter in a green pinafore apron. They are out shopping in a market and through the appearance of their stylish aprons, they are exhibiting their upper-middle class status as well as their ties to female domesticity.

===1920s===
From 1900 through the 1920s, well-heeled women wore ornate, heavily embroidered aprons. Aprons of the 1920s mirror the style of the times: loose and long. Often closed with a button and adorned with needlework, many aprons styles emerged during this era and stores began selling patterns and kits to make and adorn aprons at home.
Aprons of this period followed the silhouette of dapper fashions—long, with no waist line.

===1930s – 1940s===

The “Hooverette” or “Hoover apron” was named after the man in charge of the U.S. Food Administration at the time, Herbert Hoover. Women working outside the home wore whatever protective garments their jobs required, including coveralls, smocks, or aprons. At home, they worked in full-length aprons with hefty pockets and a cinched waistline that were often decorated with buttons, pockets and contrasting colors.

Aprons became plain during the Great Depression. Since fabric was scarce, women would make aprons out of flour and animal-feed sacks to protect their clothing. Pinafore aprons, or &quot;pinnies&quot; as they were affectionately called, began to gain popularity. Dorothy famously wore a blue and white gingham pinafore in &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot;.

===1950s===

Post-war family values made the apron the symbol of home, family, mother and wife. As sewing machines and cloth became available, aprons—both commercial and homemade—became the uniform of the professional housewife. Magazines from the 1940s and 50s feature apron-adorned women in nearly every advertisement that is related to housework or cooking, including those for irons, kitchen appliances, and food products. The 1950s brought out the half-aprons of highly starched cotton, feedsack, and for special occasions sheer fabric trimmed with lace. Two-piece aprons and short smocks of bright cotton prints for everyday use were also popular.

The postwar archetypal housewife was practical and creative. She made aprons out of remnants, extra kitchen curtains, dish towels, handkerchiefs, and flour sacks. When she made her aprons, she considered design as well as function. Many 1950s aprons were decorated with sewing, cleaning, cooking, and &quot;mom&quot; themes.

Husbands in the 1950s often sported bib aprons for barbecues on the weekends, often with written statements about Dad&#x27;s grilling talents.

===1960s – 1970s===
Aprons fell out of favor as women began looking again beyond the home and family for fulfillment as the feminist movement of the latter half of the 20th century began. In response, people chose to wear no apron when they did their work, or they wore bib aprons that were less stereotypically feminine, sometimes with ironic or sarcastic statements written on them.

Aprons remained a staple of the workplace as a means of protecting garments. Aprons were also worn as a work uniform and by people who worked in the food trades—butchers, waitresses and chefs as well as hairdressers and barbers.

===1980s – today===
Many home cooks chose not to wear an apron in the 1980s. Those that did often wore bib aprons or vintage/retro DIY aprons. However, more recently the apron has again enjoyed increasing popularity. Employees in the service industry continue to wear aprons for work, often a bib apron with company logos. Today there is no negative social stigma associated with doing one&#x27;s own chores (e.g. cooking, cleaning) or pursuing messy hobbies or careers (e.g. styling, gardening, painting) .

==See also==
* Tabard
* Gymslip
* Jumper (dress)
* Romper suit

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273831" start="3" end="8" title="Apron" label="apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q186752" start="365" end="374" title="allergens" label="allergens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="621" end="634" title="Masonic apron" label="Masonic apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="740" end="750" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302206" start="898" end="910" title="rebracketing" label="rebracketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="2505" end="2521" title="protective clothing" label="protective apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479458" start="2587" end="2599" title="jumper dress" label="jumper dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q152563" start="2661" end="2667" title="blouse" label="blouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520756" start="2872" end="2875" title="bib (garment)" label="bib"/>
<link wikidata="Q535449" start="2990" end="2996" title="tabard" label="tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081763" start="3278" end="3287" title="Hospital volunteer" label="hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915560" start="3327" end="3334" title="Shoemaking" label="cobbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q256458" start="3711" end="3724" title="kimono sleeve" label="kimono sleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010399" start="4293" end="4303" title="house coat" label="house coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405615" start="4625" end="4642" title="clerical clothing" label="clerical clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4674" end="4682" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="4695" end="4705" title="archdeacon" label="archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q324708" start="4745" end="4752" title="cassock" label="cassock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302770" start="4873" end="4881" title="breeches" label="breeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526862" start="4932" end="4939" title="gaiters" label="gaiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="5110" end="5117" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="5822" end="5845" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="6434" end="6449" title="domestic worker" label="domestic worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="11061" end="11077" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q76976" start="11357" end="11363" title="unisex" label="unisex"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="11655" end="11662" title="fabrics" label="fabrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="11825" end="11831" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="11888" end="11899" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q833860" start="12174" end="12178" title="maid" label="maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q38126150" start="12630" end="12640" title="Housewife" label="housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501507" start="12906" end="12915" title="History of clothing and textiles" label="materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="13530" end="13544" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q28920908" start="13726" end="13733" title="History of fashion design" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004136" start="14189" end="14204" title="Mary Ellen Best" label="Mary Ellen Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247116" start="14289" end="14297" title="pinafore" label="pinafore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="14417" end="14435" title="Upper middle class" label="upper-middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="15059" end="15073" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="15391" end="15407" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805240" start="15465" end="15470" title="flour sack" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q38126150" start="15930" end="15939" title="housewife" label="housewife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977453" start="16961" end="17017" title="Feminist Movement in the United States (1963-1982)" label="feminist movement of the latter half of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q535449" start="17977" end="17983" title="Tabard" label="Tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625150" start="17986" end="17993" title="Gymslip" label="Gymslip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479458" start="17996" end="18010" title="Jumper (dress)" label="Jumper (dress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q818941" start="18013" end="18024" title="Romper suit" label="Romper suit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54482" wikidata="Q295346" url="?curid=54482" title="Vertex">
<text>Vertex, vertices or vertexes may refer to:

==Science and technology==
===Mathematics and computer science===
*Vertex (geometry), a point where two or more curves, lines, or edges meet
*Vertex (computer graphics), a data structure that describes the position of a point
*Vertex (curve), a point of a plane curve where the first derivative of curvature is zero
*Vertex (graph theory), the fundamental unit of which graphs are formed
*Vertex (topography), in a triangulated irregular network
*Vertex of a representation, in finite group theory

===Physics===
*Vertex (physics), the reconstructed location of an individual particle collision
*Vertex (optics), a point where the optical axis crosses an optical surface
*Vertex function, describing the interaction between a photon and an electron

===Biology and anatomy===
*Vertex (anatomy), the highest point of the head
*Vertex (urinary bladder), alternative name of the apex of urinary bladder 
*Vertex distance, the distance between the surface of the cornea of the eye and a lens situated in front of it
*Vertex presentation, a head-first presentation at childbirth

==Businesses==
*Vertex (company), an American business services provider
*Vertex Holdings, an investment holding company in Singapore
*Vertex Inc, an American tax compliance software and services company 
*Vertex Pharmaceuticals, an American biotech company
*Vertex Railcar, a Chinese-American manufacturer of railroad rolling stock 2014–2018
*Vertex Resource Group, a Canadian environmental services company

==Other uses==
*&quot;Vertex&quot; (album), by Buck 65, 1997
*&quot;Vertex&quot; (band), formed in 1996
*Vertex (astrology), the point where the prime vertical intersects the ecliptic

== See also ==

*Virtex (disambiguation)
*Vortex (disambiguation)
*Vertex model, a type of statistical mechanics model
*Vertex operator algebra in conformal field theory

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295346" start="0" end="6" title="Vertex" label="Vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q295346" start="8" end="16" title="Vertex" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q295346" start="20" end="28" title="Vertex" label="vertexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="111" end="128" title="Vertex (geometry)" label="Vertex (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922776" start="186" end="212" title="Vertex (computer graphics)" label="Vertex (computer graphics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q362765" start="271" end="285" title="Vertex (curve)" label="Vertex (curve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="361" end="382" title="Vertex (graph theory)" label="Vertex (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296387" start="433" end="452" title="Vertex (topography)" label="Vertex (topography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922779" start="491" end="517" title="Vertex of a representation" label="Vertex of a representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118034" start="558" end="574" title="Vertex (physics)" label="Vertex (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q376733" start="640" end="655" title="Vertex (optics)" label="Vertex (optics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922778" start="716" end="731" title="Vertex function" label="Vertex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425673" start="821" end="837" title="Vertex (anatomy)" label="Vertex (anatomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="870" end="894" title="Vertex (urinary bladder)" label="Vertex (urinary bladder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922774" start="946" end="961" title="Vertex distance" label="Vertex distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258214" start="1057" end="1076" title="Vertex presentation" label="Vertex presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922769" start="1135" end="1151" title="Vertex (company)" label="Vertex (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245608" start="1193" end="1208" title="Vertex Holdings" label="Vertex Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922770" start="1254" end="1264" title="Vertex Inc" label="Vertex Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744099" start="1325" end="1347" title="Vertex Pharmaceuticals" label="Vertex Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q29791490" start="1378" end="1392" title="Vertex Railcar" label="Vertex Railcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191129" start="1463" end="1484" title="Vertex Resource Group" label="Vertex Resource Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922767" start="1545" end="1571" title="Vertex (album)" label="&amp;quot;Vertex&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901013" start="1591" end="1616" title="Vertex (band)" label="&amp;quot;Vertex&amp;quot; (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174349" start="1634" end="1652" title="Vertex (astrology)" label="Vertex (astrology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934901" start="1731" end="1754" title="Virtex (disambiguation)" label="Virtex (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q403131" start="1756" end="1779" title="Vortex (disambiguation)" label="Vortex (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922777" start="1781" end="1793" title="Vertex model" label="Vertex model"/>
<link wikidata="Q28509" start="1834" end="1857" title="Vertex operator algebra" label="Vertex operator algebra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54483" wikidata="Q218743" url="?curid=54483" title="Edge">
<text>Edge or EDGE may refer to:

==Technology==
===Computing===
* Edge computing, a network load-balancing system
* Edge device, an entry point to a computer network
* Adobe Edge, a graphical development application
* Microsoft Edge, a web browser developed by Microsoft
* Microsoft Edge Legacy, a discontinued web browser developed by Microsoft
* EdgeHTML, the layout engine used in Microsoft Edge Legacy
* ThinkPad Edge, a Lenovo laptop computer series marketed from 2010
* Silhouette edge, in computer graphics, a feature of a 3D body projected onto a 2D plane
* Explicit data graph execution, a computer instruction set architecture

===Telecommunication(s)===
* Edge Wireless, an American mobile phone provider
* Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution, a pre-3G digital mobile phone technology
* Motorola Edge, a series of smartphones made by Motorola
* Samsung Galaxy Note Edge, a phablet made by Samsung
* Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge or Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge, smartphones made by Samsung
* Ubuntu Edge, a prototype smartphone made by Canonical

==Entertainment==
===Music===
* &quot;Edge&quot; (album), a 1988 album by Daryl Braithwaite
* &quot;Edge&quot;, the B-side of the 2008 single &quot;Love the World&quot; by Perfume
* &quot;Edge&quot;, a 2013 song by Haim from &quot;Days Are Gone&quot;

===Radio and television===
* 93.7 Edge FM, in Bega, New South Wales
* Edge FM 102.1, in Wangaratta, Victoria
* Edge FM 102.5, in Deniliquin, New South Wales
* Edge Radio, in Hobart, Tasmania
* Edge TV, a Canadian cable music channel
* Edge Media Television, parent company of Irish media company Controversial TV
* &quot;Edge&quot; (TV pilot), a 2015 television pilot

===Video games===
* &quot;Edge&quot; (magazine), a UK video games magazine
* &quot;Edge&quot; (video game), a 2008 video game by Mobigame
* Edge Games, an American video game company
* Edge (&quot;Final Fantasy&quot;), a character from the game &quot;Final Fantasy IV&quot;
* Edge (&quot;Rival Schools&quot;), a character from the game &quot;Rival Schools&quot;
* Edge (&quot;Suikoden&quot;), a character from the game &quot;Suikoden III&quot;

==Organizations==
* Edge (educational foundation), an organization in the United Kingdom
* Edge Church, an assemblies of God megachurch in Adelaide, South Australia
* EDGE Foundation, an organization helping female students pursue graduate studies in mathematics
* Edge Foundation, Inc., a science and technology think tank
* EDGE Group, an advanced military and technology conglomerate based in the United Arab Emirates

==People==
===Surname===
* Edge (surname)

===Other===
* Morgan Edge, a DC Comics supervillain
* Edge (wrestler) (born 1973), ring name of Canadian professional wrestler Adam Copeland
* Edgerrin James (born 1978), nicknamed &quot;Edge&quot;, American football player
* The Edge (born 1961), British-Irish musician, singer, and songwriter with the rock band U2

==Places==
* Edge, Cheshire, a former civil parish
* Edge, Gloucestershire, a village north of Stroud
* Edge, Shropshire, a hamlet near Yockleton
* Edge, Texas, a community in the United States
* Edge House, a historic home in Groveland, Florida, U.S.

==Sports==
* Edge (cricket), a term used in cricket
* Edge rusher, either a defensive end or outside linebacker, positions in American football 
* St. John&#x27;s Edge, a Canadian basketball team
* West Michigan Edge, an American soccer team

==Other==
* Edge (geometry), a one-dimensional line segment joining two vertices
* Edge (graph theory), a pair of vertices that are adjacent in a graph
* Edge (shaving gel), a brand of shaving gel
* Edge Act, U.S. banking legislation
* Edge baronets, title in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom
* EDGE species, evolutionarily distinct and globally endangered species
* Ford Edge, a midsize crossover SUV
* Leading edge, a line connecting the forward-most points of a wing&#x27;s profile
* Trailing edge, the rear edge of the wing
* Signal edge, a transition of a digital signal from low to high or high to low
* Zivko Edge 540, an aerobatic aircraft

== See also ==
* 
* The Edge (disambiguation)
* Edging (disambiguation)
* 102.1 The Edge (disambiguation)
* Cutting edge (disambiguation)
* Leading edge (disambiguation)
* On the Edge (disambiguation)
* Over the Edge (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218743" start="0" end="4" title="Edge" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q218743" start="8" end="12" title="Edge" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337692" start="61" end="75" title="Edge computing" label="Edge computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098575" start="111" end="122" title="Edge device" label="Edge device"/>
<link wikidata="Q14073847" start="163" end="173" title="Adobe Edge" label="Adobe Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18698690" start="213" end="227" title="Microsoft Edge" label="Microsoft Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598139" start="268" end="289" title="Microsoft Edge Legacy" label="Microsoft Edge Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668903" start="343" end="351" title="EdgeHTML" label="EdgeHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784447" start="403" end="416" title="ThinkPad Edge" label="ThinkPad Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514885" start="471" end="486" title="Silhouette edge" label="Silhouette edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736059" start="561" end="590" title="Explicit data graph execution" label="Explicit data graph execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337687" start="662" end="675" title="Edge Wireless" label="Edge Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="713" end="750" title="Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution" label="Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q96393998" start="795" end="808" title="Motorola Edge (2020)" label="Motorola Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17914033" start="853" end="877" title="Samsung Galaxy Note Edge" label="Samsung Galaxy Note Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22893875" start="907" end="929" title="Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge" label="Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18941713" start="933" end="955" title="Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge" label="Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14242876" start="987" end="998" title="Ubuntu Edge" label="Ubuntu Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002457" start="1074" end="1098" title="Edge (album)" label="&amp;quot;Edge&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q307134" start="1190" end="1204" title="Love the World" label="Love the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949113" start="1273" end="1286" title="Days Are Gone" label="Days Are Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645858" start="1323" end="1335" title="93.7 Edge FM" label="93.7 Edge FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337651" start="1364" end="1377" title="Edge FM 102.1" label="Edge FM 102.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128210" start="1405" end="1418" title="Edge FM 102.5" label="Edge FM 102.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337677" start="1453" end="1463" title="Edge Radio" label="Edge Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337683" start="1487" end="1494" title="Edge TV" label="Edge TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337674" start="1529" end="1550" title="Edge Media Television" label="Edge Media Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602243" start="1609" end="1636" title="Edge (TV pilot)" label="&amp;quot;Edge&amp;quot; (TV pilot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q793975" start="1683" end="1710" title="Edge (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Edge&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047547" start="1740" end="1769" title="Edge (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Edge&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337654" start="1803" end="1813" title="Edge Games" label="Edge Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073822" start="1848" end="1880" title="Edge (Final Fantasy)" label="Edge (&amp;quot;Final Fantasy&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595691" start="1939" end="1971" title="Edge (Rival Schools)" label="Edge (&amp;quot;Rival Schools&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503171" start="2027" end="2054" title="Edge (Suikoden)" label="Edge (&amp;quot;Suikoden&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337640" start="2128" end="2157" title="Edge (educational foundation)" label="Edge (educational foundation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337645" start="2199" end="2210" title="Edge Church" label="Edge Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088830" start="2275" end="2290" title="EDGE Foundation" label="EDGE Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337653" start="2373" end="2394" title="Edge Foundation, Inc." label="Edge Foundation, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q64732479" start="2434" end="2444" title="EDGE Group" label="EDGE Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869767" start="2557" end="2571" title="Edge (surname)" label="Edge (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699823" start="2587" end="2598" title="Morgan Edge" label="Morgan Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="2627" end="2642" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge (wrestler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081617" start="2716" end="2730" title="Edgerrin James" label="Edgerrin James"/>
<link wikidata="Q714845" start="2799" end="2807" title="The Edge" label="The Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337631" start="2904" end="2918" title="Edge, Cheshire" label="Edge, Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890858" start="2944" end="2965" title="Edge, Gloucestershire" label="Edge, Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876541" start="2995" end="3011" title="Edge, Shropshire" label="Edge, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28131879" start="3039" end="3050" title="Edge, Texas" label="Edge, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337668" start="3087" end="3097" title="Edge House" label="Edge House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178987" start="3157" end="3171" title="Edge (cricket)" label="Edge (cricket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376968" start="3198" end="3209" title="Edge rusher" label="Edge rusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q42224213" start="3291" end="3311" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019084" start="3342" end="3360" title="West Michigan Edge" label="West Michigan Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q26382" start="3399" end="3414" title="Edge (geometry)" label="Edge (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="3470" end="3489" title="Edge (graph theory)" label="Edge (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376964" start="3541" end="3559" title="Edge (shaving gel)" label="Edge (shaving gel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337642" start="3586" end="3594" title="Edge Act" label="Edge Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337689" start="3623" end="3636" title="Edge baronets" label="Edge baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322847" start="3686" end="3698" title="EDGE species" label="EDGE species"/>
<link wikidata="Q962328" start="3758" end="3767" title="Ford Edge" label="Ford Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="3795" end="3807" title="Leading edge" label="Leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q975211" start="3878" end="3891" title="Trailing edge" label="Trailing edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q775654" start="3921" end="3932" title="Signal edge" label="Signal edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q206977" start="4001" end="4015" title="Zivko Edge 540" label="Zivko Edge 540"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731559" start="4060" end="4085" title="The Edge (disambiguation)" label="The Edge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337945" start="4088" end="4111" title="Edging (disambiguation)" label="Edging (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546377" start="4114" end="4145" title="102.1 The Edge (disambiguation)" label="102.1 The Edge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769074" start="4148" end="4177" title="Cutting edge (disambiguation)" label="Cutting edge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508754" start="4180" end="4209" title="Leading edge (disambiguation)" label="Leading edge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202151" start="4212" end="4240" title="On the Edge (disambiguation)" label="On the Edge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q522781" start="4243" end="4273" title="Over the Edge (disambiguation)" label="Over the Edge (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54484" wikidata="Q398045" url="?curid=54484" title="Arc">
<text>Arc may refer to:

==Mathematics==
* Arc (geometry), a segment of a differentiable curve
** Circular arc, a segment of a circle
* Arc (topology), a segment of a path
* Arc length, the distance between two points along a section of a curve
* Arc (projective geometry), a particular type of set of points of a projective plane
* arc (function prefix) (arcus), a prefix for inverse trigonometric functions
* Directed arc, a directed edge in graph theory
* Minute and second of arc, a unit of angular measurement equal to 1/60 of one degree.
*Wild arc, a concept from geometric topology

==Science and technology==
===Geology===
* Arc, in geology a mountain chain configured as an arc due to a common orogeny along a plate margin or the effect of back-arc extension
** Hellenic arc, the arc of islands positioned over the Hellenic Trench in the Aegean Sea off Greece

* Back-arc basin, a subsided region caused by back-arc extension

* Back-arc region, the region created by back-arc extension, containing all the basins, faults, and volcanoes generated by the extension
* Island arc, an arc-shaped archipelago, usually so configured for geologic causes, such as sea-floor spreading, common orogeny on the margin of the same plate, or back-arc extension
** Northeastern Japan Arc, an island arc
** Banda Arc, a set of island arcs in Indonesia
* Continental arc, in geology a continental mountain chain or parallel alignment of chains (as opposed to island arcs), configured in an arc
** Eastern Arc Mountains, a continental arc of Africa
* Volcanic arc, a chain of volcanoes positioned in an arc shape as seen from above
** Aleutian Arc, a large volcanic arc in the U.S. state of Alaska
* Nastapoka arc, a circular coastline in Hudson Bay

===Technology===
* codice_1, the command-line interface for ArcInfo
* ARC (file format), a file name extension for archive files
* ARC (processor), 32-bit RISC architecture
* ARC (adaptive replacement cache), a page replacement algorithm for high-performance filesystems
* Arc (programming language), a Lisp dialect designed by Paul Graham
* Arc (web browser), a freeware web browser developed by The Browser Company
* Sony Ericsson Xperia Arc, a cellphone
* Audio Return Channel, an audio technology working over HDMI
* Authenticated Received Chain, an email authentication system
* Arc lamp, a lamp that produces light by an electric arc 
** Xenon arc lamp, a highly specialized type of gas discharge lamp
** Deuterium arc lamp, a low-pressure gas-discharge light source
** Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide lamp, the trademark name of Osram&#x27;s brand of metal-halide gas discharge medium arc-length lamp
* Electric arc furnace, a furnace that heats charged material by means of an electric arc
* Arc welding, a welding process that is used to join metal to metal
* Arc-fault circuit interrupter, a specialized circuit breaker
* Arc converter, a spark transmitter
* Intel Arc, brand of graphics processing units designed by Intel
* Arc, one side (half) of an arch

===Other science===
* Electric arc, an ongoing plasma discharge (an electric current through a gas), producing light and heat
* Arc flash, the light and heat produced as part of an arc fault
* Arc (protein), a name of product of an immediate early gene, also called Arg3.1
* Reflex arc, a neural pathway that controls a reflex
* Circumhorizontal arc, an optical phenomenon
* Circumzenithal arc, an optical phenomenon

==Arts and entertainment==
===Music===

* &quot;A.R.C.&quot; (album), by pianist Chick Corea with bassist David Holland and drummer Barry Altschul recorded in 1971
* &quot;Arc&quot; (Neil Young &amp; Crazy Horse album), 1991
* &quot;Arc&quot; (Everything Everything album), 2013
* &quot;Arc&quot; (EP), a 2016 EP by Agoraphobic Nosebleed
* &quot;Arc&quot;, a song by Pearl Jam from &quot;Riot Act&quot;

===Video games===
* Arc System Works, a video game developer
* Luminous Arc, a video game series
* The title character of &quot;Arc the Lad&quot;, a series of role-playing video games for the PlayStation and PlayStation 2
* Armored Response Coalition, a fictional military/resistance organization seen in the 2020 video game &quot;Doom Eternal&quot;

===Other arts and entertainment===
* Tilted Arc, a controversial public art installation by Richard Serra
* &quot;Arc Poetry Magazine&quot;, a Canadian literary journal
* Character arc, the status of a character as it unfolds throughout the story
* Story arc, an extended or continuing storyline
* Arcs, one of the twelve basic principles of animation
* &quot;Ultraman Arc&quot;, a 2024 Japanese television series produced by Tsubuyara Productions and TV Tokyo

==Codes==
* Arcata Transit Center, Amtrak code for the station in Arcata, California
* IATA airport code of Arctic Village Airport, a public use airport in Alaska
* ISO 639-3 language code of the Official Aramaic language, spoken between 700 BCE and 300 BCE

==Companies and organizations==
* Arc Infrastructure, an Australian railway company
* Arc Institute, an American biomedical research organization
* Arc International, a French manufacturer and distributor of household goods
* Arc Publications, a UK independent publisher of poetry
* Arc @ UNSW, the principal student organisation at the University of New South Wales
* Arc of the United States, a charitable organization serving people with intellectual and developmental disabilities
* Arc Holdings, a French manufacturer of household goods

==Places==
* Arc (Provence), a river of southern France, flowing into the Étang de Berre
* Arc (Savoie), a river of eastern France, tributary of the Isère river
* Arc, short for &quot;Arcade&quot;; a Street suffix as used in the US

== Other uses ==
* Arc (Bahá&#x27;í), a number of administrative buildings for the Bahá&#x27;í Faith, located on Mount Carmel in Israel
* Arc (greyhounds), a major greyhound race in the Greyhound Board of Great Britain calendar

==See also==
* Joan of Arc (c. 1412–1431), national heroine of France and Catholic saint
* ARC (disambiguation)
* Arcs (disambiguation)
* Arc Angel (disambiguation)
* Arc reactor (disambiguation)
* Arch (disambiguation)
* Arch of Triumph (disambiguation)
* Ark (disambiguation)
* ARQ (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q398045" start="0" end="3" title="Arc" label="Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="37" end="51" title="Arc (geometry)" label="Arc (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335820" start="92" end="104" title="Circular arc" label="Circular arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366002" start="130" end="144" title="Arc (topology)" label="Arc (topology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q670036" start="168" end="178" title="Arc length" label="Arc length"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785004" start="241" end="266" title="Arc (projective geometry)" label="Arc (projective geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q674533" start="327" end="348" title="arc (function prefix)" label="arc (function prefix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="421" end="434" title="directed edge" label="directed edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="453" end="477" title="Minute and second of arc" label="Minute and second of arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000891" start="539" end="547" title="Wild arc" label="Wild arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624046" start="645" end="659" title="mountain chain" label="mountain chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707337" start="765" end="777" title="Hellenic arc" label="Hellenic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q798367" start="866" end="880" title="Back-arc basin" label="Back-arc basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839004" start="932" end="947" title="Back-arc region" label="Back-arc region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="1069" end="1079" title="Island arc" label="Island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11526209" start="1253" end="1275" title="Northeastern Japan Arc" label="Northeastern Japan Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854287" start="1294" end="1303" title="Banda Arc" label="Banda Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579756" start="1341" end="1356" title="Continental arc" label="Continental arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569921" start="1483" end="1504" title="Eastern Arc Mountains" label="Eastern Arc Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="1536" end="1548" title="Volcanic arc" label="Volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q749968" start="1620" end="1632" title="Aleutian Arc" label="Aleutian Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967700" start="1685" end="1698" title="Nastapoka arc" label="Nastapoka arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062851" start="1796" end="1803" title="ArcInfo" label="ArcInfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q296496" start="1806" end="1823" title="ARC (file format)" label="ARC (file format)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22041439" start="1867" end="1882" title="ARC (processor)" label="ARC (processor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322437" start="1911" end="1943" title="Adaptive Replacement Cache" label="ARC (adaptive replacement cache)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438046" start="2009" end="2035" title="Arc (programming language)" label="Arc (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q120176610" start="2078" end="2095" title="Arc (web browser)" label="Arc (web browser)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191377" start="2155" end="2179" title="Sony Ericsson Xperia Arc" label="Sony Ericsson Xperia Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q184292" start="2195" end="2215" title="Audio Return Channel" label="Audio Return Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688801" start="2257" end="2285" title="Authenticated Received Chain" label="Authenticated Received Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q841282" start="2320" end="2328" title="Arc lamp" label="Arc lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q839845" start="2380" end="2394" title="Xenon arc lamp" label="Xenon arc lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266198" start="2447" end="2465" title="Deuterium arc lamp" label="Deuterium arc lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216811" start="2512" end="2546" title="Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide lamp" label="Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q650993" start="2644" end="2664" title="Electric arc furnace" label="Electric arc furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q422937" start="2734" end="2745" title="Arc welding" label="Arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q132172" start="2803" end="2832" title="Arc-fault circuit interrupter" label="Arc-fault circuit interrupter"/>
<link wikidata="Q582060" start="2866" end="2879" title="Arc converter" label="Arc converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q108523499" start="2903" end="2912" title="Intel Arc" label="Intel Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="2996" end="3000" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="3024" end="3036" title="Electric arc" label="Electric arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360656" start="3130" end="3139" title="Arc flash" label="Arc flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037024" start="3195" end="3208" title="Arc (protein)" label="Arc (protein)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063501" start="3277" end="3287" title="Reflex arc" label="Reflex arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q205897" start="3331" end="3351" title="Circumhorizontal arc" label="Circumhorizontal arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q205928" start="3377" end="3395" title="Circumzenithal arc" label="Circumzenithal arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647274" start="3462" end="3488" title="A.R.C. (album)" label="&amp;quot;A.R.C.&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q631035" start="3586" end="3638" title="Arc (Neil Young &amp;amp; Crazy Horse album)" label="&amp;quot;Arc&amp;quot; (Neil Young &amp;amp; Crazy Horse album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785003" start="3647" end="3692" title="Arc (Everything Everything album)" label="&amp;quot;Arc&amp;quot; (Everything Everything album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097165" start="3701" end="3721" title="Arc (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Arc&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q762309" start="3808" end="3816" title="Riot Act (album)" label="Riot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617855" start="3844" end="3860" title="Arc System Works" label="Arc System Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349100" start="3887" end="3899" title="Luminous Arc" label="Luminous Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324055" start="3952" end="3963" title="Arc the Lad" label="Arc the Lad"/>
<link wikidata="Q55662649" start="4155" end="4167" title="Doom Eternal" label="Doom Eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803022" start="4212" end="4222" title="Tilted Arc" label="Tilted Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961845" start="4289" end="4308" title="Arc Poetry Magazine" label="Arc Poetry Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073730" start="4346" end="4359" title="Character arc" label="Character arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="4424" end="4433" title="Story arc" label="Story arc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4473" end="4477" title="Twelve basic principles of animation#Arc" label="Arcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q125341971" start="4535" end="4547" title="Ultraman Arc" label="Ultraman Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785258" start="4649" end="4670" title="Arcata Transit Center" label="Arcata Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069478" start="4745" end="4767" title="Arctic Village Airport" label="Arctic Village Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="4833" end="4858" title="Official Aramaic language" label="Official Aramaic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974586" start="4930" end="4948" title="Arc Infrastructure" label="Arc Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4982" end="4995" title="Arc Institute" label="Arc Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q776327" start="5044" end="5061" title="Arc International" label="Arc International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785036" start="5122" end="5138" title="Arc Publications" label="Arc Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="5179" end="5189" title="Arc @ UNSW" label="Arc @ UNSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785033" start="5265" end="5289" title="Arc of the United States" label="Arc of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q776327" start="5383" end="5395" title="Arc Holdings" label="Arc Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q631028" start="5452" end="5466" title="Arc (Provence)" label="Arc (Provence)"/>
<link wikidata="Q631049" start="5530" end="5542" title="Arc (Savoie)" label="Arc (Savoie)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623058" start="5639" end="5652" title="Street suffix" label="Street suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149036" start="5691" end="5708" title="Arc (Bahá&amp;#x27;í)" label="Arc (Bahá&amp;#x27;í)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25172078" start="5810" end="5826" title="Arc (greyhounds)" label="Arc (greyhounds)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="5916" end="5927" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q296474" start="5992" end="6012" title="ARC (disambiguation)" label="ARC (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q637966" start="6015" end="6036" title="Arcs (disambiguation)" label="Arcs (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785007" start="6039" end="6065" title="Arc Angel (disambiguation)" label="Arc Angel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785037" start="6068" end="6096" title="Arc reactor (disambiguation)" label="Arc reactor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q632009" start="6099" end="6120" title="Arch (disambiguation)" label="Arch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697441" start="6123" end="6155" title="Arch of Triumph (disambiguation)" label="Arch of Triumph (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q344964" start="6158" end="6178" title="Ark (disambiguation)" label="Ark (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238558" start="6181" end="6201" title="ARQ (disambiguation)" label="ARQ (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54487" wikidata="Q3406668" url="?curid=54487" title="Homemaking">
<text>Homemaking is mainly an American and Canadian term for the management of a home, otherwise known as housework, [[housekeeping]], housewifery or household management. It is the act of overseeing the organizational, day-to-day operations of a house or estate, and the managing of other domestic concerns. A person in charge of the homemaking, who is not employed outside the home, in the US and Canada, is called a homemaker, a term for a housewife or a stay-at-home dad. Historically, the role of homemaker was often assumed by women. The term &quot;homemaker&quot;, however, may also refer to a social worker who manages a household during the incapacity of the housewife or househusband. Home health workers assume the role of homemakers when caring for elderly individuals. This includes preparing meals, giving baths, and any duties the person in need cannot perform for themselves.

Homemaking can be the full-time responsibility of one spouse, partner, or parent, shared with children or extended family, or shared or traded between spouses/partners as one or both work outside the home. It can also be outsourced partially or completely to paid help. In previous decades, there were a number of mandatory courses available for students to learn the skills of homemaking. In high school, courses included cooking, nutrition, home economics, family and consumer science (FACS), and food and cooking hygiene. 

== Marriage ==

=== 19th century ===
In North America, early 19th-century ideals required homemaking be the responsibility of the woman; &quot;the wife is properly supposed to be the light and centre of the home.&quot; Traditional wives who stayed home and did not work for pay were required by social ideals to create and maintain a peaceful space to provide to her husband and children. For women in a pre-modern environment, &quot;it is the duty and privilege and solemn responsibility, which make this art of home-making more interesting and important to her than any other art in the world.&quot; Author of these statements, Annie Swan was not alone in the late 1800s viewpoint that women were encouraged, if not required, to maintain the home solely themselves. In 1875, Harper&#x27;s Bazaar published an article outlining the duties of a housewife and the esteemed respect those duties deserve: &quot;but if one only staid to think how countless and how onerous those duties really are, more respect would be paid to the faithful effort to perform them, and an added reverence extended to the mother who is also the housekeeper.&quot; Harper&#x27;s Bazaar recognizes that women do the majority of the work within the home, pointing out that the work is detailed and at many times, difficult.

=== 20th century ===
The 20th century began with similar homemaking roles as the 19th; however, the century concluded with a much different perception. In the late 1990s, marriage consisted in most cases of both wife and husband participating in homemaking. Darlene Piña and Vern Bengtson who are anthropologists and professors at the University of Southern California, extensively researched marriage dynamics and household labor in the late twentieth century. They concluded that &quot;all wives benefit equally by their husbands&#x27; greater involvement in household labor.&quot; The division of labor within the home promotes a healthy relationship between husband and wife. Concluding, that likelihood of increased happiness within marriage is vastly improved when homemaking is shared with the husband. West and Zimmerman, concluded an analysis of over 487 couples and found that &quot;women were rewarded for performing feminine behaviors, such as housework, whereas men receive positive reinforcement for engaging in masculine tasks, such as breadwinning.&quot;

In contrast, a study performed by Hochschild in 1989, concluded that even when wives contributed more than 50% of the household income they often still performed more household labor than their husbands. Hochschild&#x27;s study directly debunked the previous theory that women performed housework because they contributed significantly less to household income. Instead, the results of the study indicated that even in marriage dynamics where women contributed more than half of the household income, they still completed the vast majority of homemaking tasks.

Married women who are economically and emotionally dependent on their husbands are less likely to report the division of household labor as unfair. This significant group of married women felt that household labor reinforced their female gender identity and connection to femininity.

=== 21st century ===
Sex and gender continue to shape the division of household responsibilities in the United States in the twenty-first century. According to the 2018 American Time Use Survey, 84 percent of women and 69 percent of men reported that they spent some time performing household duties, which included &quot;housework, cooking, lawn care, or household management.&quot; Women reported spending an average of 2.6 hours a day on household activities, and men 2.0 hours. On a surveyed day, 49% percent of women and 20% of men reported doing housework.
Men and women&#x27;s perception of household responsibilities differ. Pew Research Center&#x27;s 2014 Religious Landscape Study found that fathers were more likely than mothers to say that chores were evenly split between both partners (56% vs. 46%). When asked, 50% of mothers reported they handled more responsibilities around the house than their partners; only 12% of fathers reported they did more household tasks. Despite this difference in perception, a majority of married U.S. adults (56%) said that sharing household chores as &quot;very important&quot; to a successful marriage.

In a 2008 article, social scientists Susan L. Brown and Sayaka Kawamura reported that the unequal distribution in housework was attributed mainly to time availability. They concluded: &quot;wives typically work fewer hours than their husbands, [so] they have more time available to perform household tasks.&quot;

==Housekeeping==

Housekeeping by the homemaker is the care and control of property, ensuring its maintenance, proper use and appearance. In a private home a maid or housekeeper is sometimes employed to do some of the housekeeping. Housework is work done by the act of housekeeping. Some housekeeping is housecleaning and some housekeeping is home chores. Home chores are housework that needs to be done at regular intervals. Housekeeping includes the budget and control of expenditures, preparing meals and buying food, paying the heat bill, and cleaning the house.

===Cooking===
Most modern-day houses contain sanitary facilities and a means of preparing food. A kitchen is a room or part of a room used by the homemaker for cooking, food preparation and food preservation. In the West, a modern kitchen is typically equipped with a stove, an oven, a sink with hot and cold running water, a refrigerator and kitchen cabinets. Many homemakers use a microwave oven, a dishwasher and other electric appliances like blender and convection cooker and automatic appliances like rice cookers. The main function of a kitchen is cooking or preparing food but it may also be used for dining for a casual meal such as lunch.

Cooking is the process of preparing food with or without heat, making, selecting, measuring and combining ingredients in an ordered procedure for producing safe and edible food. The process encompasses a vast range of methods, tools and combinations of ingredients to alter the flavor, appearance, texture, or digestibility of food. Factors affecting the outcome include the variability of ingredients, ambient conditions, tools, and the skill of the individual doing the actual cooking.

The diversity of cooking worldwide is a reflection of the aesthetic, agricultural, economic, cultural, social and religious diversity of people across the globe. Applying heat to a food usually, though not always, chemically transforms it, thus changing its flavor, texture, consistency, appearance, and nutritional properties. Methods of cooking that involve the boiling of liquid in a receptacle have been practised at least since the 10th millennium BC, with the introduction of pottery.

===Cleaning===
House cleaning by the homemaker is the systematic process of making a home neat and clean. This may be applied more broadly than just an individual home, such as a metaphor for a similar &quot;clean up&quot; process applied elsewhere such as at a hotel or as a procedural reform. In the process of house cleaning general cleaning activities are completed, such as disposing of rubbish, storing of belongings in regular places, cleaning dirty surfaces, dusting and vacuuming. The details of this are various and complicated enough that many books have been published on the subject. How-to sites on the internet have many articles on house cleaning. Tools include the vacuum cleaner, broom and mop. Supplies such as cleaning solutions and sponges are sold in grocery stores and elsewhere. Professional cleaners can be hired for less frequent or specialist tasks such as cleaning blinds, rugs, and sofas. Professional services are also offered for the basic tasks. Safety is a consideration because some cleaning products are toxic and some cleaning tasks are physically demanding. &quot;Green cleaning&quot; refers to cleaning without causing pollution or chemicals that may cause bodily harm. The history of house cleaning has links to the advancement of technology.

Outdoor housecleaning chores include removing leaves from rain gutters, washing windows, sweeping doormats, cleaning the pool, putting away lawn furniture, and taking out the trash.

===Laundry===

Laundry refers to the act of washing clothing and linens, the place where that washing is done, and/or that which needs to be, is being, or has been laundered. Various chemicals may be used to increase the solvent power of water, such as the compounds in soaproot or yucca-root used by Native American tribes. Soap, a compound made from lye (from wood-ash) and fat, is an ancient and very common laundry aid. Modern washing machines typically use powdered or liquid laundry detergent in place of more traditional soap. Once clean, the clothes are dried.

Washing machines and dryers are now fixtures in homes around the world. In some parts of the world, including the US, Canada, and Switzerland, apartment buildings and dormitories often have laundry rooms, where residents share washing machines and dryers. Usually the machines are set to run only when money is put in a coin slot. In other parts of the world, apartment buildings with laundry rooms are uncommon, and each apartment may have its own washing machine. Those without a machine at home or the use of a laundry room must either wash their clothes by hand or visit a commercial laundromat.

A clothes dryer is a household appliance that is used to remove moisture from a load of clothing and other textiles, generally shortly after they are cleaned in a washing machine. Most dryers consist of a rotating drum called a tumbler through which heated air is circulated to evaporate the moisture from the load. The tumbler is rotated relatively slowly in order to maintain space between the articles in the load. In most cases, the tumbler is belt-driven by an induction motor. Using these machines may cause clothes to shrink, become less soft (due to loss of short soft fibers/ lint) and fade. For these reasons, as well as environmental concerns, many people use open air methods such as a clothes line and clotheshorse.

Laundry starch is used in the laundering of clothes. Starch was widely used in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries to stiffen the wide collars and ruffs of fine linen which surrounded the necks of the well-to-do. During the 19th century and early 20th century, it was stylish to stiffen the collars and sleeves of men&#x27;s shirts and the ruffles of girls&#x27; petticoats by applying starch to them as the clean clothes were being ironed. Aside from the smooth, crisp edges it gave to clothing, it served practical purposes as well. Dirt and sweat from a person&#x27;s neck and wrists would stick to the starch rather than to the fibers of the clothing, and would easily wash away along with the starch. After each laundering, the starch would be reapplied. Today the product is sold in aerosol cans for home use. Kitchen starch used as a thickening agent for food can also be applied to laundered fabrics (requires boiling).

==Maintenance==

Homemakers that follow predictive maintenance techniques determine the condition of in-service equipment in order to predict when maintenance should be performed. This approach offers cost savings over routine or time-based maintenance, because tasks are performed only when warranted. Homemakers that follow preventive maintenance methods ensure that household equipment and the house are in satisfactory operating condition by providing for inspection, detection, and correction of incipient failures either before they occur or before they develop into major defects.

===Home maintenance===

Home maintenance involves the diagnosis and resolution of problems in a home, and is related to home maintenance to avoid such problems. Many types of maintenance are &quot;Do it yourself&quot; (DIY) projects. Maintenance is not necessarily the same as home improvement, although many improvements can result from repairs or maintenance. Often the costs of larger repairs will justify the alternative of investment in full-scale improvements. It may make just as much sense to upgrade a home system (with an improved one) as to repair it or incur ever-more-frequent and expensive maintenance for an inefficient, obsolete or dying system. For a DIY project, also useful is the established limits on time and money investments before a repair (or list of repairs) become overwhelming and discouraging, and less likely to ever be completed.

===Lawn maintenance===

Homemakers that have a lawn responsibility adhere to seasonal lawn care practices, which vary to some extent depending on the climate zone and type of grass that is grown (whether cool season or warm season varieties). Various recognized method used by homemakers in lawn care are observed in any area. In spring or early summer, homemakers seed, sod, or sprig a yard when the ground is warmer. In summer lawn mowers are used at high cutting for cool season grass, and lower cutting for warm season lawns. In autumn, lawns are mown by homemakers at a lower height and thatch build-up that occurs in warm season grasses are removed. Homemakers do add sandy loam and apply fertilizer, containing some type of wetting agent. Cool season lawns are planted in the autumn with adequate rainfall. Lawn care in the winter is minimal, requiring only light feedings of organic material, such as green-waste compost, and minerals to encourage earthworms and beneficial microbes.

==Management==
Household management by the homemaker is the act of overseeing the organizational, financial, and day-to-day operations of a house or estate. It differs from housekeeping, which consists of the physical maintenance and cleaning of a house.

===House organization===
House organization or home organization includes interior design to make the home aesthetically pleasing by arranging furniture, plants, blinds, and so forth. De-cluttering means removing unnecessary things from the house.

====De-cluttering====
Household de-cluttering involves putting things in their proper place after they have been used. &quot;Cleaning up your mess&quot; might involve removing glasses, eating utensils or gadgets i.e. toys from the living room if you have eaten a meal there in front of the television. If several people have done that over a few days and not removed their glasses, dishes and utensils from the living room, the living room is considered to be &quot;cluttered&quot; with dishes. The dishes are out of place because they belong in the kitchen, washed and put away in the cupboards. That is the most common example of clutter in a modern North American household.

There is another definition of clutter, which refers to having simply too many things and not enough room for all of it. Sometimes as happens in Asian households, the items are necessary, but the home is simply too small, and ingenious methods are needed to organize everything to minimize unsightly clutter. Removing unneeded or no longer necessary objects from a household or home is also an aspect of de-cluttering. Objects can be given away to friends or charitable organizations, sold as second-hand, recycled or thrown away.

Extreme forms of an inability to de-clutter is a behavioral aspect of compulsive hoarding. On the other end, a society that relies overly much on generating and then disposing of waste is referred to as a throw-away society.

===Household purchasing===

Household purchasing refers to homemaker&#x27;s attempt to acquire goods or services to accomplish the goals of the household. Though there are several households that attempt to set standards in the purchasing process, processes can vary greatly between households. Typically the word &quot;purchasing&quot; is not used interchangeably with the word &quot;procurement&quot;, since procurement typically includes other concepts. Home makers decide the market goods that the household will buy, such as the groceries which have been bought at a grocer&#x27;s.

Another important purchase handled by homemakers is the power source used for appliances. Home or other building heating may include boilers, furnaces, and water heaters. Compressed natural gas is used in rural homes without connections to piped-in public utility services, or with portable grills. However, due to being less economical than LPG, LPG (Propane) is the dominant source of rural gas for natural gas-powered ranges and/or ovens, natural gas-heated clothes dryers, heating/cooling and central heating. The amount of usages is determined by factors such as natural gas prices.

===Servants===

Homemakers may manage household workers or &quot;domestic workers&quot;.

==Work strategies==

In sociology, &quot;household work strategy&quot; is the division of labour between members of a household, whether implicit or the result of explicit decision–making, with the alternatives weighed up in a simplified type of cost-benefit analysis. It is a plan for the relative deployment of household members&#x27; time between the three domains of employment:
# in the &quot;market economy&quot;, including home-based self-employment second jobs, in order to obtain money to buy goods and services in the market;
# &quot;domestic production work&quot;, such as cultivating a vegetable patch or raising chickens, purely to supply food to the household; and
# &quot;domestic consumption work&quot; to provide goods and services directly within the household, such as cooking meals, child–care, household repairs, or the manufacture of clothes and gifts.
Household work strategies may vary over the life-cycle, as household members age, or with the economic environment; they may be imposed by one person or be decided collectively.

==Household production==
&quot;Household production&quot; is an economic category for activities including homemaking. It is defined as &quot;the production of the goods and services by the members of a household, for their own consumption, using their own capital and their own unpaid labor. Goods and services produced by households for their own use include accommodation, meals, clean clothes, and child care. The process of household production involves the transformation of purchased intermediate commodities into final consumption commodities. Households use their own capital and their own labor.&quot;

There are efforts to construct estimates of the value of household production in a way analogous to GDP, though the category is not usually included in GDP. Goods and services created by households are generally consumed within the same country, and hence contribute in a &quot;Domestic Consumption&quot; category in national accounts.

==Wages for housework==
The International Wages for Housework Campaign was a global, social movement co-founded in 1972 in Padua, Italy, by author and activist Selma James. The Campaign was formed to raise awareness of how housework and childcare are the base of all industrial work and to stake the claim that these unavoidable tasks should be compensated as paid, wage labor. The demands for the Wages for Housework formally called for economic compensation for domestic work but also used these demands to more generally call attention to the affective labors of women, the reliance of capitalist economies on exploitative labor practices against women, and leisure inequality.

==Effects of technology and advertising==
Many home appliances have been invented that make housework faster or more effective compared to before the industrial revolution. These include:
*Washing machine
*Clothes dryer
*Dishwasher
*Sewing machine
*Vacuum cleaner
*Small electrics like the electric mixer, blender, toaster, and coffee maker
*Microwave oven
*Refrigerator, reducing the number of grocery trips or the amount of food preservation work to do

Utilities can potentially eliminate work like gathering and chopping firewood, shovelling coal, fetching water from outdoors, and heating cold tap water.

Historian Ruth Schwartz Cowan estimated that homemakers in the 1800s performed about 50–60 hours of work per week, and that this is the same as the 1990s. She says that, rather than reducing the amount of time devoted to housework, labor-saving devices have been used to make the same amount of time do more work, such as by vacuuming a rug instead of sweeping it, or washing fabrics more frequently. Modern parents also more frequently transport their children to after-school activities, and doctors no longer make house calls.

==See also==

*Handyman
*Scientific management

==References==
==Sources==
*Lopata, H. Z. (1994). Circles and settings: Role changes of American women. SUNY series in gender and society. Albany: State University of New York Press. &quot;Homemaker&quot; Page 137+.
*Arnold, E. (1993). Voices of American homemakers. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
*Goldstein, Carolyn M. &quot;Creating Consumers: Home Economists in Twentieth-Century America&quot; Univ of North Carolina Press, 2012. 
*Harvey, L. S. (1920). Food facts for the home-maker. Boston: Houghton Mifflin company.
*Frederick, C. (1919). Household engineering; Scientific management in the home. Chicago: American school of home economics.
*Snedden, D. (1919). Vocational homemaking education: Some problems and proposals. New York City: Teachers College, Columbia University.
*Kinne, H., &amp; Cooley, A. M. (1914). Shelter and clothing: A textbook of the household arts. New York: Macmillan.

==Further reading==
*&quot;Friendly Visiting Among the Poor&quot;; by Mary Ellen Richmond. &quot;The Homemaker&quot;, Pages 64ff.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="0" end="10" title="Homemaking" label="Homemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="24" end="32" title="American English" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="37" end="45" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743" start="75" end="79" title="home" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="100" end="109" title="Homemaking" label="housework"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="111" end="127" title="Homemaking" label="[[housekeeping]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="129" end="140" title="Homemaking" label="housewifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="144" end="164" title="Homemaking" label="household management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="413" end="422" title="Homemaking" label="homemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q38126150" start="437" end="446" title="housewife" label="housewife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154210" start="452" end="468" title="stay-at-home dad" label="stay-at-home dad"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="595" end="608" title="social worker" label="social worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="1310" end="1317" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="1319" end="1328" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="1330" end="1344" title="home economics" label="home economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="1346" end="1373" title="family and consumer science" label="family and consumer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q909821" start="1386" end="1410" title="food and cooking hygiene" label="food and cooking hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="2191" end="2211" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2885" end="2893" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="3011" end="3025" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3049" end="3082" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q349777" start="3820" end="3830" title="Adam Hochschild" label="Hochschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591167" start="4269" end="4285" title="household income" label="household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q259059" start="4469" end="4478" title="household" label="household"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228543" start="4802" end="4826" title="American Time Use Survey" label="American Time Use Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="5266" end="5285" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5298" end="5323" title="Religious Landscape Study" label="Religious Landscape Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q708514" start="6119" end="6131" title="Housekeeping" label="Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q833860" start="6259" end="6263" title="maid" label="maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596569" start="6267" end="6278" title="Housekeeper (domestic worker)" label="housekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="6749" end="6763" title="Cooking" label="preparing food"/>
<link wikidata="Q43164" start="6767" end="6774" title="kitchen" label="kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="6829" end="6836" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497296" start="6838" end="6854" title="food preparation" label="food preparation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="6859" end="6876" title="food preservation" label="food preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203789" start="6937" end="6942" title="stove" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q140565" start="6955" end="6959" title="sink" label="sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="6995" end="7007" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306022" start="7012" end="7027" title="kitchen cabinet" label="kitchen cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="7052" end="7066" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q186263" start="7070" end="7080" title="dishwasher" label="dishwasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q501862" start="7116" end="7123" title="blender" label="blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918092" start="7139" end="7145" title="cooker" label="cooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137500" start="7176" end="7187" title="rice cooker" label="rice cooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="7278" end="7284" title="dining" label="dining"/>
<link wikidata="Q12896105" start="7311" end="7316" title="lunch" label="lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="7319" end="7326" title="Cooking" label="Cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="7355" end="7359" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="7376" end="7380" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10675206" start="7572" end="7582" title="ingredient" label="ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="7597" end="7603" title="Flavor (taste)" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="7629" end="7642" title="digestion" label="digestibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="7742" end="7746" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="8022" end="8032" title="chemistry" label="chemically"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="8183" end="8189" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="8290" end="8297" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q708514" start="8315" end="8329" title="Housekeeping" label="House cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="8562" end="8567" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="8692" end="8699" title="Waste" label="rubbish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165632" start="8767" end="8771" title="dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q101674" start="8779" end="8788" title="Vacuum cleaner" label="vacuuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q101674" start="8982" end="8996" title="vacuum cleaner" label="vacuum cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q172833" start="8998" end="9003" title="broom" label="broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q828361" start="9008" end="9011" title="mop" label="mop"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="9030" end="9048" title="Detergent" label="cleaning solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="9339" end="9344" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574200" start="9401" end="9415" title="Green cleaning" label="Green cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q852100" start="9781" end="9788" title="Laundry" label="Laundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23841" start="9810" end="9817" title="washing" label="washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="9818" end="9826" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="9831" end="9836" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711207" start="10036" end="10044" title="soaproot" label="soaproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34396" start="10091" end="10095" title="Soap" label="Soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122650" start="10118" end="10121" title="lye" label="lye"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="10142" end="10145" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="10197" end="10212" title="washing machine" label="washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q910284" start="10247" end="10264" title="laundry detergent" label="laundry detergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="10479" end="10497" title="apartment building" label="apartment building"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="10503" end="10514" title="dormitory" label="dormitories"/>
<link wikidata="Q552504" start="10656" end="10665" title="Currency detector" label="coin slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143034" start="10924" end="10934" title="laundromat" label="laundromat"/>
<link wikidata="Q496334" start="10939" end="10952" title="clothes dryer" label="clothes dryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="11025" end="11033" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="11044" end="11052" title="textiles" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="11151" end="11155" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="11215" end="11224" title="evaporate" label="evaporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207450" start="11403" end="11418" title="induction motor" label="induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432810" start="11635" end="11647" title="clothes line" label="clothes line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755179" start="11652" end="11664" title="clotheshorse" label="clotheshorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="11667" end="11681" title="starch" label="Laundry starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q852100" start="11697" end="11707" title="laundry" label="laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="11711" end="11718" title="clothing" label="clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="11746" end="11752" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q653053" start="11816" end="11821" title="Ruff (clothing)" label="ruffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q76768" start="11994" end="11999" title="shirt" label="shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062620" start="12032" end="12041" title="petticoat" label="petticoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650142" start="12102" end="12108" title="ironing" label="ironed"/>
<link wikidata="Q165632" start="12204" end="12208" title="dust" label="Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="12213" end="12218" title="sweat" label="sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q659495" start="12458" end="12470" title="Aerosol spray" label="aerosol cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182448" start="12638" end="12660" title="predictive maintenance" label="predictive maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043452" start="12924" end="12946" title="preventive maintenance" label="preventive maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889160" start="13211" end="13227" title="Home maintenance" label="Home maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26384" start="13384" end="13398" title="Do it yourself" label="Do it yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789106" start="13464" end="13480" title="home improvement" label="home improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q207766" start="14136" end="14145" title="lawn care" label="lawn care"/>
<link wikidata="Q267474" start="14200" end="14212" title="climate zone" label="climate zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="14225" end="14230" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131303" start="14730" end="14734" title="loam" label="loam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25931691" start="15125" end="15139" title="organizing (management)" label="organizational"/>
<link wikidata="Q708514" start="15216" end="15228" title="housekeeping" label="housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q179232" start="15373" end="15388" title="interior design" label="interior design"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15483" end="15496" title="De-cluttering" label="De-cluttering"/>
<link wikidata="Q184303" start="16661" end="16671" title="Gift" label="given away"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="16686" end="16696" title="Charitable organization" label="charitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="16712" end="16716" title="selling" label="sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068804" start="16720" end="16731" title="second-hand" label="second-hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="16733" end="16741" title="Recycling" label="recycled"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="16745" end="16756" title="Waste management" label="thrown away"/>
<link wikidata="Q195941" start="16829" end="16848" title="compulsive hoarding" label="compulsive hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="16938" end="16943" title="waste" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700929" start="16964" end="16982" title="throw-away society" label="throw-away society"/>
<link wikidata="Q829492" start="17370" end="17381" title="procurement" label="procurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="17519" end="17528" title="groceries" label="groceries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="17557" end="17563" title="grocer" label="grocer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10715538" start="17715" end="17722" title="Furnace (house heating)" label="furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q27098513" start="17729" end="17742" title="water heating" label="water heaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="17744" end="17766" title="Compressed natural gas" label="Compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="17778" end="17783" title="rural" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="17813" end="17818" title="plumbing" label="piped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="17822" end="17836" title="public utility" label="public utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q853185" start="17864" end="17870" title="Grill (cooking)" label="grills"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="17915" end="17918" title="Liquefied petroleum gas" label="LPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q496334" start="18034" end="18047" title="clothes dryer" label="clothes dryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="18050" end="18057" title="HVAC" label="heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="18058" end="18065" title="air conditioning" label="cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q843596" start="18070" end="18085" title="central heating" label="central heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980694" start="18141" end="18159" title="natural gas prices" label="natural gas prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="18227" end="18242" title="domestic worker" label="domestic worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="18276" end="18285" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="18330" end="18348" title="division of labour" label="division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="18498" end="18519" title="cost-benefit analysis" label="cost-benefit analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="18623" end="18633" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="18650" end="18664" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897274" start="19585" end="19597" title="unpaid work" label="unpaid labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="20019" end="20022" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q350151" start="20236" end="20253" title="national accounts" label="national accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959525" start="20284" end="20326" title="Wages for housework" label="International Wages for Housework Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="20379" end="20384" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160071" start="20416" end="20427" title="Selma James" label="Selma James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="20493" end="20502" title="childcare" label="childcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="20980" end="21000" title="List of home appliances" label="Many home appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="21127" end="21142" title="Washing machine" label="Washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q496334" start="21144" end="21157" title="Clothes dryer" label="Clothes dryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186263" start="21159" end="21169" title="Dishwasher" label="Dishwasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49013" start="21171" end="21185" title="Sewing machine" label="Sewing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101674" start="21187" end="21201" title="Vacuum cleaner" label="Vacuum cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21203" end="21218" title="Small electrics" label="Small electrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q954087" start="21228" end="21242" title="electric mixer" label="electric mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q501862" start="21244" end="21251" title="blender" label="blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890" start="21253" end="21260" title="toaster" label="toaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q211841" start="21266" end="21278" title="coffee maker" label="coffee maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="21280" end="21294" title="Microwave oven" label="Microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="21296" end="21308" title="Refrigerator" label="Refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="21394" end="21403" title="Utilities" label="Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872351" start="21559" end="21578" title="Ruth Schwartz Cowan" label="Ruth Schwartz Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552579" start="22095" end="22103" title="Handyman" label="Handyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203549" start="22105" end="22126" title="Scientific management" label="Scientific management"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54488" wikidata="Q193401" url="?curid=54488" title="Cape Canaveral">
<text>Cape Canaveral () is a cape in Brevard County, Florida, in the United States, near the center of the state&#x27;s Atlantic coast. Officially Cape Kennedy from 1963 to 1973, it lies east of Merritt Island, separated from it by the Banana River. It is part of a region known as the Space Coast, and is the site of the Cape Canaveral Space Force Station. Since many U.S. spacecraft have been launched from both the station and the Kennedy Space Center on adjacent Merritt Island, the two are sometimes conflated with each other.

Other features of the cape include Port Canaveral, one of the busiest cruise ports in the world, and the Cape Canaveral Lighthouse. The city of Cape Canaveral lies just south of the Port Canaveral District. Mosquito Lagoon, the Indian River, Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge and Canaveral National Seashore are also features of this area.

== History ==

Humans have occupied the area for at least 12,000 years.

During the middle Archaic period, from 5000 BC to 2000 BC, the Mount Taylor period culture region covered northeast Florida, including the area around Cape Canaveral. Late in the Archaic period, from 2000 BC to 500 BC, the Mount Taylor culture was succeeded by the Orange culture, which was among the earliest cultures in North America to produce pottery. The Orange culture was followed by the St. Johns culture, from 500 BC until after European contact. The area around the Indian River was in the Indian River variant of the St. Johns culture, with influences from the Belle Glade culture to the south.

During the first Spanish colonial period the area around the Indian River, to the south of Cape Canaveral, was occupied by the Ais people, while the area around the Mosquito Lagoon, to the north of the Cape, was occupied by the Surruque people. The Surruque were allied with the Ais, but it is not clear whether the Surruque spoke a Timucua language, or a language related to the Ais language.

In the early 16th century, Cape Canaveral was noted on maps, although without being named. It was named by Spanish explorers in the first half of the 16th century as . The name &quot;Canaveral&quot; ( in Spanish, meaning &#x27;reed bed&#x27; or &#x27;sugarcane plantation&#x27;) is the third oldest surviving European place name in the United States. The first application of the name, according to the Smithsonian Institution, was from the 1521–1525 explorations of Spanish explorer Francisco Gordillo. A point of land jutting out into an area of the Atlantic Ocean with swift currents, it became a landing spot for many shipwrecked sailors. An early alternative name was &quot;Cape of Currents&quot;. By at least 1564, the name appeared on maps.

English privateer John Hawkins and his journalist John Sparke gave an account of their landing at Cape Canaveral in the 16th century. A Presbyterian missionary was wrecked here and lived among the Indians. Other histories tell of French survivors from Jean Ribault&#x27;s colony at Fort Caroline, whose ship the wrecked on the shores of Cape Canaveral in 1565, and built a fort from its timbers.

In December 1571, Pedro Menéndez was wrecked off the Coast of Cape Canaveral and encountered the Ais Indians. From 1605 to 1606, the Spanish Governor of Florida Pedro de Ibarra sent Alvaro Mexia on a diplomatic mission to the Ais Indian nation. The mission was a success; diplomatic ties were made and an agreement for the Ais to receive ransoms for all the shipwrecked sailors they returned.

The first Cape Canaveral Lighthouse was completed in January 1848 to warn ships of the coral shoals off the coast.

The hurricane of August 1885, pushed a &quot;wall of water&quot; over the barrier island (elevation, ) devastating Cape Canaveral and adjacent areas. The ocean waves flooded the homesteaders and discouraged further settlement in the area. The beach near the lighthouse was severely eroded prompting its relocation west inland.

The 1890 graduating class of Harvard University started a gun club called the &quot;Canaveral Club&quot; at the Cape. This was founded by C. B. Horton of Boston and George H. Reed. A number of distinguished visitors including presidents Grover Cleveland and Benjamin Harrison were reported to have stayed here. In the 1920s, the grand building fell into disrepair and later burned to the ground.

In the 20th century, several communities sprang up in Cape Canaveral with names like Canaveral, Canaveral Harbor, Artesia and De Soto Beach. While the area was predominantly a farming and fishing community, some visionaries saw its potential as a resort for vacationers. However, the stock market crash of 1929 hampered its development. In the 1930s, a group of wealthy journalists started a community called &quot;Journalista Beach&quot;, now called Avon by the Sea. The Brossier brothers built houses in this area and started a publication entitled the &quot;Evening Star Reporter&quot; that was the forerunner of the &quot;Orlando Sentinel&quot;.

Construction of Port Canaveral for military and commercial purposes was started in July 1950 and dedicated on November 4, 1953. Congress approved the construction of a deep-water port in 1929, half a century after it was first petitioned by the U.S. Navy in 1878. It is now the major deep-water port of Central Florida.

=== Rocket launch site ===

Cape Canaveral became the test site for missiles when the legislation for the Joint Long Range Proving Ground was passed by the 81st Congress and signed by President Harry Truman on May 11, 1949. Work began on May 9, 1950, under a contract with the Duval Engineering Company of Jacksonville, Florida, to build the Cape&#x27;s first paved access road and its first permanent launch site.

The first rocket launched at the Cape was a V-2 rocket named Bumper 8 from Launch Complex 3 on July 24, 1950. On February 6, 1959, the first successful test firing of a Titan intercontinental ballistic missile was accomplished. NASA&#x27;s Project Mercury and Gemini space flights were launched from Cape Canaveral, as were Apollo flights using the Saturn I and Saturn IB rockets.

Cape Canaveral was chosen for rocket launches to take advantage of the Earth&#x27;s rotation. The linear velocity of the Earth&#x27;s surface is greatest towards the equator; the relatively southerly location of the cape allows rockets to take advantage of this by launching eastward, in the same direction as the Earth&#x27;s rotation. It is also highly desirable to have the downrange area sparsely populated, in case of accidents; an ocean is ideal for this. The east coast of Florida has logistical advantages over potential competing sites. The Spaceport Florida Launch Complex 46 of the Cape Canaveral Space Force Station is the easternmost near the tip of the cape.

In 1999, the North American Numbering Plan Administration allocated telephone area code 321 (as in a launch countdown) to the Cape Canaveral area in homage to its spacefaring heritage.

=== Name changes ===
A post office in the area was built and listed in the U.S. Post Office application as &quot;Artesia&quot; and retained this name from 1893 to 1954. It was &quot;Port Canaveral&quot; from 1954 to 1962, and then the City of Cape Canaveral from 1962 to 1963, when a larger post office was built.

In 1963, President Lyndon Johnson issued an executive order renaming the area &quot;Cape Kennedy&quot;, after President John F. Kennedy, who had set the goal of landing on the Moon. After Kennedy&#x27;s assassination in November 1963, his widow, Jacqueline Kennedy, suggested to Johnson that renaming the Cape Canaveral facility would be an appropriate memorial. Johnson recommended the renaming of the entire cape, announced in a televised address on November 28, 1963, six days after the assassination, on Thanksgiving evening. Accordingly, Cape Canaveral was officially renamed Cape Kennedy. Kennedy&#x27;s last visit to the space facility was on November 16, 1963, six days before his death;
 the final Mercury mission had concluded six months earlier.

Although the name change was approved by the U.S. Board on Geographic Names of the Department of the Interior in December 1963, it was not popular in Florida from the outset, especially in the bordering city of Cape Canaveral. In May 1973, the Florida Legislature passed a law restoring the former 400-year-old name, and the Board went along. The name restoration to Cape Canaveral became official on October 9, 1973. Senator Ted Kennedy had stated in 1970 that it was a matter to be decided by the citizens of Florida. The Kennedy family issued a letter stating they &quot;understood the decision&quot;. NASA&#x27;s Kennedy Space Center retains the &quot;Kennedy&quot; name.

The Gemini, Apollo, and the first Skylab missions were all launched while the area was named Cape Kennedy. The first crewed launch under the restored name of Cape Canaveral was Skylab 4, the final Skylab mission, on November 16, 1973.

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Osborne, Ray (2008) &quot;Images of America: Cape Canaveral&quot; Arcadia Publishing, USA 

== External links ==
* City of Cape Canaveral, FL
* The Straight Dope: Why did they change the name of Cape Kennedy back to Cape Canaveral?
* Nautical Chart of Cape Canaveral 
* Cape Canaveral from &quot;Encyclopedia Astronautica&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="0" end="14" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q185113" start="23" end="27" title="cape (geography)" label="cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q488517" start="31" end="54" title="Brevard County, Florida" label="Brevard County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="114" end="122" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="141" end="153" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q991010" start="189" end="203" title="Merritt Island" label="Merritt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881874" start="230" end="242" title="Banana River" label="Banana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920489" start="280" end="291" title="Space Coast" label="Space Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="316" end="350" title="Cape Canaveral Space Force Station" label="Cape Canaveral Space Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="428" end="448" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q991010" start="461" end="475" title="Merritt Island" label="Merritt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946528" start="499" end="508" title="conflation" label="conflated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233873" start="562" end="576" title="Port Canaveral" label="Port Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303352" start="597" end="609" title="Maritime passenger terminal" label="cruise ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034639" start="632" end="652" title="Cape Canaveral Light" label="Cape Canaveral Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q966657" start="671" end="685" title="Cape Canaveral, Florida" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916482" start="734" end="749" title="Mosquito Lagoon" label="Mosquito Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141324" start="755" end="767" title="Indian River (Florida)" label="Indian River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820354" start="769" end="808" title="Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge" label="Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031230" start="813" end="840" title="Canaveral National Seashore" label="Canaveral National Seashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="965" end="979" title="Archaic period in the Americas" label="Archaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="991" end="993" title="Before Christ" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924062" start="1010" end="1029" title="Mount Taylor period" label="Mount Taylor period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099773" start="1212" end="1226" title="Orange culture" label="Orange culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1269" end="1282" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589031" start="1342" end="1359" title="St. Johns culture" label="St. Johns culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883633" start="1519" end="1538" title="Belle Glade culture" label="Belle Glade culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="1565" end="1594" title="Spanish Florida" label="first Spanish colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141324" start="1615" end="1627" title="Indian River (Florida)" label="Indian River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49305" start="1681" end="1691" title="Ais people" label="Ais people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916482" start="1719" end="1734" title="Mosquito Lagoon" label="Mosquito Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646914" start="1782" end="1790" title="Surruque" label="Surruque"/>
<link wikidata="Q638300" start="1887" end="1903" title="Timucua language" label="Timucua language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49305" start="1934" end="1946" title="Ais language" label="Ais language"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="2056" end="2063" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2153" end="2160" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q620424" start="2176" end="2184" title="reed bed" label="reed bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="2200" end="2209" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="2210" end="2220" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="2352" end="2375" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2433" end="2451" title="Francisco Gordillo" label="Francisco Gordillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2501" end="2515" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q315490" start="2716" end="2728" title="John Hawkins (naval commander)" label="John Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q935052" start="2950" end="2962" title="Jean Ribault" label="Jean Ribault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438483" start="2980" end="2993" title="Fort Caroline" label="Fort Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q553152" start="3113" end="3127" title="Pedro Menéndez de Avilés" label="Pedro Menéndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249922" start="3228" end="3255" title="List of colonial governors of Florida" label="Spanish Governor of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160036" start="3256" end="3271" title="Pedro de Ibarra (governor of La Florida)" label="Pedro de Ibarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737914" start="3277" end="3289" title="Alvaro Mexia" label="Alvaro Mexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034639" start="3499" end="3519" title="Cape Canaveral Light" label="Cape Canaveral Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="3783" end="3795" title="homesteaders" label="homesteaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3962" end="3980" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="4170" end="4186" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="4191" end="4208" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="4614" end="4640" title="Wall Street crash of 1929" label="stock market crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q746424" start="4956" end="4972" title="Orlando Sentinel" label="Orlando Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233873" start="4997" end="5011" title="Port Canaveral" label="Port Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="5109" end="5117" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="5226" end="5235" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920358" start="5284" end="5299" title="Central Florida" label="Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="5408" end="5439" title="Joint Long Range Proving Ground" label="Joint Long Range Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644572" start="5458" end="5471" title="81st Congress" label="81st Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5486" end="5495" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="5496" end="5508" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112125084" start="5579" end="5604" title="Houdaille Industries" label="Duval Engineering Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="5608" end="5629" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="5762" end="5772" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q27382" start="5779" end="5787" title="RTV-G-4 Bumper" label="Bumper 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="5793" end="5809" title="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 3" label="Launch Complex 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q931050" start="5887" end="5927" title="Titan I" label="Titan intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="5946" end="5950" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="5958" end="5973" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="5978" end="5984" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="6042" end="6048" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q521076" start="6067" end="6075" title="Saturn I" label="Saturn I"/>
<link wikidata="Q719315" start="6080" end="6089" title="Saturn IB" label="Saturn IB"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="6266" end="6273" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253317" start="6477" end="6486" title="downrange" label="downrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034346" start="6650" end="6685" title="Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 46" label="Spaceport Florida Launch Complex 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="6693" end="6727" title="Cape Canaveral Space Force Station" label="Cape Canaveral Space Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="6787" end="6831" title="North American Numbering Plan Administration" label="North American Numbering Plan Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150186" start="6852" end="6865" title="area code 321" label="area code 321"/>
<link wikidata="Q775594" start="6882" end="6891" title="countdown" label="countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="7035" end="7051" title="United States Post Office Department" label="U.S. Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="7294" end="7308" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="7319" end="7334" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="7395" end="7410" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="7451" end="7455" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="7521" end="7539" title="Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis" label="Jacqueline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="7783" end="7795" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444685" start="7848" end="7855" title="geographical renaming" label="renamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q498722" start="7976" end="7981" title="Mercury-Atlas 9" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="7982" end="7989" title="Project Mercury" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148422" start="8078" end="8108" title="United States Board on Geographic Names" label="U.S. Board on Geographic Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="8116" end="8142" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q966657" start="8236" end="8258" title="Cape Canaveral, Florida" label="city of Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556484" start="8277" end="8296" title="Florida Legislature" label="Florida Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="8451" end="8458" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="8459" end="8470" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="8557" end="8571" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy family"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="8650" end="8670" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="8714" end="8720" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="8722" end="8728" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="8744" end="8750" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8887" end="8895" title="Skylab 4" label="Skylab 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704199" start="9288" end="9313" title="Encyclopedia Astronautica" label="Encyclopedia Astronautica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54491" wikidata="Q403987" url="?curid=54491" title="National Portrait Gallery">
<text>National Portrait Gallery may refer to:

*National Portrait Gallery (Australia), in Canberra
*National Portrait Gallery (Sweden), in Mariefred
*National Portrait Gallery (United States), in Washington, D.C.
*National Portrait Gallery, London, with satellite galleries in North Yorkshire and Somerset, England
*Scottish National Portrait Gallery, in Edinburgh

== See also ==
*Portrait Gallery
*NPG (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q403987" start="0" end="25" title="National Portrait Gallery" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489633" start="42" end="79" title="National Portrait Gallery (Australia)" label="National Portrait Gallery (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817221" start="94" end="128" title="National Portrait Gallery (Sweden)" label="National Portrait Gallery (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967614" start="144" end="185" title="National Portrait Gallery (United States)" label="National Portrait Gallery (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="208" end="241" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441562" start="310" end="344" title="Scottish National Portrait Gallery" label="Scottish National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232237" start="376" end="392" title="Portrait Gallery" label="Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q447736" start="394" end="414" title="NPG (disambiguation)" label="NPG (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54492" wikidata="Q233343" url="?curid=54492" title="Second Battle of Bull Run">
<text>The Second Battle of Bull Run or Battle of Second Manassas was fought August 28–30, 1862, in Prince William County, Virginia, as part of the American Civil War. It was the culmination of the Northern Virginia Campaign waged by Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee&#x27;s Army of Northern Virginia against Union Maj. Gen. John Pope&#x27;s Army of Virginia, and a battle of much larger scale and numbers than the First Battle of Bull Run (or First Manassas) fought on July 21, 1861, on the same ground.

Following a wide-ranging flanking march, Confederate Maj. Gen. Thomas J. &quot;Stonewall&quot; Jackson captured the Union supply depot at Manassas Junction, threatening Pope&#x27;s line of communications with Washington, D.C. Withdrawing a few miles to the northwest, Jackson took up strong concealed defensive positions on Stony Ridge and awaited the arrival of the wing of Lee&#x27;s army commanded by Maj. Gen. James Longstreet. On August 28, 1862, Jackson attacked a Union column just east of Gainesville, at Brawner&#x27;s Farm, resulting in a stalemate but successfully getting Pope&#x27;s attention. On that same day, Longstreet broke through light Union resistance in the Battle of Thoroughfare Gap and approached the battlefield.

Pope became convinced that he had trapped Jackson and concentrated the bulk of his army against him. On August 29, Pope launched a series of assaults against Jackson&#x27;s position along an unfinished railroad grade. The attacks were repulsed with heavy casualties on both sides. At noon, Longstreet arrived on the field from Thoroughfare Gap and took position on Jackson&#x27;s right flank. On August 30, Pope renewed his attacks, seemingly unaware that Longstreet was on the field. When massed Confederate artillery devastated a Union assault by Maj. Gen. Fitz John Porter&#x27;s V Corps, Longstreet&#x27;s wing of 25,000 men in five divisions counterattacked in the largest simultaneous mass assault of the war. The Union left flank was crushed and the army was driven back to Bull Run. Only an effective Union rear guard action prevented a replay of the First Manassas defeat. Pope&#x27;s retreat to Centreville was nonetheless precipitous.

Success in this battle emboldened Lee to initiate the ensuing Maryland Campaign.

==Background==

===Military situation===

After the collapse of Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan&#x27;s Peninsula Campaign in the Seven Days Battles of June 1862, President Abraham Lincoln appointed John Pope to command the newly formed Army of Virginia. Pope had achieved some success in the Western Theater, and Lincoln sought a more aggressive general than McClellan.

===Plans===
Pope&#x27;s mission was to fulfill two basic objectives: protect Washington and the Shenandoah Valley; and draw Confederate forces away from McClellan by moving in the direction of Gordonsville. Based on his experience fighting McClellan in the Seven Days, Robert E. Lee perceived that McClellan was no further threat to him on the Virginia Peninsula, so he felt no compulsion to keep all of his forces in direct defense of Richmond. This allowed him to relocate Jackson to Gordonsville to block Pope and protect the Virginia Central Railroad.

Lee had larger plans in mind. Since the Union Army was split between McClellan and Pope and they were widely separated, Lee saw an opportunity to destroy Pope before returning his attention to McClellan. He committed Maj. Gen. A.P. Hill to join Jackson with 12,000 men.

===Initial movements in the Northern Virginia Campaign===


On August 3, General-in-Chief Henry Halleck directed McClellan to begin his final withdrawal from the Peninsula and to return to Northern Virginia to support Pope. McClellan protested and did not begin his redeployment until August 14.

On August 9, Nathaniel Banks&#x27;s corps attacked Jackson at Cedar Mountain, gaining an early advantage, but a Confederate counterattack led by A.P. Hill drove Banks back across Cedar Creek. Jackson&#x27;s advance was stopped, however, by the Union division of Brig. Gen. James B. Ricketts. By now Jackson had learned that Pope&#x27;s corps were all together, foiling his plan of defeating each in separate actions. He remained in position until August 12, then withdrew to Gordonsville. On August 13, Lee sent Longstreet to reinforce Jackson.

===Prelude to battle===
From August 22 to 25, the two armies fought a series of minor actions along the Rappahannock River. Heavy rains had swollen the river and Lee was unable to force a crossing. By this time, reinforcements from the Army of the Potomac were arriving from the Peninsula. Lee&#x27;s new plan in the face of all these additional forces outnumbering him was to send Jackson and Stuart with half of the army on a flanking march to cut Pope&#x27;s line of communication, the Orange &amp; Alexandria Railroad. Pope would be forced to retreat and could be defeated while moving and vulnerable. Jackson departed on August 25 and reached Salem (present-day Marshall) that night.

On the evening of August 26, after passing around Pope&#x27;s right flank via Thoroughfare Gap, Jackson&#x27;s wing of the army struck the Orange &amp; Alexandria Railroad at Bristoe Station and before daybreak on August 27 marched to capture and destroy the massive Union supply depot at Manassas Junction. This surprise movement forced Pope into an abrupt retreat from his defensive line along the Rappahannock. During the night of August 27–28, Jackson marched his divisions north to the First Bull Run (Manassas) battlefield, where he took position behind an unfinished railroad grade below Stony Ridge. The defensive position was a good one. The heavy woods allowed the Confederates to conceal themselves, while maintaining good observation points of the Warrenton Turnpike, the likely avenue of Union movement, only a few hundred yards to the south. There were good approach roads for Longstreet to join Jackson, or for Jackson to retreat to the Bull Run Mountains if he could not be reinforced in time. Finally, the unfinished railroad grade offered cuts and fills that could be used as ready-made entrenchments.

In the Battle of Thoroughfare Gap on August 28, Longstreet&#x27;s wing broke through light Union resistance and marched through the gap to join Jackson. This seemingly inconsequential action virtually ensured Pope&#x27;s defeat during the coming battles because it allowed the two wings of Lee&#x27;s army to unite on the Manassas battlefield.
==Opposing forces==

===Union===


Gen. Pope&#x27;s Army of Virginia of approximately 51,000 men was divided into three army corps:

The I Corps, under Maj. Gen. Franz Sigel consisted of the divisions of:
*Brig Gen. Robert C. Schenck (brigades of Brig Gen. Julius Stahel and Col. Nathaniel C. McLean).
*Brig Gen. Adolph von Steinwehr (brigade of Col. John A. Koltes).
*Brig Gen. Carl Schurz (brigades of Col. Alexander Schimmelfennig and Col. Wlodzimierz Krzyzanowski).
*Independent Brigades of Brig Gen. Robert H. Milroy, Col. John Beardsley, and Cpt. Louis Schirmer)

The II Corps, under Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks

The III Corps, Maj. Gen. Irvin McDowell, who had led the losing Union army at First Bull Run, consisted of the divisions of:
*Brig Gen. Rufus King (brigades of Brig Gen. John P. Hatch, Brig Gen. Abner Doubleday, Brig Gen. Marsena R. Patrick, and Brig Gen. John Gibbon)
*Brig Gen. James B. Ricketts (brigades of Brig Gen. Abram Duryée, Brig Gen. Zealous B. Tower, Col. John W. Stiles, and Col. Joseph Thoburn)

The Kanawha Division (detachment) and parts of three army corps of Gen. McClellan&#x27;s Army of the Potomac, eventually joined Pope for combat operations, raising his strength to 77,000:

The III Corps, under Maj. Gen. Samuel P. Heintzelman, consisted of the divisions of:
*Maj. Gen. Philip Kearny (brigades of Brig Gen. John C. Robinson, Brig Gen. David B. Birney, Col. Orlando Poe)
*Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker (brigades of Col. Cuvier Grover, Col. Nelson Taylor, and Col. Joseph B. Carr)

The V Corps under Maj. Gen. Fitz John Porter, consisted of the divisions of:
*Brig Gen. Daniel Butterfield (brigades of Col. Charles W. Roberts and Col. Henry S. Lansing)
*Brig Gen. George Sykes (brigades of Brig. Gen. Abram S. Piatt, Lt. Col. Robert C. Buchanan, Lt. Col. William Chapman, Col. Gouverneur K. Warren, and Cpt. Stephen H. Weed)

The VI Corps under Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin

The IX Corps under Maj. Gen. Jesse L. Reno, consisted of the divisions of:
*Brig Gen. Isaac I. Stevens (brigades of Col. Benjamin C. Christ, Col. Daniel Leasure and Col. Addison Farnsworth)
*Maj. Gen. Jesse L. Reno (brigades of Col. James Nagle and Col. Edward Ferrero)

===Confederate===


On the Confederate side, Gen. Robert E. Lee&#x27;s Army of Northern Virginia was organized into two &quot;wings&quot; or &quot;commands&quot; totaling about 55,000 men:

Maj. Gen. James Longstreet&#x27;s Right Wing or Command consisted of the following divisions:
*Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson (brigades of Brig Gen. Lewis A. Armistead, Brig Gen. William Mahone, Brig Gen. Ambrose R. Wright, and Col. Stephen D. Lee)
*Brig Gen. David R. Jones (brigades of Col. Henry L. Benning, Brig Gen. Thomas F. Drayton, and Col. George T. Anderson)
*Brig Gen. Cadmus M. Wilcox (brigades of Brig Gen. Cadmus M. Wilcox, Brig Gen. Roger A. Pryor, and Brig Gen. Winfield S. Featherston)
*Brig Gen. John B. Hood (brigades of Brig Gen. John B. Hood, Col. Evander M. Law, Maj. Bushrod W. Frobel
*Brig Gen. James L. Kemper (brigades of Col. Montgomery D. Corse, Brig Gen. Micah Jenkins, Col. Eppa Hunton
*Reporting Directly (Brig Gen. Nathan G. Evans)
*Reserve Artillery of James B. Walton

Maj. Gen. Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s Left Wing or Command consisted of the following divisions:
*Brig Gen. William B. Taliaferro (brigades of Col. William S. Baylor, Col. Bradley T. Johnson, Col. Alexander G. Taliaferro, Brig Gen. William E. Starke and Maj. Lindsey M. Shumaker)
*Maj. Gen. A. P. Hill (brigades of Brig Gen. Lawrence O. Branch, Brig Gen. William D. Pender, Col. Edward L. Thomas, Brig Gen. Maxcy Gregg, Brig Gen. James J. Archer, Brig Gen. Charles W. Field and Lt. Col. R. Lindsay Walker)
*Maj. Gen. Richard S. Ewell (brigades of Brig Gen. Alexander R. Lawton, Brig Gen. Isaac R. Trimble, Brig Gen. Jubal A. Early and Col. Henry Forno)
* The Cavalry Division, under Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart was attached to Jackson&#x27;s wing.

An exact estimate of both armies&#x27; strength at the battle is not possible as different reports and returns provide differing figures. The total strength of the Army of Northern Virginia, cavalry and artillery included, was slightly less than 55,000 men. Factoring in only infantry, the effective Confederate strength was probably about 50,000 men, possibly as low as 47,000. Union strength was around 63,000 men if Banks&#x27;s corps is excluded as it was not present at the battle aside from a few detachments. The total Union strength with Banks added in was approximately 70,000 men.

==Battle==

===August 28: Brawner&#x27;s Farm (Groveton) ===
The Second Battle of Bull Run began on August 28 as a Federal column, under Jackson&#x27;s observation just outside Gainesville, near the farm of the John Brawner family, moved along the Warrenton Turnpike. It consisted of units from Brig. Gen. Rufus King&#x27;s division: the brigades of Brig. Gens. John P. Hatch, John Gibbon, Abner Doubleday, and Marsena R. Patrick, marching eastward to concentrate with the rest of Pope&#x27;s army at Centreville. King was not with his division because he had suffered a serious epileptic attack earlier that day.

Jackson, who had been relieved to hear earlier that Longstreet&#x27;s men were on their way to join him, displayed himself prominently to the Union troops, by riding up next to the marching Federals in his horse as a farmer, to the horror of his aides, but his presence was disregarded, as the Federals had no interest in a seemingly harmless farmer. Concerned that Pope might be withdrawing his army behind Bull Run to link up with McClellan&#x27;s arriving forces, Jackson determined to attack. Returning to his position behind the tree line, he told his subordinates, &quot;Bring out your men, gentlemen.&quot; At about 6:30 p.m., Confederate artillery began shelling the portion of the column to their front, John Gibbon&#x27;s Black Hat Brigade (later to be named the Iron Brigade). Gibbon, a former artilleryman, responded with fire from Battery B, 4th U.S. Artillery. The artillery exchange halted King&#x27;s column. Hatch&#x27;s brigade had proceeded past the area and Patrick&#x27;s men, in the rear of the column, sought cover, leaving Gibbon and Doubleday to respond to Jackson&#x27;s attack. Gibbon assumed that, since Jackson was supposedly at Centreville (according to Pope), and having just seen the 14th Brooklyn of Hatch&#x27;s Brigade reconnoiter the position, that these were merely horse artillery cannons from Jeb Stuart&#x27;s cavalry. Gibbon sent aides out to the other brigades with requests for reinforcements, and sent his staff officer Frank A. Haskell to bring the veteran 2nd Wisconsin Infantry up the hill to disperse the harassing cannons. Gibbon met the 2nd in the woods saying, &quot;If we can get you up there quietly, we can capture those guns.&quot;


The 2nd Wisconsin, under the command of Col. Edgar O&#x27;Connor, advanced obliquely back through the woods the Federal column was passing through. When the 430 men emerged from the woods on John Brawner&#x27;s farm they were quietly formed and advanced up the hill. Upon reaching the plateau, they deployed skirmishers who drove back Confederate skirmishers. They soon received a heavy volley into their right flank by 800 men of the fabled Stonewall Brigade, commanded by Col. William S. Baylor. Absorbing the volley from , the 2nd Wisconsin did not waver, but replied with a devastating volley at the Virginians in Brawner&#x27;s orchard. The Confederates returned fire when the lines were only apart. As units were added by both sides, the battle lines remained close together, a standup fight with little cover, trading mass volleys for over two hours. Jackson described the action as &quot;fierce and sanguinary&quot;. Gibbon added his 19th Indiana. Jackson, personally directing the actions of his regiments instead of passing orders to the division commander, Maj. Gen. Richard S. Ewell, sent in three Georgia regiments belonging to Brig. Gen. Alexander R. Lawton&#x27;s brigade. Gibbon countered this advance with the 7th Wisconsin. Jackson ordered Brig. Gen. Isaac R. Trimble&#x27;s brigade to support Lawton, which met the last of Gibbon&#x27;s regiments, the 6th Wisconsin.

After Trimble&#x27;s brigade entered the action, Gibbon needed to fill a gap in his line between the 6th Wisconsin and the rest of the Iron Brigade regiments. Doubleday sent in the 56th Pennsylvania and the 76th New York, who advanced through the woods and checked the new Confederate advance. These men arrived at the scene after dark and both Trimble and Lawton launched uncoordinated assaults against them. Horse artillery under Captain John Pelham was ordered forward by Jackson and fired at the 19th Indiana from less than . The engagement ended around 9 p.m., with Gibbon&#x27;s men slowly retreating backwards still firing, making their line at the edge of the woods. Doubleday&#x27;s regiments retired to the turnpike in an orderly fashion. The fight was essentially a stalemate, but at a heavy cost, with over 1,150 Union and 1,250 Confederate casualties. The 2nd Wisconsin lost 276 of 430 engaged. The Stonewall Brigade lost 340 out of 800. Two Georgia regiments—Trimble&#x27;s 21st and Lawton&#x27;s 26th—each lost more than 70%. In all, one of every three men engaged in the fight was shot. Confederate Brig. Gen. William B. Taliaferro wrote, &quot;In this fight there was no maneuvering and very little tactics. It was a question of endurance and both endured.&quot; Taliaferro was wounded, as was Ewell, whose left leg was shattered by a Minié ball and had to be amputated, removing him from action for the next ten months.

Jackson had not been able to achieve a decisive victory with his superior force (about 6,200 men against Gibbon&#x27;s 2,100), due to darkness, his piecemeal deployment of forces, the loss of two of his division commanders, and the tenacity of the enemy. But he had achieved his strategic intent, attracting the attention of John Pope. Pope wrongly assumed that the fight at the Brawner Farm occurred as Jackson was retreating from Centreville. Pope believed he had &quot;bagged&quot; Jackson and sought to capture him before he could be reinforced by Longstreet. Pope&#x27;s dispatch sent that evening to Maj. Gen. Philip Kearny stated, in part, &quot;General McDowell has intercepted the retreat of the enemy and is now in his front ... Unless he can escape by by-paths leading to the north to-night, he must be captured.&quot; Gibbon conferred with King, Patrick, and Doubleday as to the next move, because McDowell was &quot;lost in the woods&quot;. The division was in an exposed position with two of its brigades badly cut up, and facing Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s entire corps. Although the Union generals did not know exactly how many men Jackson had with him, it was almost certainly a far greater number than the 4000 men in King&#x27;s division. Moreover, Confederate prisoners taken in the fighting around Brawner&#x27;s Farm claimed that Jackson&#x27;s command numbered between 60,000 and 70,000 men and was poised to strike at first light the next morning. Reynolds and Sigel were some miles away and would not be on the scene until morning, by which time Jackson could easily crush King. Ricketts was closer, but had Longstreet following far behind. Since staying in place at Groveton was clearly unacceptable, the only other options were retreating either to Manassas Junction or Centreville. Gibbon recommended the former since the exact disposition of the enemy was unknown and going to Centreville risked a disastrous march across his front. King finally agreed, and the division formed up into columns and moved south to Manassas Junction. At the same time, Ricketts had arrived at a similar conclusion and marched south and away from Jackson as well, in his case towards Bristoe Station.

Pope issued orders to his subordinates to surround Jackson and attack him in the morning, but Jackson was not where Pope thought he was, nor were Pope&#x27;s own troops where he assumed. He believed that McDowell and Sigel were blocking Jackson&#x27;s retreat west across the Bull Run Mountains when in fact King and Ricketts had both retreated southward, while Sigel and Reynolds were south and east of Jackson, who had no intention at all of retreating and was well dug-in and awaiting Longstreet&#x27;s arrival, which Pope refused to believe was a possibility.

===August 29: Jackson defends Stony Ridge===
Jackson had initiated the battle at Brawner&#x27;s farm with the intent of holding Pope until Longstreet arrived with the remainder of the Army of Northern Virginia. Longstreet&#x27;s 25,000 men began their march from Thoroughfare Gap at 6 a.m. on August 29; Jackson sent Stuart to guide the initial elements of Longstreet&#x27;s column into positions that Jackson had preselected. While he waited for their arrival, Jackson reorganized his defense in case Pope attacked him that morning, positioning 20,000 men in a line to the south of Stony Ridge. Noticing the buildup of I Corps (Sigel&#x27;s) troops along the Manassas-Sudley Road, he ordered A.P. Hill&#x27;s brigades behind the railroad grade near Sudley Church on his left flank. Aware that his position was geographically weak (because the heavy woods in the area prevented effective deployment of artillery), Hill placed his brigades in two lines, with Brig. Gen. Maxcy Gregg&#x27;s South Carolina brigade and Brig. Gen. Edward L. Thomas&#x27;s Georgia brigade in the front. In the center of the line, Jackson placed two brigades from Ewell&#x27;s division (now under the command of Brig. Gen. Alexander Lawton), and on the right, William B. Taliaferro&#x27;s division, now commanded by Brig. Gen. William E. Starke. Jackson&#x27;s position straddled a railroad grade that had been dug out by the Manassas Gap Railroad Company in the 1850s and abandoned on the eve of the war. While some parts of the railroad grade were a good defensive position, others were not, moreover the heavily wooded terrain largely precluded the use of artillery aside from the right end of the line, which faced open fields. Fitz Lee&#x27;s cavalry along with a battery of horse artillery were anchoring the left flank of the Confederate line, in case any Union troops attempted to cross Sudley Ford (as McDowell had done during the battle here 13 months earlier) and get in Jackson&#x27;s rear. The Confederate right flank was potentially vulnerable, as it was held by Taliaferro&#x27;s (now Starke&#x27;s) division, the smallest of Jackson&#x27;s three divisions and which had also taken significant casualties in the fighting at Brawner&#x27;s Farm. Jackson thus placed the brigades of Early and Forno on the right end of the line, both large brigades that had not been engaged the previous evening and were fresh. Aside from bolstering Starke&#x27;s understrength division, they were to watch and give notice of Longstreet&#x27;s arrival.

At daybreak on the 29th, Pope had learned to his surprise and annoyance that Ricketts and King had both withdrawn south. In addition, John Gibbon arrived at Centreville and informed Pope that the retreat from Groveton was a mistake, ignoring the fact that he had recommended it in the first place. Gibbon also stated that he had no idea what had become of McDowell, to which an infuriated Pope replied &quot;God damn McDowell! He&#x27;s never where he&#x27;s supposed to be!&quot; Gibbon rode down to Manassas where he encountered Porter&#x27;s troops resting and drawing rations. In addition, King, exhausted and ill from epileptic attacks, had turned over command of the division to John Hatch. McDowell was there as well, after spending most of the previous day wandering aimlessly around Prince William County, and not happy to learn of Pope&#x27;s orders. In effect, King would accompany Porter, while Reynolds was temporarily attached to Sigel&#x27;s corps, and Ricketts was still some miles away at Bristoe Station in effect leaving McDowell without any command. Pope on the 29th remained firmly wedded to the idea that Jackson was in a desperate situation and almost trapped, not only an incorrect assumption, but one that also depended on the coordination of all the corps and divisions under his command, none of which were where he intended them to be.

The result was that Pope&#x27;s complicated attack plans for August 29 ended up as a simple frontal assault by Sigel&#x27;s corps, the only troops in position that morning. I Corps was widely considered one of the army&#x27;s weakest links, being largely composed of recent German immigrants who spoke little English: Siegel, though a trained and experienced military officer, was German-born and widely considered a political general promoted by Lincoln solely for his ability to recruit and motivate these German-speaking Unionists (many of whom had enlisted solely to fight under him). Having performed poorly in battles against Jackson in the Shenandoah Valley during the spring (and with scant respect or faith from their comrades-in-arms), I Corps&#x27; fighting morale was chronically low. Moreover, until Pope himself arrived, Sigel was the ranking officer on the field and would be in overall charge of the battle.

Pope&#x27;s intention was to move against Jackson on both flanks. He ordered Fitz John Porter to move toward Gainesville and attack what he considered to be the Confederate right flank. He ordered Sigel to attack Jackson&#x27;s left at daybreak. Sigel, unsure of Jackson&#x27;s dispositions, chose to advance along a broad front, with Brig. Gen. Robert C. Schenck&#x27;s division, supported by Brig. Gen. John F. Reynolds&#x27;s division (McDowell&#x27;s III Corps) on the left, Brig. Gen. Robert H. Milroy&#x27;s independent brigade in the center, and Brig. Gen. Carl Schurz&#x27;s division on the right. Schurz&#x27;s two brigades, moving north on the Manassas-Sudley Road, were the first to contact Jackson&#x27;s men, at about 7 a.m.

The actions in Sigel&#x27;s attack against A.P. Hill&#x27;s division were typical of all the attacks near Stony Ridge that day. Although the unfinished railroad provided natural defensive positions in some places, in general the Confederates maintained all but a static defense, absorbing the Union blows and following up with vigorous counterattacks. (These were the same tactics that Jackson would employ at the Battle of Antietam a few weeks later.) Schurz&#x27;s two brigades (under Brig. Gen. Alexander Schimmelfennig and Col. Włodzimierz Krzyżanowski) skirmished heavily with Gregg and Thomas, with both sides committing their forces piecemeal. Hand-to-hand combat ensued in the woods to the west of Sudley Road as Krzyzanowski&#x27;s brigade clashed with Gregg&#x27;s. As Milroy heard the sound of battle to his right, he ordered his brigade forward, the 82nd Ohio and 5th West Virginia in front and the 2nd West Virginia and 4th West Virginia in the rear as support troops. The two forward regiments were immediately met with volleys of Confederate musket fire, in the confusion, the 82nd Ohio found an undefended ravine in the middle of the railroad embankment known as &quot;The Dump&quot; and got in the rear of Isaac Trimble&#x27;s Confederate brigade. However, Trimble was quickly reinforced by part of Bradley Johnson&#x27;s Virginia brigade and the 82nd Ohio was forced to retreat. Its commander, Col. James Cantwell, was shot dead and the regiment fled in panic, causing the 5th West Virginia behind them to also retreat in disorder. In just 20 minutes of fighting, Milroy&#x27;s brigade had taken 300 casualties. Schenck and Reynolds, subjected to a heavy artillery barrage, answered with counterbattery fire, but avoided a general advance of their infantry, instead merely deploying skirmishers which got into a low-level firefight with Jubal Early&#x27;s brigade. While this was going on, Meade&#x27;s brigade came across wounded men from King&#x27;s division, who had been abandoned by their comrades and left on the field all night. Medical personnel attempted to evacuate as many of the wounded as possible under the ongoing firefight. With his brigade in shreds, Milroy attempted to rally the survivors. He then came across Brig. Gen Julius Stahel, one of Schenck&#x27;s brigadiers, and ordered him to defend against any Confederate counterattack coming from the woods. Although a hundred or so Confederates came bounding out of the woods in pursuit of Milroy, they were quickly driven back by artillery fire and Stahel returned to his original position south of the turnpike.

Assuming that Kearny&#x27;s division of the III Corps was poised to support him, Schurz ordered another assault against Hill around 10 a.m., now that Schimmelfennig&#x27;s brigade, plus the 1st New York from Kearny&#x27;s division, had come up to reinforce Krzyzanowski. The fighting in the woods west of Sudley Road resumed and it came down to a standstill until the 14th Georgia came down to reinforce the South Carolinans. They let loose multiple volleys of musket fire that sent Krzyzanowski&#x27;s men running in panic. The Confederates came charging after the disorganized mass of Union troops, clubbing, bayoneting, and knifing resisters, but as they exited the woods and came out onto open ground, Union artillery positioned on Dogan&#x27;s Ridge opened fire on them and forced them to retreat. To the north, Schimmelfennig&#x27;s three regiments, the 61st Ohio, 74th Pennsylvania, and 8th West Virginia, engaged part of Gregg and Branch&#x27;s brigades, but were forced to retreat. Kearny however did not move forward. His three brigades instead marched to the banks of Bull Run Creek, where Orlando Poe&#x27;s brigade forded the creek. The arrival of Poe&#x27;s brigade aroused panic at Jackson&#x27;s headquarters, as the dreaded scenario of Union troops getting in the Confederate rear seemed to be turning to reality. Jackson ordered his wagons evacuated from the area and Maj. John Pelham&#x27;s horse artillery wheeled into position. The horse artillery and several companies of the 1st Virginia Cavalry engaged in a firefight with Poe&#x27;s brigade for several minutes. Nobody on the Union side realized that they were getting in the rear of the Confederate line, and the sight of gray infantry in the distance was enough to discourage Poe from advancing any further, so he pulled back across the creek. Robinson&#x27;s brigade remained in position along the banks of the creek while Birney&#x27;s seven regiments scattered. One was directed to support the corps artillery on Matthews Hill, another held idly in reserve, and the remaining three accompanied Poe to the banks of the creek until Confederate artillery fire became too hot for them and they pulled south into the woods where they joined in skirmishing with A.P. Hill&#x27;s troops.

Sigel for his part was satisfied with the progress of the battle so far, assuming he was merely supposed to perform a holding action until Pope arrived. By 1 p.m., his sector was reinforced by the division of Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker (III Corps) and the brigade of Brig. Gen. Isaac Stevens (IX Corps). Pope also arrived on the battlefield, where Sigel graciously ceded command to him. He expected to see the culmination of his victory, but instead, he found that Sigel&#x27;s attack had failed completely with Schurz and Milroy&#x27;s troops shot up, disorganized, and incapable of further action. Reynolds and Schenck&#x27;s divisions were fresh, but they were committed to guarding the army&#x27;s left flank. However, Heintzelman&#x27;s corps and the two divisions of Reno were also available, giving a total of eight fresh brigades, but Pope also assumed that McDowell would be on the field and that McClellan would come down from Washington, D.C., with the II and VI Corps. Instead, there was no sign of any of these troops anywhere. Pope momentarily considered withdrawing to Centreville, but became worried of the political fallout that would result if he was seen as insufficiently aggressive. Around this time, a messenger arrived and delivered Pope a note announcing that McDowell&#x27;s corps was close up and would soon be on the field. Pope thus decided that he would drive at Jackson&#x27;s center. By this time, Longstreet&#x27;s initial units were in position to Jackson&#x27;s right. Brig. Gen. John Bell Hood&#x27;s division straddled the turnpike, loosely connected with Jackson&#x27;s right flank. To Hood&#x27;s right were the divisions of Brig. Gens. James L. Kemper and David R. &quot;Neighbor&quot; Jones. Brig. Gen. Cadmus M. Wilcox&#x27;s division arrived last and was placed into reserve.

Stuart&#x27;s cavalry encountered Porter, Hatch, and McDowell moving up the Manassas-Gainesville Road and a brief but sharp firefight halted the Union column. Then a courier arrived with a message for Porter and McDowell, a controversial document from Pope that has become known as the &quot;Joint Order&quot;. Historian John J. Hennessy described the order as a &quot;masterpiece of contradiction and obfuscation that would become the focal point of decades of wrangling&quot;. It described the attacks on Jackson&#x27;s left, which were already underway, but was unclear about what Porter and McDowell were supposed to do. Rather than moving &quot;to&quot; Gainesville and striking Jackson&#x27;s supposedly unprotected right flank, it described a move &quot;toward&quot; Gainesville and &quot;as soon as communication is established [with the other divisions] the whole command shall halt. It may be necessary to fall back behind Bull Run to Centreville tonight.&quot; Nowhere in the order did Pope explicitly direct Porter and McDowell to attack and he concluded the order with, &quot;If any considerable advantages are to be gained from departing from this order it will not be strictly carried out,&quot; rendering the document virtually useless as a military order.

Meanwhile, Stuart&#x27;s cavalry under Col. Thomas Rosser deceived the Union generals by dragging tree branches behind a regiment of horses to simulate great clouds of dust from large columns of marching soldiers. At this time, McDowell received a report from his cavalry commander, Brig. Gen. John Buford, who reported that 17 regiments of infantry, one battery, and 500 cavalry were moving through Gainesville at 8:15 a.m. This was Longstreet&#x27;s wing arriving from Thoroughfare Gap, and it warned the two Union generals that trouble lay to their front. The Union advance was again halted. For some reason, McDowell neglected to forward Buford&#x27;s report to Pope until about 7 p.m., so the army commander was operating under two severe misconceptions: that Longstreet was not near the battlefield and that Porter and McDowell were marching to attack Jackson&#x27;s right flank.

As Longstreet&#x27;s men were placed into their final positions, General Lee ordered an offensive against the Union left. (Longstreet later remembered that Lee &quot;was inclined to engage as soon as practicable, but did not order&quot;.) Longstreet, however, saw that the divisions of Reynolds and Schenck extended south of the Warrenton Turnpike, overlapping half of his line, and he argued against making the attack at that time. Lee eventually relented when Jeb Stuart reported that the force on the Gainesville–Manassas Road (Porter and McDowell) was formidable.

Pope, assuming that the attack on Jackson&#x27;s right would proceed as he thought he had ordered, authorized four separate attacks against Jackson&#x27;s front with the intent of diverging the Confederates&#x27; attention until Porter delivered the fatal blow. Brig. Gen. Cuvier Grover&#x27;s brigade attacked at 3 p.m., expecting to be supported by Kearny&#x27;s division. With Isaac Stevens&#x27;s division behind him as support, Grover moved his brigade into the woods and charged right at Edward Thomas&#x27;s Georgia brigade. Grover&#x27;s men got all the way to the railroad embankment and unleashed a volley of near point-blank fire on Thomas&#x27;s regiments, followed by a bayonet charge. Taken by surprise, the Georgians fell back and fierce hand-to-hand combat ensued. Maxcy Gregg&#x27;s South Carolinans came to reinforce them, followed by Dorsey Pender&#x27;s brigade of North Carolinans. Pender hit Grover&#x27;s brigade in the flank and sent the men fleeing in panic with over 350 casualties. Pender&#x27;s brigade then surged out of the woods in pursuit of Grover, but once again the Union artillery on Dogan Ridge was too powerful; a strong barrage forced Pender to retreat. Meanwhile, to the north, Joseph Carr&#x27;s brigade had been engaged in a low-level firefight with Confederate troops, in the process wounding Isaac Trimble, one of Jackson&#x27;s most dependable brigadiers since the Valley Campaign the previous spring. With Nelson Taylor&#x27;s brigade of Hooker&#x27;s division in support, James Nagle&#x27;s brigade of Reno&#x27;s division surged forward and slammed into Trimble&#x27;s brigade, temporarily leaderless. Trimble&#x27;s men were routed and began to retreat in disorder, but like all the previous Union attacks during the day, Nagle was unsupported and had no chance against overwhelming enemy numbers. Henry Forno&#x27;s Louisiana brigade counterattacked and drove Nagle back. Bradley Johnson and Col. Leroy Stafford&#x27;s 9th Louisiana joined in the assault. To the south, John Hood&#x27;s division had just arrived on the field, forcing back Milroy and Nagle. Milroy&#x27;s already exhausted brigade fell apart and started to run from the onslaught. To check the Confederate counterattack, Pope pulled Schenck from south of the turnpike and with artillery support, forced the Confederates back to the shelter of the railroad embankment. While all this was going on, Kearny still remained out of the action.

Reynolds was ordered to conduct a spoiling attack south of the turnpike and encountered Longstreet&#x27;s men, causing him to call off his demonstration. Pope dismissed Reynolds&#x27;s concern as a case of mistaken identity, insisting that Reynolds had run into Porter&#x27;s V Corps, preparing to attack Jackson&#x27;s flank. Jesse Reno ordered a IX Corps brigade under Col. James Nagle to attack the center of Jackson&#x27;s line again. This time Brig. Gen. Isaac R. Trimble&#x27;s brigade was driven back from the railroad embankment, but Confederate counterattacks restored the line and pursued Nagle&#x27;s troops back into the open fields until Union artillery halted their advance.

At 4:30 p.m., Pope finally sent an explicit order to Porter to attack, but his aide (his nephew) lost his way and did not deliver the message until 6:30 p.m. In any event, Porter was in no better position to attack then than he had been earlier in the day. But in anticipation of the attack that would not come, Pope ordered Kearny to attack Jackson&#x27;s far left flank, intending to put strong pressure on both ends of the line. At 5 p.m. Kearny sent Robinson and Birney&#x27;s brigades surging forward into A.P. Hill&#x27;s exhausted division. The brunt of the attack fell on Maxcy Gregg&#x27;s brigade, which had defended against two major assaults over eight hours that day and was nearly out of ammunition in addition to having lost most of its officers. As they fell back onto the edge of a hillside, Gregg lopped some wildflowers with his old Revolutionary War scimitar and remarked, &quot;Let us die here my men, let us die here.&quot; With both Thomas&#x27;s and Gregg&#x27;s brigades on the verge of disintegrating, A.P. Hill sent a message to Jackson calling for help. Meanwhile, Daniel Leasure&#x27;s brigade of Isaac Stevens&#x27;s division crept around to the south and forced back James Archer&#x27;s Tennessee brigade. Jubal Early&#x27;s brigade, which had begun the day on the extreme right of the Confederate line, and Lawrence O&#x27;Bryan Branch&#x27;s brigade, which had thus far been held in reserve, counterattacked and drove back Kearny&#x27;s division. During the fighting, one of Hill&#x27;s brigadiers, Charles W. Field, was severely wounded and command of his brigade, which had also taken a beating over the course of the day, fell to Col. John M. Brockenbrough of the 40th Virginia.

On the Confederate right, Longstreet observed a movement of McDowell&#x27;s force away from his front; the I Corps was moving divisions to Henry House Hill to support Reynolds. This report caused Lee to revive his plan for an offensive in that sector. Longstreet once again argued against it, this time due to inadequate time before dusk. Longstreet suggested &quot;that the day being far spent it might be well to advance before night on a forced reconnaissance, get our troops in the most favourable positions, and have all things ready for battle the next morning.&quot; To this General Lee reluctantly gave consent and Hood&#x27;s division was sent forward. As soon as McDowell arrived at Pope&#x27;s headquarters, the latter urged him to move King&#x27;s division forward. McDowell then informed Pope that King had fallen ill and relinquished command of the division to Brig. Gen John P. Hatch, whom Pope had taken a considerable disliking to early in the campaign. Hatch had originally led a cavalry brigade and failed to carry out an order from Pope to raid down into the Richmond outskirts. Displeased at this, Pope reassigned Hatch to infantry command. He now ordered Hatch to go up the Sudley Road and attack, but Hatch protested that the road was clogged with Kearny&#x27;s troops, it would not be possible to clear them out of the way before darkness. Exasperated, Pope repeated his order for Hatch to advance on the Confederate right, but was soon distracted by actions going on the other side of the line. John Hood&#x27;s division had arrived on Jackson&#x27;s right and McDowell ordered Hatch to reinforce Reynolds despite Hatch&#x27;s protests that two of his three brigades (Gibbon and Doubleday&#x27;s) were exhausted from the fight at Brawner&#x27;s Farm the previous day. Hatch deployed Doubleday&#x27;s brigade out in front. Hood&#x27;s division forced Hatch and Reynolds back to a position on Bald Hill, overrunning Chinn Ridge in the process. As night fell, Hood pulled back from this exposed position. Longstreet and his subordinates again argued to Lee that they should not be attacking a force they considered to be placed in a strong defensive position, and for the third time, Lee cancelled the planned assault.

Hood&#x27;s withdrawal from Chinn Ridge only reinforced Pope&#x27;s belief that the enemy was retreating. When Pope learned from McDowell about Buford&#x27;s report, he finally acknowledged that Longstreet was on the field, but he optimistically assumed that Longstreet was there only to reinforce Jackson while the entire Confederate army withdrew; Hood&#x27;s division had in fact just done that. Pope issued explicit orders for Porter&#x27;s corps to rejoin the main body of the army and planned for another offensive on August 30. Historian A. Wilson Greene argues that this was Pope&#x27;s worst decision of the battle. Since he no longer had numerical superiority over the Confederates and did not possess any geographical advantage, the most prudent course would have been to withdraw his army over Bull Run and unite with McClellan&#x27;s Army of the Potomac, which had 25,000 men nearby.

That evening, Pope wired Halleck with a report of the day&#x27;s fighting, describing it as &quot;severe&quot; and estimating his losses at 7000–8000 men. He estimated Confederate losses at twice this many, an extremely incorrect estimation given that Jackson had been fighting a mostly defensive battle. Although Confederate casualties were lower, their officer losses had been high; aside from the loss of two division commanders on August 28, three brigade commanders, Trimble, Field, and Col. Henry Forno, had been wounded. For comparison, only one Union brigade commander had been wounded so far, Col. Daniel Leasure, and no general officers.

One of the historical controversies of the battle involves George B. McClellan&#x27;s cooperation with John Pope. In late August, two full corps of the Army of the Potomac (William B. Franklin&#x27;s VI Corps and Edwin V. Sumner&#x27;s II Corps) had arrived in Alexandria, but McClellan would not allow them to advance to Manassas because of what he considered inadequate artillery, cavalry, and transportation support. He was accused by his political opponents of deliberately undermining Pope&#x27;s position, and he did not help his case in history when he wrote to his wife on August 10, &quot;Pope will be badly thrashed within two days &amp; ... they will be very glad to turn over the redemption of their affairs to me. I won&#x27;t undertake it unless I have full &amp; entire control.&quot; He told Abraham Lincoln on August 29 that it might be wise &quot;to leave Pope to get out of his scrape, and at once use all our means to make the capital perfectly safe&quot;.

===August 30: Longstreet counterattack, Union retreat===
The final element of Longstreet&#x27;s command, the division of Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson, marched and arrived on the battlefield at 3 a.m., August 30. Exhausted and unfamiliar with the area, they halted on a ridge east of Groveton. At dawn, they realized they were in an isolated position too close to the enemy and fell back. Pope&#x27;s belief that the Confederate army was in retreat was reinforced by this movement, which came after the withdrawal of Hood&#x27;s troops the night before.

Pope thus directed McDowell to move his entire corps up the Sudley Road and hit the Confederate right flank. McDowell however protested this order, stating that he had no idea what was happening down on the Confederate left and he would much prefer to have his troops on Chinn Ridge. He then said that it would make more sense to attack the Confederate right with Heintzelman&#x27;s troops, since they were closer to this area. Pope gave in, but decided to detach King&#x27;s division to support Heintzelman.

At an 8 a.m. council of war at Pope&#x27;s headquarters, his subordinates attempted to convince their commander to move cautiously. Probes of the Confederate line on Stony Ridge around 10 a.m. indicated that Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s men were still firmly in their defensive positions. John F. Reynolds indicated that the Confederates were in great strength south of the turnpike. Fitz John Porter arrived later with similar intelligence. However, Heintzelman and McDowell conducted a personal reconnaissance that somehow failed to find Jackson&#x27;s defensive line, and Pope finally made up his mind to attack the retreating Southerners.

While Porter was bringing his corps up, a further mix-up in orders resulted in the loss of two brigades. Abram Sanders Piatt&#x27;s small brigade, which had been detached from the defenses of Washington, D.C., and temporarily attached to the V Corps, and Charles Griffin&#x27;s brigade both pulled out of Porter&#x27;s main column, marched back down to Manassas Junction, and then up to Centreville. Morell, using an outdated set of orders from a day earlier, had assumed Pope was at Centreville and he was expected to join him there. Piatt eventually realized that something was amiss and turned back around towards the battlefield, arriving on Henry House Hill at about 4 p.m. Griffin and his division commander Maj. Gen George W. Morell however stayed at Centreville despite their discovery that Pope was not there. Eventually, at 4 p.m., Griffin began moving his brigade towards the action, but by this point, Pope&#x27;s army was in full retreat and a mass of wagons and stragglers were blocking the roadway. Additionally, the bridge over Cub Run was broken, making it impossible for him to move any further west.

As Ricketts&#x27;s division approached the Confederate lines, it became clear that the enemy was still there in force and was showing no sign of retreating. Pope, unnerved by these reports, contemplated waiting for McClellan to arrive with the II and VI Corps, but then worried that McClellan would take credit for any victory in the battle, so he decided to attack immediately rather than wait. Shortly after noon, Pope issued orders for Porter&#x27;s corps, supported by Hatch and Reynolds, to advance west along the turnpike. At the same time, Ricketts, Kearny, and Hooker were to advance on the Confederate left. This dual movement would potentially crush the retreating Confederates. But the Confederates were not retreating, and were in fact hoping to be attacked. Lee was still waiting for an opportunity to counterattack with Longstreet&#x27;s force. Although he was not certain that Pope would attack that day, Lee positioned 18 artillery pieces under Col. Stephen D. Lee on high ground northeast of the Brawner Farm, ideally situated to bombard the open fields in front of Jackson&#x27;s position.

Porter&#x27;s corps was actually not in position to pursue west on the turnpike, but was in the woods north of the turnpike near Groveton. It took about two hours to prepare the assault on Jackson&#x27;s line, ten brigades numbering roughly 10,000 men, with 28 artillery pieces on Dogan Ridge to support them. On the right, Ricketts&#x27; division would support Heintzelman while Sigel&#x27;s corps remained in reserve to the rear. Reynolds&#x27; division was stationed near Henry House Hill, with King&#x27;s division on its right. Porter would strike Jackson&#x27;s right flank with his 1st Division. Since General Morell was not present, command of the remaining troops fell to Brig. Gen Daniel Butterfield, the ranking brigadier in the division. George Sykes&#x27; division of regular army troops was held in reserve. As noon approached and the sun climbed high up in the sky, temperatures on the battlefield topped 90 °F.

The Confederates, however, attempted to strike the first blow. Elements of Hill&#x27;s and Ewell&#x27;s divisions came charging out of the woods and surprised some of Ricketts&#x27; men with a volley or two, but once again the Union artillery on Dogan Ridge was too much for them and after being blasted by shellfire, they withdrew back to the line of the unfinished railroad.

The Union men faced a formidable task. Butterfield&#x27;s division had to cross of open pasture, land owned by widow Lucinda Dogan, the final of which were steeply uphill, to attack a strong position behind the unfinished railroad. Porter then ordered John Hatch&#x27;s division to support Butterfield&#x27;s right flank. Hatch formed his four brigades into a line of battle, the attack being spearheaded by his own brigade, now commanded by Col. Timothy Sullivan since he assumed division command the day earlier. Hatch&#x27;s division had only to traverse, but was required to perform a complex right wheel maneuver under fire to hit the Confederate position squarely in its front. They experienced devastating fire from Stephen Lee&#x27;s batteries and then withering volleys from the infantrymen in the line. In the confusion, Hatch was knocked from his horse by an artillery shell and taken off the field unconscious. Nevertheless, they were able to break the Confederate line, routing the 48th Virginia Infantry. The Stonewall Brigade rushed in to restore the line, taking heavy casualties, including its commander, Col. Baylor. In what was arguably the most famous incident of the battle, Confederates in Col. Bradley T. Johnson&#x27;s and Col. Leroy A. Stafford&#x27;s brigades fired so much that they ran out of ammunition and resorted to throwing large rocks at the 24th New York, causing occasional damage, and prompting some of the surprised New Yorkers to throw them back. To support Jackson&#x27;s exhausted defense, which was stretched to the breaking point, Longstreet&#x27;s artillery added to the barrage against Union reinforcements attempting to move in, cutting them to pieces. Hatch&#x27;s brigade fell back in confusion, the men running into Patrick&#x27;s brigade and causing them to also panic. The mob quickly contacted Gibbon&#x27;s brigade, which remained some distance to the rear, while Doubleday&#x27;s brigade had inexplicably wandered away from the field of action. Meanwhile, Butterfield&#x27;s hard-pressed division was buckling under heavy Confederate musketry and artillery blasts and coming near to disintegrating.

Trying to shore up Butterfield&#x27;s faltering attack, Porter ordered Lt. Col Robert C. Buchanan&#x27;s brigade of regulars into action, but Longstreet&#x27;s attack on the Union left interrupted him. The withdrawal was also a costly operation. Some of the jubilant Confederates in Starke&#x27;s brigade attempted a pursuit, but were beaten back by the Union reserves posted along the Groveton-Sudley Road. Overall, Jackson&#x27;s command was too depleted to counterattack, allowing Porter to stabilize the situation north of the turnpike. Concerned about Porter&#x27;s situation, however, Irvin McDowell ordered Reynolds&#x27;s division to leave Chinn Ridge and come to Porter&#x27;s support. This may have been the worst tactical decision of the day because it left only 2,200 Union troops south of the turnpike, where they would soon face ten times their number of Confederates.

Lee and Longstreet agreed that the time was right for the long-awaited assault and that the objective would be Henry House Hill, which had been the key terrain in the First Battle of Bull Run, and which, if captured, would dominate the potential Union line of retreat. Longstreet&#x27;s command of 25,000 men in five divisions stretched nearly a mile and a half from the Brawner Farm in the north to the Manassas Gap Railroad in the south. To reach the hill, they would have to traverse 1.5 to of ground containing ridges, streams, and some heavily wooded areas. Longstreet knew that he would not be able to project a well-coordinated battle line across this terrain, so he had to rely on the drive and initiative of his division commanders. The lead division, on the left, closest to the turnpike, was John Bell Hood&#x27;s Texans, supported by Brig. Gen. Nathan G. &quot;Shanks&quot; Evans&#x27;s South Carolinians. On Hood&#x27;s right were Kemper&#x27;s and Jones&#x27;s divisions. Anderson&#x27;s division was held in reserve. Just before the attack, Lee signaled to Jackson: &quot;General Longstreet is advancing; look out for and protect his left flank.&quot;

Realizing what was happening down on the left, Porter told Buchanan to instead move in that direction to stem the Confederate onslaught and then also sent a messenger to find the other regular brigade, commanded by Col. Charles W. Roberts and get it into action. The Union defenders south of the turnpike consisted of only two brigades, commanded by Cols. Nathaniel C. McLean (Schenck&#x27;s division, Sigel&#x27;s I Corps) and Gouverneur K. Warren (Sykes&#x27;s division, Porter&#x27;s V Corps). McLean held Chinn Ridge, Warren was near Groveton, about further west. Hood&#x27;s men began the assault at 4 p.m., immediately overwhelming Warren&#x27;s two regiments, the 5th New York (Duryée&#x27;s Zouaves) and 10th New York (the National Zouaves). Within the first 10 minutes of contact, the 500 men of the 5th New York had suffered almost 300 casualties, 120 of them mortally wounded. This was the largest loss of life of any infantry regiment in a single battle during the entire war. The Zouave regiments had been wearing bright red and blue uniforms, and one of Hood&#x27;s officers wrote that the bodies lying on the hill reminded him of the Texas countryside when the wildflowers were in bloom.

While all this was going on, Pope was at his headquarters behind Dogan Ridge, oblivious to the chaos unfurling to the south. Instead, he was focused on a message he had just received from Henry Halleck announcing that the II and VI Corps, plus Brig. Gen Darius Couch&#x27;s division of the IV Corps, were on the way to reinforce him, and moreover, McClellan had been ordered to stay behind in Washington, D.C. This would give Pope 41 brigades, all of them completely under his command and with no interference from McClellan whatsoever. Only after Warren had collapsed and McLean was being driven from the field did Pope finally realize what was happening.

McDowell ordered Ricketts&#x27; division to disengage from its attack on the Confederate left, which had also failed to achieve any breakthrough, and reinforce the Union left. McDowell rode out with Reynolds to supervise the construction of the new line of defense on Chinn Ridge, just as Porter&#x27;s shattered troops came running out of the woods to the west. Reynolds protested the order to move to Chinn Ridge, arguing that his division was needed to prevent a Confederate attack from the woods. McDowell, however, told Reynolds that the Confederate attack was not coming from that direction, but from the south and to move his division there immediately. Even before this happened, one of Reynolds&#x27; brigade commanders, Col. Martin Hardin (commanding Brig. Gen Conrad F. Jackson&#x27;s brigade after Jackson had called in sick the previous day), took the initiative by himself and marched down to stem the Confederate onslaught. Taking with him Battery G of the 1st Pennsylvania Artillery, Hardin&#x27;s brigade unleashed a volley of musket fire that stunned the 1st and 4th Texas regiments, but the 5th Texas to the right kept coming on and quickly shot down most of the gunners of Battery G. Nathan Evans&#x27; South Carolina brigade now arrived to reinforce the Texans and got in the rear of Hardin&#x27;s brigade. Hardin fell wounded and command of the brigade devolved on Col. James Kirk of the 10th Pennsylvania Reserves. Kirk was shot down within minutes and a lieutenant colonel took over. The crumbling remains of the brigade fell back, some soldiers pausing to take shots at the oncoming Confederates. Nathaniel McLean&#x27;s brigade of Ohioans arrived on the scene, but was assailed on three sides by the brigades of Law, Wilcox, and Evans, and soon joined the survivors of Hardin&#x27;s brigade in a disorganized mob on Henry House Hill.

The first two Union brigades to arrive were from Ricketts&#x27;s division, commanded by Brig. Gen. Zealous B. Tower and Col. Fletcher Webster, temporarily commanding Col. John Stiles&#x27; brigade. James Ricketts had been at the same battlefield a year earlier, at First Bull Run, where he had commanded a regular gun battery and had been captured at the fight for Henry Hill. Tower&#x27;s brigade slammed Wilcox&#x27;s Alabamians in the flank and sent them reeling, but was then immediately confronted with the fresh Confederate division of David R. Jones. Webster lined up his four regiments to face the Confederate attackers, but was struck by an artillery shell and collapsed dead on the field. Disheartened by Webster&#x27;s death, his men began to fall back. Meanwhile, Tower was shot from his horse and carried off the field unconscious. Robert Schenck then ordered Col. John Koltes&#x27; brigade, which had been held in reserve during Sigel&#x27;s attack on the Confederate left the previous day and was fresh, into action, along with Wlodzimierz Krzyzanowski&#x27;s brigade, which had been heavily engaged and was tired. Koltes however was quickly struck by an artillery shell and killed. Overall command devolved onto Col. Richard Coulter of the 11th Pennsylvania, the highest-ranking officer remaining on the field, and a Mexican War veteran. Although Koltes and Krzyzanowski&#x27;s six regiments held their ground for a little while, they were quickly overwhelmed by yet more fresh Confederates in the brigades of Lewis Armistead, Montgomery Corse, and Eppa Hunton and started to fall back in disorder.

During the first two hours of the Confederate assault, McDowell had constructed a new line of defense consisting of Reynolds&#x27; and Sykes&#x27; divisions. Longstreet&#x27;s last fresh troops,
Richard Anderson&#x27;s division now took the offensive. The regulars of George Sykes&#x27;s division along with Meade and Seymour&#x27;s brigades, plus Piatt&#x27;s brigade, formed a line on Henry House Hill that held off this final Confederate attack long enough to give the rest of the army time to withdraw across Bull Run Creek to Centreville.

Stonewall Jackson, under relatively ambiguous orders from Lee to support Longstreet, launched an attack north of the turnpike at 6 p.m., probably as soon as his exhausted forces could be mustered. Historian John J. Hennessy called Jackson&#x27;s delays &quot;one of the battle&#x27;s great puzzles&quot; and &quot;one of the most significant Confederate failures&quot; of the battle, greatly reducing the value of his advance. The attack coincided with Pope&#x27;s ordered withdrawal of units north of the turnpike to assist in the Henry House Hill defense and the Confederates were able to overrun a number of artillery and infantry units in their fierce assault. By 7 p.m., however, Pope had established a strong defensive line that aligned with the units on Henry House Hill. At 8 p.m., he ordered a general withdrawal on the turnpike to Centreville. Unlike the calamitous retreat at the First Battle of Bull Run, the Union movement was quiet and orderly. The Confederates, weary from battle and low on ammunition, did not pursue in the darkness. Although Lee had won a great victory, he had not achieved his objective of destroying Pope&#x27;s army.

The final significant action of the battle occurred around 7:00 PM as Lee directed J.E.B. Stuart&#x27;s cavalry to go around the Union flank and cut off their retreat. Brig. Gen Beverly Robertson&#x27;s cavalry brigade, accompanied by Col. Thomas Rosser&#x27;s 5th Virginia Cavalry headed for Lewis Ford, a crossing in Bull Run Creek that would enable them to get in the rear of the Union army. However, Robertson and Rosser found the crossing blocked by John Buford&#x27;s cavalry and after a short, but fierce engagement, Buford&#x27;s superior numbers won out and the Confederate horsemen pulled back. The cavalry clash lasted only about ten minutes, but resulted in Col. Thomas Munford of the 2nd Virginia Cavalry being wounded. Col. Thornton Brodhead of the 1st Michigan Cavalry was shot dead, and John Buford was also wounded. The Union army&#x27;s retreat however had been safeguarded.

==Aftermath==

===Casualties===
The Second Battle of Manassas, like the First (July 21, 1861), was a significant tactical victory for the Confederates and was another blow to Union morale. Union casualties were about 14,000 killed and wounded out of 62,000 engaged (22.5%); the Confederates lost about 1,000 killed and 7,000 wounded out of 50,000 (16%).

===Chantilly===
As the Union Army concentrated on Centreville, Lee planned his next move. He sent Jackson on another flanking march in an attempt to interpose his army between Pope and Washington. Pope countered the move and the two forces clashed a final time at the Battle of Chantilly (also known as Ox Hill) on September 1. Lee immediately began his next campaign on September 3, when the vanguard of the Army of Northern Virginia crossed the Potomac River, marching toward a fateful encounter with the Army of the Potomac in the Maryland Campaign and the Battle of Antietam.

===Pope relieved of command===

Pope was relieved of command on September 12, and his army was merged into the Army of the Potomac as it marched into Maryland under McClellan. He spent the remainder of the war in the Department of the Northwest in Minnesota, dealing with the Dakota War of 1862. Pope sought scapegoats to spread the blame for his defeat. On November 25, Fitz John Porter was arrested and court-martialed for his actions on August 29. Porter was found guilty on January 10, 1863, of disobedience and misconduct, and he was dismissed from the Army on January 21. He spent most of the remainder of his life fighting against the verdict. In 1878, a special commission under General John M. Schofield exonerated Porter by finding that his reluctance to attack Longstreet probably saved Pope&#x27;s Army of Virginia from an even greater defeat. Eight years later, President Chester A. Arthur reversed Porter&#x27;s sentence.

===Longstreet criticized===
James Longstreet was criticized for his performance during the battle and the postbellum advocates of the Lost Cause claimed that his slowness, reluctance to attack, and disobedience to Gen. Lee on August 29 were a harbinger of his controversial performance to come on July 2, 1863, at the Battle of Gettysburg. Lee&#x27;s biographer, Douglas Southall Freeman, wrote: &quot;The seeds of much of the disaster at Gettysburg were sown in that instant—when Lee yielded to Longstreet and Longstreet discovered that he would.&quot;

==Battlefield preservation==
Part of the site of the battle is now Manassas National Battlefield Park. Located north of Manassas, in Prince William County, Virginia, it preserves the site of two major American Civil War battles: the First Battle of Bull Run on July 21, 1861, and the Second Battle of Bull Run which was fought between August 28 and August 30, 1862 (also known as the First Battle of Manassas and the Second Battle of Manassas, respectively). The peaceful Virginia countryside bore witness to clashes between the armies of the North (Union) and the South (Confederacy), and it was there that Confederate General Thomas J. Jackson acquired his nickname &quot;Stonewall&quot;. The American Battlefield Trust and its partners have acquired and preserved of the Second Battle of Bull Run battlefield in more than 10 transactions since 2000.

==Historic photographs==

===Gallery===
==See also==
* List of American Civil War battles
* Armies in the American Civil War
* Manassas National Battlefield Park
* Clara Barton
* Peninsula Campaign and Seven Days Battles
* Troop engagements of the American Civil War, 1862
* List of costliest American Civil War land battles
* Bibliography of the American Civil War
* Bibliography of Abraham Lincoln
* Bibliography of Ulysses S. Grant
==Notes==
==References==
* Editors of Time-Life Books. &quot;Lee Takes Command: From Seven Days to Second Bull Run&quot;. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1984. .
* Eicher, David J. &quot;The Longest Night: A Military History of the Civil War&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2001. .
* Esposito, Vincent J. &quot;West Point Atlas of American Wars&quot;. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1959. . The collection of maps (without explanatory text) is available online at the West Point website.
* Gallagher, Gary W. &quot;Lee and His Generals in War and Memory&quot;. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1998. .
* Greene, A. Wilson. &quot;The Second Battle of Manassas&quot;. National Park Service Civil War Series. Fort Washington, PA: U.S. National Park Service and Eastern National, 2006. .
* Harsh, Joseph L. &quot;Confederate Tide Rising: Robert E. Lee and the Making of Southern Strategy, 1861–1862&quot;. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press, 1998. .
* Hennessy, John J. &quot;Return to Bull Run: The Campaign and Battle of Second Manassas&quot;. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1993. .
* Herdegen, Lance J. &quot;The Men Stood Like Iron: How the Iron Brigade Won Its Name&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997. .
* Kennedy, Frances H., ed. &quot;The Civil War Battlefield Guide&quot;. 2nd ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1998. .
* Langellier, John. &quot;Second Manassas 1862: Robert E. Lee&#x27;s Greatest Victory&quot;. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2002. .
* Martin, David G. &quot;The Second Bull Run Campaign: July–August 1862&quot;. New York: Da Capo Press, 1997. .
* Nolan, Alan T. &quot;The Iron Brigade, A Military History&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1961. .
* Ropes, John Codman. &quot;The Army in the Civil War&quot;. Vol. 4, &quot;The Army under Pope&quot;. New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons, 1881. .
* Salmon, John S. &quot;The Official Virginia Civil War Battlefield Guide&quot;. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2001. .
* Warner, Ezra J. &quot;Generals in Blue: Lives of the Union Commanders&quot;. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1964. .
* Wert, Jeffry D. &quot;General James Longstreet: The Confederacy&#x27;s Most Controversial Soldier: A Biography&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1993. .
* Whitehorne, Joseph W. A. &quot;The Battle of Second Manassas: Self-Guided Tour&quot;. Washington, DC: United States Army Center of Military History, 1990. .
* Woodworth, Steven E., and Kenneth J. Winkle. &quot;Oxford Atlas of the Civil War&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. .
* National Park Service battle description

===Memoirs and primary sources===
* Dawes, Rufus R. &quot;A Full Blown Yankee of the Iron Brigade: Service with the Sixth Wisconsin Volunteers&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999. . First published 1890 by E. R. Alderman and Sons.
* Longstreet, James. &quot;From Manassas to Appomattox: Memoirs of the Civil War in America&quot;. New York: Da Capo Press, 1992. . First published in 1896 by J. B. Lippincott and Co.
* Schurz, Carl. &quot;The Reminiscences of Carl Schurz, Volume Two, 1852–1863&quot;. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page &amp; Co., 1913. .
* Robert Underwood Johnson, Clarence Clough Buell, &quot;Battles and Leaders of the Civil War&quot;, Volume 2 (Pdf), New York: The Century Co., 1887.
* U.S. War Department, &quot;The War of the Rebellion&quot;: &quot;a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies&quot;. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1880–1901.

==Further reading==
* Ballard, Ted, and Billy Arthur. &quot;Second Bull Run Staff Ride: Briefing Book&quot;. Carlisle, PA: United States Army Center of Military History, 1999? .
* Beaudot, William J. K., and Lance J. Herdegen. &quot;An Irishman in the Iron Brigade: The Civil War Memoirs of James P. Sullivan, Sergt., Company K, 6th Wisconsin Volunteers&quot;. New York: Fordham University Press, 1993. .
* Whitehorne, Joseph W. A. &quot;The Battle of Second Manassas: Self-Guided Tour&quot;. Washington, DC: United States Army Center of Military History, 1990. .

==External links==
* 
* Harriet Porter Wife Of Fitz John Porter
* Second Manassas Battlefield Page: Battle maps, photos, history articles, and battlefield news (CWPT)
* Manassas National Battlefield Park website
* Second Bull Run Order of Battle
* The Battle of Gainesville on the 2nd Wisconsin&#x27;s Website
* Animated History of the Second Manassas Campaign
* Eye witness accounts by Sergeant Luther Mesnard of Company D of OH 55th</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="4" end="29" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="33" end="58" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Battle of Second Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q183263" start="93" end="124" title="Prince William County, Virginia" label="Prince William County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="141" end="159" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952979" start="191" end="217" title="Northern Virginia Campaign" label="Northern Virginia Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="227" end="238" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="239" end="243" title="General (CSA)" label="Gen."/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="244" end="257" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="265" end="290" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="299" end="304" title="Union Army" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="305" end="314" title="Major General (CSA)" label="Maj. Gen."/>
<link wikidata="Q465291" start="315" end="324" title="John Pope (military officer)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q689872" start="332" end="348" title="Army of Virginia" label="Army of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="405" end="429" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427134" start="521" end="535" title="Flanking maneuver" label="flanking march"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="559" end="598" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Thomas J. &amp;quot;Stonewall&amp;quot; Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="634" end="651" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="705" end="721" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="910" end="926" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205730" start="1176" end="1202" title="Battle of Thoroughfare Gap" label="Battle of Thoroughfare Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421282" start="1795" end="1811" title="Fitz John Porter" label="Fitz John Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386057" start="1819" end="1826" title="V Corps (Union Army)" label="V Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q179446" start="2017" end="2025" title="Bull Run (Occoquan River)" label="Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q980173" start="2051" end="2061" title="rear guard" label="rear guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="2095" end="2109" title="First Manassas" label="First Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374678" start="2141" end="2152" title="Centreville, Virginia" label="Centreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342042" start="2245" end="2262" title="Maryland Campaign" label="Maryland Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="2339" end="2358" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="2366" end="2384" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="2392" end="2410" title="Seven Days Battles" label="Seven Days Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2425" end="2434" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="2435" end="2450" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988047" start="2555" end="2570" title="Western Theater of the American Civil War" label="Western Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="2730" end="2747" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376615" start="2827" end="2839" title="Gordonsville, Virginia" label="Gordonsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="2978" end="2996" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560669" start="3163" end="3188" title="Virginia Central Railroad" label="Virginia Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q358391" start="3418" end="3427" title="A.P. Hill" label="A.P. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q504369" start="3552" end="3565" title="Henry Halleck" label="Henry Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q429655" start="3821" end="3835" title="Battle of Cedar Mountain" label="Cedar Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129177" start="4032" end="4049" title="James B. Ricketts" label="James B. Ricketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="4409" end="4427" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099763" start="4794" end="4826" title="Orange &amp;amp; Alexandria Railroad" label="Orange &amp;amp; Alexandria Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001819" start="4972" end="4980" title="Marshall, Virginia" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969135" start="5170" end="5185" title="Bristow, Virginia" label="Bristoe Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205730" start="6123" end="6149" title="Battle of Thoroughfare Gap" label="Battle of Thoroughfare Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q465291" start="6500" end="6504" title="John Pope (military officer)" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q689872" start="6512" end="6528" title="Army of Virginia" label="Army of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340828" start="6597" end="6604" title="I Corps (Union Army)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190" start="6622" end="6633" title="Franz Sigel" label="Franz Sigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434877" start="6676" end="6693" title="Robert C. Schenck" label="Robert C. Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301174" start="6717" end="6730" title="Julius Stahel" label="Julius Stahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969756" start="6740" end="6759" title="Nathaniel C. McLean" label="Nathaniel C. McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q24793" start="6773" end="6793" title="Adolph von Steinwehr" label="Adolph von Steinwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q111279976" start="6811" end="6825" title="John A. Koltes" label="John A. Koltes"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="6839" end="6850" title="Carl Schurz" label="Carl Schurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417" start="6869" end="6893" title="Alexander Schimmelfennig" label="Alexander Schimmelfennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501690" start="6903" end="6927" title="Wlodzimierz Krzyzanowski" label="Wlodzimierz Krzyzanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q774052" start="6965" end="6981" title="Robert H. Milroy" label="Robert H. Milroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59692384" start="6988" end="7002" title="John Beardsley (colonel)" label="John Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7013" end="7027" title="Louis Schirmer" label="Louis Schirmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q854967" start="7034" end="7042" title="II Corps (Union Army)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q714106" start="7060" end="7078" title="Nathaniel P. Banks" label="Nathaniel P. Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392746" start="7084" end="7093" title="III Corps (Union Army)" label="III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q707558" start="7105" end="7119" title="Irvin McDowell" label="Irvin McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378068" start="7216" end="7226" title="Rufus King (general)" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435022" start="7250" end="7263" title="John P. Hatch" label="John P. Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q322555" start="7275" end="7290" title="Abner Doubleday" label="Abner Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773276" start="7302" end="7320" title="Marsena R. Patrick" label="Marsena R. Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700203" start="7336" end="7347" title="John Gibbon" label="John Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129177" start="7360" end="7377" title="James B. Ricketts" label="James B. Ricketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821882" start="7401" end="7413" title="Abram Duryée" label="Abram Duryée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575052" start="7425" end="7441" title="Zealous B. Tower" label="Zealous B. Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q111361312" start="7448" end="7462" title="John W. Stiles" label="John W. Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287393" start="7473" end="7487" title="Joseph Thoburn" label="Joseph Thoburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360806" start="7494" end="7510" title="Kanawha Division" label="Kanawha Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="7562" end="7571" title="George B. McClellan" label="McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="7579" end="7598" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392746" start="7683" end="7692" title="III Corps (Union Army)" label="III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594218" start="7710" end="7731" title="Samuel P. Heintzelman" label="Samuel P. Heintzelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354545" start="7775" end="7788" title="Philip Kearny" label="Philip Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699503" start="7812" end="7828" title="John C. Robinson" label="John C. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173613" start="7840" end="7855" title="David B. Birney" label="David B. Birney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103138" start="7862" end="7873" title="Orlando Poe" label="Orlando Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="7886" end="7899" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197046" start="7918" end="7931" title="Cuvier Grover" label="Cuvier Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q799513" start="7938" end="7951" title="Nelson Taylor" label="Nelson Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281662" start="7962" end="7976" title="Joseph B. Carr" label="Joseph B. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386057" start="7983" end="7990" title="V Corps (Union Army)" label="V Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421282" start="8007" end="8023" title="Fitz John Porter" label="Fitz John Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615867" start="8067" end="8085" title="Daniel Butterfield" label="Daniel Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083245" start="8104" end="8122" title="Charles W. Roberts" label="Charles W. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q111367769" start="8132" end="8148" title="Henry S. Lansing" label="Henry S. Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q945728" start="8161" end="8173" title="George Sykes" label="George Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669383" start="8198" end="8212" title="Abram S. Piatt" label="Abram S. Piatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342579" start="8223" end="8241" title="Robert C. Buchanan" label="Robert C. Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8252" end="8267" title="William Chapman (colonel)" label="William Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460144" start="8274" end="8294" title="Gouverneur K. Warren" label="Gouverneur K. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247051" start="8305" end="8320" title="Stephen H. Weed" label="Stephen H. Weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392750" start="8327" end="8335" title="VI Corps (Union Army)" label="VI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937373" start="8352" end="8371" title="William B. Franklin" label="William B. Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156546" start="8377" end="8385" title="IX Corps (Union Army)" label="IX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393264" start="8402" end="8415" title="Jesse L. Reno" label="Jesse L. Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q888719" start="8459" end="8475" title="Isaac I. Stevens" label="Isaac I. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888363" start="8494" end="8512" title="Benjamin C. Christ" label="Benjamin C. Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217893" start="8519" end="8533" title="Daniel Leasure" label="Daniel Leasure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8543" end="8561" title="Addison Farnsworth" label="Addison Farnsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680881" start="8606" end="8617" title="James Nagle (general)" label="James Nagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719956" start="8627" end="8641" title="Edward Ferrero" label="Edward Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="8694" end="8707" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="8715" end="8740" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="8844" end="8860" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344911" start="8939" end="8958" title="Richard H. Anderson (general)" label="Richard H. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q659645" start="8982" end="9000" title="Lewis A. Armistead" label="Lewis A. Armistead"/>
<link wikidata="Q925055" start="9012" end="9026" title="William Mahone" label="William Mahone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389224" start="9038" end="9055" title="Ambrose R. Wright" label="Ambrose R. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q327002" start="9066" end="9080" title="Stephen D. Lee" label="Stephen D. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160418" start="9093" end="9107" title="David Rumph Jones" label="David R. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q523143" start="9126" end="9142" title="Henry L. Benning" label="Henry L. Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q980680" start="9154" end="9171" title="Thomas F. Drayton" label="Thomas F. Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q712157" start="9182" end="9200" title="George T. Anderson" label="George T. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038012" start="9213" end="9229" title="Cadmus M. Wilcox" label="Cadmus M. Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161601" start="9281" end="9295" title="Roger A. Pryor" label="Roger A. Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584141" start="9311" end="9334" title="Winfield S. Featherston" label="Winfield S. Featherston"/>
<link wikidata="Q553533" start="9347" end="9359" title="John B. Hood" label="John B. Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425246" start="9402" end="9416" title="Evander M. Law" label="Evander M. Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9423" end="9440" title="Bushrod W. Frobel" label="Bushrod W. Frobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q879250" start="9452" end="9467" title="James L. Kemper" label="James L. Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946287" start="9486" end="9505" title="Montgomery D. Corse" label="Montgomery D. Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q346272" start="9517" end="9530" title="Micah Jenkins" label="Micah Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339968" start="9537" end="9548" title="Eppa Hunton" label="Eppa Hunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966555" start="9580" end="9595" title="Nathan G. Evans" label="Nathan G. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129198" start="9619" end="9634" title="James B. Walton" label="James B. Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="9646" end="9663" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523033" start="9741" end="9762" title="William B. Taliaferro" label="William B. Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017905" start="9781" end="9798" title="William S. Baylor" label="William S. Baylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955053" start="9805" end="9823" title="Bradley T. Johnson" label="Bradley T. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9830" end="9853" title="Alexander G. Taliaferro" label="Alexander G. Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439990" start="9865" end="9882" title="William E. Starke" label="William E. Starke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9892" end="9911" title="Lindsey M. Shumaker" label="Lindsey M. Shumaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q358391" start="9924" end="9934" title="A. P. Hill" label="A. P. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809235" start="9958" end="9976" title="Lawrence O. Branch" label="Lawrence O. Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604205" start="9988" end="10005" title="William D. Pender" label="William D. Pender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355269" start="10012" end="10028" title="Edward L. Thomas" label="Edward L. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148378" start="10040" end="10051" title="Maxcy Gregg" label="Maxcy Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360749" start="10063" end="10078" title="James J. Archer" label="James J. Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066440" start="10090" end="10106" title="Charles W. Field" label="Charles W. Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317484" start="10120" end="10137" title="R. Lindsay Walker" label="R. Lindsay Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q431200" start="10150" end="10166" title="Richard S. Ewell" label="Richard S. Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719981" start="10190" end="10209" title="Alexander R. Lawton" label="Alexander R. Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q922066" start="10221" end="10237" title="Isaac R. Trimble" label="Isaac R. Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q257497" start="10249" end="10263" title="Jubal A. Early" label="Jubal A. Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q130359837" start="10273" end="10284" title="Henry Forno" label="Henry Forno"/>
<link wikidata="Q313583" start="10326" end="10339" title="J.E.B. Stuart" label="J.E.B. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q408957" start="11218" end="11236" title="U.S. Route 29" label="Warrenton Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11265" end="11275" title="Brigadier General#United States" label="Brig. Gen."/>
<link wikidata="Q7378068" start="11276" end="11286" title="Rufus King (general)" label="Rufus King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435022" start="11332" end="11345" title="John P. Hatch" label="John P. Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700203" start="11347" end="11358" title="John Gibbon" label="John Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q322555" start="11360" end="11375" title="Abner Doubleday" label="Abner Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773276" start="11381" end="11399" title="Marsena R. Patrick" label="Marsena R. Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="11549" end="11565" title="Epilepsy" label="epileptic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382693" start="12358" end="12370" title="Iron Brigade" label="Iron Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484873" start="13049" end="13065" title="Frank A. Haskell" label="Frank A. Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633965" start="13087" end="13109" title="2nd Wisconsin Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="2nd Wisconsin Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="13314" end="13318" title="Colonel (United States)" label="Col."/>
<link wikidata="Q2082696" start="13716" end="13733" title="Stonewall Brigade" label="Stonewall Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017905" start="13753" end="13770" title="William S. Baylor" label="William S. Baylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595768" start="14216" end="14228" title="19th Indiana Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="19th Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q431200" start="14352" end="14368" title="Richard S. Ewell" label="Richard S. Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719981" start="14426" end="14445" title="Alexander R. Lawton" label="Alexander R. Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644221" start="14501" end="14514" title="7th Wisconsin Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="7th Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q922066" start="14543" end="14559" title="Isaac R. Trimble" label="Isaac R. Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959585" start="14645" end="14658" title="6th Wisconsin Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="6th Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23074127" start="14868" end="14881" title="76th New York Volunteer Infantry" label="76th New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182276" start="15101" end="15112" title="John Pelham (officer)" label="John Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523033" start="15787" end="15808" title="William B. Taliaferro" label="William B. Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937271" start="16013" end="16023" title="Minié ball" label="Minié ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354545" start="16716" end="16729" title="Philip Kearny" label="Philip Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148378" start="19842" end="19853" title="Maxcy Gregg" label="Maxcy Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355269" start="19899" end="19915" title="Edward L. Thomas" label="Edward L. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719981" start="20072" end="20088" title="Alexander Lawton" label="Alexander Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523033" start="20109" end="20130" title="William B. Taliaferro" label="William B. Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439990" start="20176" end="20193" title="William E. Starke" label="William E. Starke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394317" start="23182" end="23199" title="political general" label="political general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434877" start="24036" end="24053" title="Robert C. Schenck" label="Robert C. Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q557091" start="24095" end="24111" title="John F. Reynolds" label="John F. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q774052" start="24180" end="24196" title="Robert H. Milroy" label="Robert H. Milroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="24254" end="24265" title="Carl Schurz" label="Carl Schurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="24843" end="24861" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q96417" start="24927" end="24951" title="Alexander Schimmelfennig" label="Alexander Schimmelfennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501690" start="24961" end="24985" title="Włodzimierz Krzyżanowski" label="Włodzimierz Krzyżanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644658" start="25291" end="25300" title="82nd Ohio Infantry" label="82nd Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641487" start="25305" end="25322" title="5th West Virginia Infantry" label="5th West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633963" start="25340" end="25357" title="2nd West Virginia Infantry" label="2nd West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25362" end="25379" title="4th West Virginia Infantry" label="4th West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301174" start="26686" end="26699" title="Julius Stahel" label="Julius Stahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641820" start="27890" end="27899" title="61st Ohio Infantry" label="61st Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643370" start="27901" end="27918" title="74th Pennsylvania Infantry" label="74th Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245015" start="27924" end="27941" title="8th West Virginia Infantry" label="8th West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103138" start="28131" end="28142" title="Orlando Poe" label="Orlando Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182276" start="28421" end="28432" title="John Pelham (officer)" label="John Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596666" start="28528" end="28548" title="1st Virginia Cavalry" label="1st Virginia Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="29511" end="29524" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q888719" start="29567" end="29580" title="Isaac Stevens" label="Isaac Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q854967" start="30253" end="30255" title="II Corps (Union Army)" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392750" start="30260" end="30268" title="VI Corps (Union army)" label="VI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q553533" start="30803" end="30817" title="John Bell Hood" label="John Bell Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q879250" start="30964" end="30979" title="James L. Kemper" label="James L. Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160418" start="30984" end="31019" title="David Rumph Jones" label="David R. &amp;quot;Neighbor&amp;quot; Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038012" start="31032" end="31048" title="Cadmus M. Wilcox" label="Cadmus M. Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530770" start="32426" end="32439" title="Thomas Rosser" label="Thomas Rosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q540971" start="32676" end="32687" title="John Buford" label="John Buford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197046" start="34111" end="34124" title="Cuvier Grover" label="Cuvier Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680881" start="36670" end="36681" title="James Nagle (general)" label="James Nagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809235" start="38323" end="38351" title="Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Bryan Branch" label="Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Bryan Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066440" start="38516" end="38532" title="Charles W. Field" label="Charles W. Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245720" start="38655" end="38676" title="John M. Brockenbrough" label="John M. Brockenbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606863" start="38839" end="38855" title="Henry House Hill" label="Henry House Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435022" start="39585" end="39598" title="John P. Hatch" label="John P. Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217893" start="42447" end="42461" title="Daniel Leasure" label="Daniel Leasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937373" start="42662" end="42681" title="William B. Franklin" label="William B. Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392750" start="42689" end="42697" title="VI Corps (Union Army)" label="VI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q887218" start="42702" end="42717" title="Edwin V. Sumner" label="Edwin V. Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q854967" start="42725" end="42733" title="II Corps (Union Army)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="42750" end="42760" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344911" start="43598" end="43617" title="Richard H. Anderson (general)" label="Richard H. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574878" start="44545" end="44559" title="council of war" label="council of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669383" start="45277" end="45296" title="Abram Sanders Piatt" label="Abram Sanders Piatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q73513" start="45427" end="45442" title="Charles Griffin" label="Charles Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545705" start="45895" end="45911" title="George W. Morell" label="George W. Morell"/>
<link wikidata="Q327002" start="47258" end="47272" title="Stephen D. Lee" label="Stephen D. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615867" start="48092" end="48110" title="Daniel Butterfield" label="Daniel Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638715" start="49702" end="49724" title="48th Virginia Infantry" label="48th Virginia Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528899" start="49959" end="49976" title="Leroy Augustus Stafford" label="Leroy A. Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342579" start="50940" end="50958" title="Robert C. Buchanan" label="Robert C. Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456779" start="52548" end="52576" title="Texas Brigade" label="John Bell Hood&amp;#x27;s Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966555" start="52602" end="52643" title="Nathan George Evans" label="Nathan G. &amp;quot;Shanks&amp;quot; Evans&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083245" start="53133" end="53151" title="Charles W. Roberts" label="Charles W. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969756" start="53269" end="53288" title="Nathaniel McLean" label="Nathaniel C. McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460144" start="53341" end="53361" title="Gouverneur K. Warren" label="Gouverneur K. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817897" start="53584" end="53596" title="5th New York Volunteer Infantry" label="5th New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821882" start="53598" end="53611" title="Abram Duryée" label="Duryée&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638325" start="53612" end="53618" title="Zouave" label="Zouave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352658" start="54371" end="54383" title="Darius Couch" label="Darius Couch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55546" end="55570" title="Conrad F. Jackson&amp;#x27;s" label="Conrad F. Jackson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575052" start="56735" end="56751" title="Zealous Bates Tower" label="Zealous B. Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160418" start="57178" end="57192" title="David Rumph Jones" label="David R. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501690" start="57679" end="57703" title="Wlodzimierz Krzyzanowski" label="Wlodzimierz Krzyzanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547948" start="57892" end="57909" title="11th Pennsylvania Infantry" label="11th Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="57969" end="57980" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican War"/>
<link wikidata="Q659645" start="58162" end="58177" title="Lewis Armistead" label="Lewis Armistead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946287" start="58179" end="58195" title="Montgomery Corse" label="Montgomery Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339968" start="58201" end="58212" title="Eppa Hunton" label="Eppa Hunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395110" start="60130" end="60147" title="Beverly Robertson" label="Beverly Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530770" start="60192" end="60205" title="Thomas Rosser" label="Thomas Rosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641475" start="60213" end="60233" title="5th Virginia Cavalry" label="5th Virginia Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794329" start="60627" end="60641" title="Thomas Munford" label="Thomas Munford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633949" start="60649" end="60669" title="2nd Virginia Cavalry" label="2nd Virginia Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302750" start="60690" end="60707" title="Thornton Brodhead" label="Thornton Brodhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596472" start="60715" end="60735" title="1st Michigan Cavalry" label="1st Michigan Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="60918" end="60923" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420736" start="61469" end="61488" title="Battle of Chantilly" label="Battle of Chantilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="61648" end="61661" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342042" start="61735" end="61752" title="Maryland Campaign" label="Maryland Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="61761" end="61779" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="62030" end="62039" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851858" start="62058" end="62076" title="Dakota War of 1862" label="Dakota War of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178209" start="62187" end="62218" title="Court-martial of Fitz John Porter" label="court-martialed for his actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q996047" start="62477" end="62494" title="John M. Schofield" label="John M. Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="62667" end="62684" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="62853" end="62863" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="63037" end="63057" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q451929" start="63082" end="63106" title="Douglas Southall Freeman" label="Douglas Southall Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747016" start="63341" end="63375" title="Manassas National Battlefield Park" label="Manassas National Battlefield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="63507" end="63531" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="63969" end="63995" title="American Battlefield Trust" label="American Battlefield Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743836" start="64183" end="64217" title="List of American Civil War battles" label="List of American Civil War battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778688" start="64220" end="64252" title="Armies in the American Civil War" label="Armies in the American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747016" start="64255" end="64289" title="Manassas National Battlefield Park" label="Manassas National Battlefield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q188039" start="64292" end="64304" title="Clara Barton" label="Clara Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="64307" end="64325" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="64330" end="64348" title="Seven Days Battles" label="Seven Days Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845551" start="64351" end="64400" title="Troop engagements of the American Civil War, 1862" label="Troop engagements of the American Civil War, 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165129" start="64403" end="64452" title="List of costliest American Civil War land battles" label="List of costliest American Civil War land battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903448" start="64455" end="64493" title="Bibliography of the American Civil War" label="Bibliography of the American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903312" start="64496" end="64527" title="Bibliography of Abraham Lincoln" label="Bibliography of Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007231" start="64530" end="64562" title="Bibliography of Ulysses S. Grant" label="Bibliography of Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235417" start="64728" end="64744" title="David J. Eicher" label="Eicher, David J."/>
<link wikidata="Q28036945" start="65062" end="65080" title="Gary W. Gallagher" label="Gallagher, Gary W."/>
<link wikidata="Q6176389" start="66700" end="66715" title="Jeffry D. Wert" label="Wert, Jeffry D."/>
<link wikidata="Q7889463" start="66962" end="67007" title="United States Army Center of Military History" label="United States Army Center of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="67442" end="67459" title="James Longstreet" label="Longstreet, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q127437" start="67626" end="67638" title="Carl Schurz" label="Schurz, Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349693" start="67999" end="68015" title="Official Records of the American Civil War" label="Official Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889463" start="68243" end="68288" title="United States Army Center of Military History" label="United States Army Center of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889463" start="68629" end="68674" title="United States Army Center of Military History" label="United States Army Center of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124628" start="68846" end="68850" title="CWPT" label="CWPT"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54493" wikidata="Q837902" url="?curid=54493" title="Kuratowski's theorem">
<text>In graph theory, Kuratowski&#x27;s theorem is a mathematical forbidden graph characterization of planar graphs, named after Kazimierz Kuratowski. It states that a finite graph is planar if and only if it does not contain a subgraph that is a subdivision of formula_1 (the complete graph on five vertices) or of formula_2 (a complete bipartite graph on six vertices, three of which connect to each of the other three, also known as the utility graph).

==Statement==
A planar graph is a graph whose vertices can be represented by points in the Euclidean plane, and whose edges can be represented by simple curves in the same plane connecting the points representing their endpoints, such that no two curves intersect except at a common endpoint. Planar graphs are often drawn with straight line segments representing their edges, but by Fáry&#x27;s theorem this makes no difference to their graph-theoretic characterization.

A subdivision of a graph is a graph formed by subdividing its edges into paths of one or more edges. Kuratowski&#x27;s theorem states that a finite graph formula_3 is planar if it is not possible to subdivide the edges of formula_1 or formula_2, and then possibly add additional edges and vertices, to form a graph isomorphic to formula_3. Equivalently, a finite graph is planar if and only if it does not contain a subgraph that is homeomorphic to formula_1 or formula_2.

==Kuratowski subgraphs==

If formula_3 is a graph that contains a subgraph formula_10 that is a subdivision of formula_1 or formula_2, then formula_10 is known as a Kuratowski subgraph of formula_3. With this notation, Kuratowski&#x27;s theorem can be expressed succinctly: a graph is planar if and only if it does not have a Kuratowski subgraph.

The two graphs formula_1 and formula_2 are nonplanar, as may be shown either by a case analysis or an argument involving Euler&#x27;s formula. Additionally, subdividing a graph cannot turn a nonplanar graph into a planar graph: if a subdivision of a graph formula_3 has a planar drawing, the paths of the subdivision form curves that may be used to represent the edges of formula_3 itself. Therefore, a graph that contains a Kuratowski subgraph cannot be planar. The more difficult direction in proving Kuratowski&#x27;s theorem is to show that, if a graph is nonplanar, it must contain a Kuratowski subgraph.

==Algorithmic implications==
A Kuratowski subgraph of a nonplanar graph can be found in linear time, as measured by the size of the input graph. This allows the correctness of a planarity testing algorithm to be verified for nonplanar inputs, as it is straightforward to test whether a given subgraph is or is not a Kuratowski subgraph.
Usually, non-planar graphs contain a large number of Kuratowski-subgraphs. The extraction of these subgraphs is needed, e.g., in branch and cut algorithms for crossing minimization. It is possible to extract a large number of Kuratowski subgraphs in time dependent on their total size.

==History==
Kazimierz Kuratowski published his theorem in 1930. The theorem was independently proved by Orrin Frink and Paul Smith, also in 1930, but their proof was never published. The special case of cubic planar graphs (for which the only minimal forbidden subgraph is formula_2) was also independently proved by Karl Menger in 1930.
Since then, several new proofs of the theorem have been discovered.

In the Soviet Union, Kuratowski&#x27;s theorem was known as either the Pontryagin–Kuratowski theorem or the Kuratowski–Pontryagin theorem,
as the theorem was reportedly proved independently by Lev Pontryagin around 1927.
However, as Pontryagin never published his proof, this usage has not spread to other places.

==Related results==
A closely related result, Wagner&#x27;s theorem, characterizes the planar graphs by their minors in terms of the same two forbidden graphs formula_1 and formula_2. Every Kuratowski subgraph is a special case of a minor of the same type, and while the reverse is not true, it is not difficult to find a Kuratowski subgraph (of one type or the other) from one of these two forbidden minors; therefore, these two theorems are equivalent.

An extension is the Robertson–Seymour theorem.

==See also==
*Kelmans–Seymour conjecture, that 5-connected nonplanar graphs contain a subdivision of formula_1

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="3" end="15" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q837902" start="17" end="42" title="Kuratowski&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Kuratowski&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467387" start="61" end="93" title="forbidden graph characterization" label="forbidden graph characterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="97" end="109" title="planar graph" label="planar graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q161846" start="124" end="144" title="Kazimierz Kuratowski" label="Kazimierz Kuratowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="223" end="231" title="Glossary of graph theory#Subgraphs" label="subgraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q584521" start="242" end="253" title="subdivision (graph theory)" label="subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="272" end="286" title="complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="295" end="303" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q913598" start="324" end="348" title="complete bipartite graph" label="complete bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q32918" start="435" end="448" title="utility graph" label="utility graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="468" end="480" title="planar graph" label="planar graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="543" end="558" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="598" end="610" title="simple curve" label="simple curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q739462" start="769" end="774" title="graph drawing" label="drawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="789" end="801" title="line segment" label="line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455031" start="836" end="855" title="Fáry&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Fáry&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q584521" start="927" end="938" title="subdivision (graph theory)" label="subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415372" start="998" end="1003" title="path (graph theory)" label="paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q303100" start="1240" end="1250" title="graph isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584521" start="1358" end="1370" title="homeomorphism (graph theory)" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299950" start="1829" end="1842" title="Proof by cases" label="case analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852973" start="1868" end="1888" title="Euler characteristic" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="2446" end="2457" title="linear time" label="linear time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200967" start="2536" end="2553" title="planarity testing" label="planarity testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q498566" start="2824" end="2838" title="branch and cut" label="branch and cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q161846" start="2994" end="3014" title="Kazimierz Kuratowski" label="Kazimierz Kuratowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104083" start="3086" end="3097" title="Orrin Frink" label="Orrin Frink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404986" start="3102" end="3112" title="Paul Althaus Smith" label="Paul Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374495" start="3185" end="3190" title="cubic graph" label="cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q93690" start="3299" end="3310" title="Karl Menger" label="Karl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3396" end="3408" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q451319" start="3582" end="3596" title="Lev Pontryagin" label="Lev Pontryagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959587" start="3750" end="3771" title="Wagner&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Wagner&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q905837" start="3814" end="3820" title="graph minor" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527155" start="4180" end="4205" title="Robertson–Seymour theorem" label="Robertson–Seymour theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q24687039" start="4222" end="4248" title="Kelmans–Seymour conjecture" label="Kelmans–Seymour conjecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54494" wikidata="Q363705" url="?curid=54494" title="Santa (disambiguation)">
<text>Santa usually refers to the character Santa Claus, or Father Christmas.

Santa (feminine form of saint in various languages) may also refer to:

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
*&quot;Santa&quot; (1932 film), the first Mexican narrative sound film
*&quot;Santa&quot; (1943 film), a Mexican film
*Santa (band), a Spanish rock band of the 1980s
*&quot;Santa&quot; (song), by Rvssian, Rauw Alejandro and Ayra Starr
*&quot;Santa&quot; (TV series), a 1978 Mexican telenovela
*&quot;Santa&quot;, Hindi title of the 2017 Indian Tamil-language film &quot;Sakka Podu Podu Raja&quot;

==Places==
===Extraterrestrial===
*1288 Santa, an asteroid
*(obsolete) , a dwarf planet given the in-house nickname &quot;Santa&quot;

===Inhabited places===
*Santa, Cameroon
*Santa, Ghana
*Santa, Montagnes, Ivory Coast
*Santa, Woroba, Ivory Coast
*Santa Province, Peru
**Santa District
**Santa, Peru
*Santa, Ilocos Sur, Philippines
*Santa, now Dumanlı, a district in modern northern Turkey

==People==
*José Santa (born 1970), Colombian football player
*Santa Claus (Alaskan politician), American politician 
*Santa (singer), French singer
*Santa (given name), feminine given name

==Other uses==
*La Santa, a secret criminal society in Italy
*Santa, a stock character in Sardarji jokes
*Santa F1, a grape tomato marketed by Santa Sweets, Inc.
*Santa language, a Mongolic language spoken in northwest China
*Dongxiangs or Santa, an ethnic group in China
*Šanta or Santa, a god worshiped in Bronze Age Anatolia

==See also==
*
*Dear Santa (disambiguation)
*My Santa (disambiguation)
*Santa Claus (disambiguation)
*Santa Claus machine, a fictional machine which can be used to convert materials into anything else
*Santa claws (disambiguation)
*&quot;Santa&#x27;s Slay&quot;, a 2005 Canadian-American Christmas slasher comedy film that stars professional wrestler Bill Goldberg as Santa Claus
* &quot;Santa with Muscles&quot;, a 1996 American Christmas comedy film starring Hulk Hogan
*Santalahti, a district in Tampere, Finland
*Santo (disambiguation)
*Santos (disambiguation)
*Los Santos (disambiguation)
*Sant (disambiguation)
*Shantha (disambiguation)
*Satan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q363705" start="0" end="5" title="Santa (disambiguation)" label="Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="38" end="49" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q363705" start="73" end="78" title="Santa (disambiguation)" label="Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="97" end="102" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q614930" start="181" end="210" title="Santa (1932 film)" label="&amp;quot;Santa&amp;quot; (1932 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120207" start="252" end="281" title="Santa (1943 film)" label="&amp;quot;Santa&amp;quot; (1943 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120205" start="299" end="311" title="Santa (band)" label="Santa (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128800221" start="347" end="371" title="Santa (song)" label="&amp;quot;Santa&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120209" start="416" end="445" title="Santa (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Santa&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964356" start="544" end="576" title="Sakka Podu Podu Raja (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;Sakka Podu Podu Raja&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607073" start="613" end="623" title="1288 Santa" label="1288 Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419130" start="737" end="752" title="Santa, Cameroon" label="Santa, Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20855178" start="754" end="766" title="Santa, Ghana" label="Santa, Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472554" start="768" end="784" title="Santa, Montagnes" label="Santa, Montagnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472555" start="799" end="812" title="Santa, Woroba" label="Santa, Woroba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779734" start="827" end="841" title="Santa Province" label="Santa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698778" start="850" end="864" title="Santa District" label="Santa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173314" start="867" end="878" title="Santa, Peru" label="Santa, Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q12873" start="880" end="897" title="Santa, Ilocos Sur" label="Santa, Ilocos Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112199" start="923" end="930" title="Dumanlı" label="Dumanlı"/>
<link wikidata="Q922195" start="982" end="992" title="José Santa" label="José Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q111958578" start="1033" end="1065" title="Santa Claus (Alaskan politician)" label="Santa Claus (Alaskan politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123370607" start="1089" end="1103" title="Santa (singer)" label="Santa (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16281197" start="1120" end="1138" title="Santa (given name)" label="Santa (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948918" start="1177" end="1185" title="La Santa" label="La Santa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423765" start="1251" end="1264" title="Sardarji joke" label="Sardarji joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597009" start="1279" end="1291" title="grape tomato" label="grape tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q32947" start="1324" end="1338" title="Santa language" label="Santa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="1387" end="1397" title="Dongxiangs" label="Dongxiangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223351" start="1434" end="1439" title="Šanta" label="Šanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q27892510" start="1506" end="1533" title="Dear Santa (disambiguation)" label="Dear Santa (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18230426" start="1535" end="1560" title="My Santa (disambiguation)" label="My Santa (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q350262" start="1562" end="1590" title="Santa Claus (disambiguation)" label="Santa Claus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938181" start="1592" end="1611" title="Santa Claus machine" label="Santa Claus machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419990" start="1692" end="1720" title="Santa claws (disambiguation)" label="Santa claws (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q577360" start="1728" end="1745" title="Santa&amp;#x27;s Slay" label="Santa&amp;#x27;s Slay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631700" start="1878" end="1896" title="Santa with Muscles" label="Santa with Muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25461618" start="1963" end="1973" title="Santalahti" label="Santalahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q406964" start="2007" end="2029" title="Santo (disambiguation)" label="Santo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q674129" start="2031" end="2054" title="Santos (disambiguation)" label="Santos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870600" start="2056" end="2083" title="Los Santos (disambiguation)" label="Los Santos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906806" start="2085" end="2106" title="Sant (disambiguation)" label="Sant (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071977" start="2108" end="2132" title="Shantha (disambiguation)" label="Shantha (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q231449" start="2134" end="2156" title="Satan (disambiguation)" label="Satan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54495" wikidata="Q528252" url="?curid=54495" title="Hittite">
<text>Hittite may refer to:

* Hittites, ancient Anatolian people
** Hittite language, the earliest-attested Indo-European language
** Hittite grammar
** Hittite phonology
** Hittite cuneiform
** Hittite inscriptions
** Hittite laws
** Hittite religion
** Hittite music
** Hittite art
** Hittite cuisine
** Hittite navy
** Hittite kings
** Hittite sites
** Hittite studies
* Syro-Hittite states, Iron Age states located in modern Turkey and Syria
* Biblical Hittites, also known as the &quot;Children of Heth&quot;
* Hittite Microwave Corporation, a former semiconductor manufacturer now owned by Analog Devices

== See also ==
*Hatti (disambiguation)
*Hattush (disambiguation)
*Hattian (disambiguation)
*Hattic (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q528252" start="0" end="7" title="Hittite" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="25" end="33" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q35668" start="63" end="79" title="Hittite language" label="Hittite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5872685" start="129" end="144" title="Hittite grammar" label="Hittite grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790339" start="148" end="165" title="Hittite phonology" label="Hittite phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035956" start="169" end="186" title="Hittite cuneiform" label="Hittite cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q477151" start="190" end="210" title="Hittite inscriptions" label="Hittite inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035946" start="214" end="226" title="Hittite laws" label="Hittite laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142277" start="230" end="246" title="Hittite religion" label="Hittite religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60982616" start="250" end="263" title="Hittite music" label="Hittite music"/>
<link wikidata="Q10523720" start="267" end="278" title="Hittite art" label="Hittite art"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164994" start="282" end="297" title="Hittite cuisine" label="Hittite cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766890" start="301" end="313" title="Hittite navy" label="Hittite navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583243" start="317" end="330" title="Hittite kings" label="Hittite kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345357" start="334" end="347" title="Hittite sites" label="Hittite sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q491481" start="351" end="366" title="Hittite studies" label="Hittite studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q770281" start="369" end="388" title="Syro-Hittite states" label="Syro-Hittite states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891174" start="443" end="460" title="Biblical Hittites" label="Biblical Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q484930" start="511" end="540" title="Hittite Microwave Corporation" label="Hittite Microwave Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591" start="623" end="645" title="Hatti (disambiguation)" label="Hatti (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96651156" start="647" end="671" title="Hattush (disambiguation)" label="Hattush (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682017" start="673" end="697" title="Hattian (disambiguation)" label="Hattian (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682021" start="699" end="722" title="Hattic (disambiguation)" label="Hattic (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="54496" wikidata="Q217790" url="?curid=54496" title="Lawrence Lessig">
<text>Lester Lawrence &quot;Larry&quot; Lessig III (born June 3, 1961) is an American legal scholar and political activist. He is the Roy L. Furman Professor of Law at Harvard Law School and the former director of the Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics at Harvard University. He is the founder of Creative Commons and of Equal Citizens. Lessig was a candidate for the Democratic Party&#x27;s nomination for president of the United States in the 2016 U.S. presidential election but withdrew before the primaries.

== Life and career ==

Lessig was born on June 3, 1961, in Rapid City, South Dakota to Lester Lawrence &quot;Jack&quot; Lessig II (1929–2020) who was an engineer and Patricia &quot;Pat&quot; West Lessig (1930–2019), a real estate agent. He has two older step-siblings, Robert (died 2019) and Kitty, and a younger biological sister, Leslie. He grew up in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1983 with a double degree BA in economics and a BS in management. He then studied philosophy at Trinity College, Cambridge, receiving an MA in 1986. Lessig then returned to the United States to attend law school. He did his first year at the University of Chicago Law School before transferring to Yale Law School, and graduated in 1989 with a JD degree.

After graduation from law school, Lessig was a law clerk for Richard Posner of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit from 1989 to 1990, and then for Justice Antonin Scalia of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1990 to 1991.

Lessig started his academic career at the University of Chicago Law School, where he was professor from 1991 to 1997. As co-director of its Center for the Study of Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, he helped the newly independent Republic of Georgia draft a constitution. From 1997 to 2000, he was at Harvard Law School, holding for a year the chair of Berkman Professor of Law, affiliated with the Berkman Klein Center for Internet &amp; Society. He subsequently joined Stanford Law School, where he established the Stanford Center for Internet and Society.

Lessig returned to Harvard in July 2009 as professor and director of the Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics. In 2013, Lessig was appointed as the Roy L. Furman Professor of Law and Leadership at Harvard; his chair lecture was entitled &quot;Aaron&#x27;s Laws: Law and Justice in a Digital Age.&quot;

== Views ==
Lessig is a proponent of reduced legal restrictions on copyright, trademark, and radio frequency spectrum, particularly in technology applications. In 2001, he founded Creative Commons, a nonprofit organization devoted to expanding the range of creative works available for others to build upon and to share legally. Prior to his most recent appointment at Harvard, he was a professor of law at Stanford Law School, where he founded the Stanford Center for Internet and Society, and at the University of Chicago. He is a former board member of the Free Software Foundation and Software Freedom Law Center; the Washington, D.C. lobbying groups Public Knowledge and Free Press; and the Electronic Frontier Foundation. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2007.

As a political activist, Lessig has called for state-based activism to promote substantive reform of government with a Second Constitutional Convention. In May 2014, he launched a crowd-funded political action committee that he entitled, Mayday PAC, with the purpose of electing candidates to Congress who would pass campaign finance reform. Lessig is also the co-founder of Rootstrikers, and is on the boards of MapLight and Represent.Us. He serves on the advisory boards of the &quot;Democracy Café&quot; and the Sunlight Foundation.

In August 2015, Lessig announced that he was exploring a possible candidacy for president of the United States, promising to run if his exploratory committee raised $1 million by Labor Day. After accomplishing this, on September 6, 2015, Lessig announced that he was entering the race to become a candidate for the 2016 Democratic Party presidential nomination. Lessig described his candidacy as a referendum on campaign finance reform and electoral reform legislation. He stated that, if elected, he would serve a full term as president with his proposed reforms as his legislative priorities. He ended his campaign in November 2015, citing rule changes from the Democratic Party that precluded him from appearing in the televised debates.

== Political background ==
Lessig has emphasized in interviews that his study of philosophy at Cambridge radically changed his values and career path. Previously, he had held strong conservative or libertarian political views, desired a career in business, was a highly active member of Teenage Republicans, served as the 1978 youth governor for Pennsylvania through the YMCA Youth and Government program, and almost pursued a Republican political career.

Since studying philosophy at Cambridge in the mid-1980s, Lessig has been politically liberal. What was intended to be a year abroad at Cambridge convinced him instead to stay another two years to complete an undergraduate degree in philosophy and develop his changing political values. During this time, he also traveled in the Eastern Bloc, where he acquired a lifelong interest in Eastern European law and politics.

By the late 1980s, two influential conservative judges, Judge Richard Posner and Justice Antonin Scalia, selected him to serve as a law clerk, choosing him because they considered him brilliant, rather than for his ideology, and effectively making him the &quot;token liberal&quot; on their respective staffs. Later, Posner would call Lessig &quot;the most distinguished law professor of his generation.&quot;

Lessig remains skeptical of government intervention, but favors some regulation, calling himself &quot;a constitutionalist&quot;. On one occasion, Lessig also commended the John McCain campaign for discussing fair use rights in a letter to YouTube where it took issue with YouTube for indulging overreaching copyright claims that led to the removal of various campaign videos.

== Internet and computer activism ==
=== &quot;Code is law&quot; ===
In computer science, &quot;code&quot; typically refers to the text of a computer program (the source code). In law, &quot;code&quot; may refer to the texts that constitute statutory law. In his 1999 book entitled &quot;Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace&quot;, Lessig explores the ways in which code can be instruments for social control in both senses, leading to his dictum that &quot;Code is law&quot;. Lessig later updated his work in order to keep up with the prevailing views of the time and released the book as &quot;&quot; in December 2006.

=== Remix culture ===
Lessig has been a proponent of the remix culture since the early 2000s. In his 2008 book entitled, &quot;Remix&quot;, he presents this as a desirable cultural practice distinct from piracy. Lessig further articulates remix culture as intrinsic to technology and the Internet. Remix culture is therefore an amalgam of practice, creativity, &quot;read/write&quot; culture, and the hybrid economy.

According to Lessig, the problem with the remix comes when it is at odds with stringent U.S. copyright law. He has compared this to the failure of prohibition, both in its ineffectiveness and in its tendency to normalize criminal behavior. Instead he proposes more lenient licensing, namely Creative Commons licenses, as a remedy to maintain &quot;rule of law&quot; while combating plagiarism.

=== Free culture ===


On March 28, 2004 Lessig was elected to the FSF board of directors. He proposed the concept of &quot;free culture&quot;. He also supports free and open-source software and open spectrum. At his free culture keynote speech at the O&#x27;Reilly Open Source Convention 2002, a few minutes of his speech was about software patents, which he views as a rising threat to free software, open source software, and innovation.

In March 2006, Lessig joined the board of advisors of the Digital Universe project. A few months later, Lessig gave a talk on the ethics of the Free Culture Movement at the 2006 Wikimania conference. In December 2006, his lecture &quot;On Free, and the Differences between Culture and Code&quot; was one of the highlights at 23C3 &quot;Who can you trust?&quot;.

According to Comedy Central, Lessig claimed in 2009 that because 70 percent of young people obtain digital information from illegal sources, laws should be changed.

In a foreword to the Freesouls book project, Lessig makes an argument in favor of amateur artists in the world of digital technologies: &quot;there is a different class of amateur creators that digital technologies have ... enabled, and a different kind of creativity has emerged as a consequence&quot;.

Lessig is also a well-known critic of copyright term extensions.

=== Net neutrality ===

Lessig has long been known to be a supporter of net neutrality. In 2006, he testified before the U.S. Senate that he believed Congress should ratify Michael Powell&#x27;s four Internet freedoms and add a restriction to access-tiering, i.e., he does not believe content providers should be charged different amounts. The reason is that the Internet, under the neutral end-to-end design is an invaluable platform for innovation, and the economic benefit of innovation would be threatened if large corporations could purchase faster service to the detriment of newer companies with less capital. However, Lessig has supported the idea of allowing ISPs to give consumers the option of different tiers of service at different prices. He was reported on CBC News as saying that he has always been in favour of allowing internet providers to charge differently for consumer access at different speeds. He said, &quot;Now, no doubt, my position might be wrong. Some friends in the network neutrality movement as well as some scholars believe it is wrong—that it doesn&#x27;t go far enough. But the suggestion that the position is &#x27;recent&#x27; is baseless. If I&#x27;m wrong, I&#x27;ve always been wrong.&quot;

=== Legislative reform ===
Despite presenting an anti-regulatory standpoint in many fora, Lessig still sees the need for legislative enforcement of copyright. He has called for limiting copyright terms for creative professionals to five years, but believes that since many of them are independent, the work of creative professionals would become more easily and quickly available if a bureaucratic procedure were introduced to renew trademarks for up to 75 years after this five-year term.

Lessig has repeatedly taken a stance that privatization through legislation such as that seen in the 1980s in the UK with British Telecommunications is not the best way to help the Internet grow. He said, &quot;When government disappears, it&#x27;s not as if paradise will take its place. When governments are gone, other interests will take their place&quot;, &quot;My claim is that we should focus on the values of liberty. If there is not government to insist on those values, then who?&quot; &quot;The single unifying force should be that we govern ourselves.&quot;

=== Legal challenges ===
From 1999 to 2002, Lessig represented a high-profile challenge to the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act. Working with the Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Lessig led the team representing the plaintiff in &quot;Eldred v. Ashcroft&quot;. The plaintiff in the case was joined by a group of publishers who frequently published work in the public domain and a large number of &quot;amici&quot; including the Free Software Foundation, the American Association of Law Libraries, the Bureau of National Affairs, and the College Art Association.

In March 2003, Lessig acknowledged severe disappointment with his Supreme Court defeat in the Eldred copyright-extension case, where he unsuccessfully tried to convince Chief Justice William Rehnquist, who had sympathies for de-regulation, to back his &quot;market-based&quot; approach to intellectual property regulation.

In August 2013, Lawrence Lessig brought suit against Liberation Music PTY Ltd., after Liberation issued a takedown notice of one of Lessig&#x27;s lectures on YouTube that had used the song &quot;Lisztomania&quot; by the band Phoenix, whom Liberation Music represents. Lessig sought damages under section 512(f) of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, which holds parties liable for misrepresentations of infringement or removal of material. Lessig was represented by the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Jones Day. In February 2014, the case ended with a settlement in which Liberation Music admitted wrongdoing in issuing the takedown notice, issued an apology, and paid a confidential sum in compensation.

=== &quot;Killswitch&quot; ===

In October 2014, &quot;Killswitch&quot;, a film featuring Lawrence Lessig, as well as Aaron Swartz, Tim Wu, and Edward Snowden received its World Premiere at the Woodstock Film Festival, where it won the award for Best Editing. In the film, Lessig frames the story of two young hacktivists, Swartz and Snowden, who symbolize the disruptive and dynamic nature of the Internet. The film reveals the emotional bond between Lessig and Swartz, and how it was Swartz (the mentee) who challenged Lessig (the mentor) to engage in the political activism that has led to Lessig&#x27;s crusade for campaign finance reform.

In February 2015, &quot;Killswitch&quot; was invited to be screened at the Capitol Visitor&#x27;s Center in Washington, D.C., by Congressman Alan Grayson. The event was held on the eve of the Federal Communications Commission&#x27;s historic decision on Net Neutrality. Lessig, Congressman Grayson, and Free Press CEO Craig Aaron spoke about the importance of protecting net neutrality and the free and open Internet.

Congressman Grayson states that Killswitch is &quot;One of the most honest accounts of the battle to control the Internet -- and access to information itself.&quot; Richard von Busack of the Metro Silicon Valley, writes of &quot;Killswitch&quot;, &quot;Some of the most lapidary use of found footage this side of The Atomic Café&quot;. Fred Swegles of the Orange County Register, remarks, &quot;Anyone who values unfettered access to online information is apt to be captivated by &quot;Killswitch&quot;, a gripping and fast-paced documentary.&quot; Kathy Gill of GeekWire asserts that &quot;&quot;Killswitch&quot; is much more than a dry recitation of technical history. Director Ali Akbarzadeh, producer Jeff Horn, and writer Chris Dollar created a human centered story. A large part of that connection comes from Lessig and his relationship with Swartz.&quot;

=== The Electors Trust ===
In December 2016 Lawrence Lessig and Laurence Tribe established The Electors Trust under the aegis of EqualCitizens.US to provide pro bono legal counsel as well as a secure communications platform for those of the 538 members of the United States Electoral College regarding a vote of conscience against Donald Trump in the presidential election.

Lessig hosts the podcast &quot;Another Way&quot; in conjunction with The Young Turks Network.

=== Artificial intelligence ===
Lessig came out in favor of a &quot;right to warn&quot; proposed by former OpenAI employees that would protect their right to warn the public of the catastrophic risks of AI. Lessig also agreed to work pro bono in defense of the whistleblowers.

In August 2024, Lessig co-authored a letter alongside AI researchers Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, and Stuart Russell in favor of SB 1047, a California AI safety bill that would require companies training the most powerful models to perform risk assessments on their models before release. The letter argued that the bill would be a first step towards mitigating the severe risks posed by AI, and &quot;the bare minimum for effective regulation of this technology&quot;. Lessig said that Gavin Newsom, the Governor of California, would have the opportunity to &quot;cement California as a national first-mover in regulating AI.&quot;

== Money-in-politics activism ==

At the iCommons iSummit 07, Lessig announced that he would stop focusing his attention on copyright and related matters in order to work on political corruption instead, as the result of a transformative conversation with Aaron Swartz, a young internet prodigy whom Lessig met through his work with Creative Commons. This new work was partially facilitated through his wiki, Lessig Wiki, through which he has encouraged the public to document cases of corruption. Lessig criticized the revolving-door phenomenon in which legislators and staffers leave office to become lobbyists and after having become beholden to special interests.

In February 2008, a Facebook group formed by law professor John Palfrey encouraged Lessig to run for Congress from California&#x27;s 12th congressional district, the seat vacated by the death of Representative Tom Lantos. Later that month, after forming an &quot;exploratory project&quot;, he decided not to run for the vacant seat.

=== Rootstrikers ===

Despite having decided to forgo running for Congress, Lessig remained interested in attempting to change Congress to reduce corruption. To this end, he worked with political consultant Joe Trippi to launch a web based project called &quot;Change Congress&quot;. In a press conference on March 20, 2008, Lessig explained that he hoped the Change Congress website would help provide technological tools voters could use to hold their representatives accountable and reduce the influence of money on politics. He is a board member of MAPLight.org, a nonprofit research group illuminating the connection between money and politics.

Change Congress later became &quot;Fix Congress First&quot;, and was finally named Rootstrikers. In November 2011, Lessig announced that Rootstrikers would join forces with Dylan Ratigan&#x27;s &quot;Get Money Out&quot; campaign, under the umbrella of the United Republic organization. Rootstrikers subsequently came under the aegis of Demand Progress, an organization co-founded by Aaron Swartz.

=== Article V convention ===

In 2010, Lessig began to organize for a national Article V convention. He co-founded &quot;Fix Congress First!&quot; with Joe Trippi. In a speech in 2011, Lessig revealed that he was disappointed with Obama&#x27;s performance in office, criticizing it as a &quot;betrayal&quot;, and he criticized the president for using &quot;the (Hillary) Clinton playbook&quot;. Lessig has called for state governments to call for a national Article V convention, including by supporting Wolf-PAC, a national organization attempting to call an Article V convention to address the problem. The convention Lessig supports would be populated by a &quot;random proportional selection of citizens&quot; which he suggested would work effectively. He said &quot;politics is a rare sport where the amateur is better than the professional.&quot; He promoted this idea at a September 24–25, 2011, conference he co-chaired with the Tea Party Patriots&#x27; national coordinator, in Lessig&#x27;s October 5, 2011, book, &quot;Republic, Lost: How Money Corrupts Congress—and a Plan to Stop It,&quot; and at the Occupy protest in Washington, D.C. Reporter Dan Froomkin said the book offers a manifesto for the Occupy Wall Street protestors, focusing on the core problem of corruption in both political parties and their elections. An Article V convention does not dictate a solution, but Lessig would support a constitutional amendment that would allow legislatures to limit political contributions from non-citizens, including corporations, anonymous organizations, and foreign nationals and he also supports public campaign financing and electoral college reform to establish the one person, one vote principle.

=== New Hampshire Rebellion ===
The New Hampshire Rebellion is a walk to raise awareness about corruption in politics. The event began in 2014 with a 185-mile march in New Hampshire. In its second year the walk expanded to include other locations in New Hampshire.

From January 11 to January 24, 2014, Lessig and many others, such as New York activist Jeff Kurzon, marched from Dixville Notch, New Hampshire to Nashua (a 185-mile march) to promote the idea of tackling &quot;the systemic corruption in Washington&quot;. Lessig chose this language over the related term &quot;campaign finance reform&quot;, commenting that &quot;Saying we need campaign finance reform is like referring to an alcoholic as someone who has a liquid intake problem.&quot; The walk was to continue the work of New Hampshire native Doris &quot;Granny D&quot; Haddock, and in honor of deceased activist Aaron Swartz. The New Hampshire Rebellion marched 16 miles from Hampton to New Castle on the New Hampshire Seacoast. The initial location also was chosen because of its important and visible role in the quadrennial &quot;New Hampshire primaries&quot;, the traditional first primary of the presidential election.

== 2016 presidential candidacy ==

Lessig announced the launch of his long shot presidential campaign on September 6, 2015.
On August 11, 2015, Lessig announced that he had launched an exploratory campaign for the purpose of exploring his prospects of winning the Democratic Party nomination for president of the United States in the 2016 election. Lessig pledged to seek the nomination if he raised one million dollars by Labor Day 2015. The announcement was widely reported in national media outlets, and was timed to coincide with a media blitz by the Lessig 2016 Campaign. Lessig was interviewed in &quot;The New York Times&quot; and Bloomberg. Campaign messages and Lessig&#x27;s electoral finance reform positions were circulated widely on social media. His campaign was focused on a single issue: The Citizen Equality Act, a proposal that couples campaign finance reform with other laws aimed at curbing gerrymandering and ensuring voting access. As an expression of his commitment to the proposal, Lessig initially promised to resign once the Citizen Equality Act became law and turn the presidency over to his vice president, who would then serve out the remainder of the term as a typical American president and act on a variety of issues. In October 2015, Lessig abandoned his automatic resignation plan and adopted a full policy platform for the presidency, although he did retain the passage of the Citizen Equality Act as his primary legislative objective.

Lessig made a single campaign stop in Iowa, with an eye toward the first-in-the-nation precinct caucuses: at Dordt College, in Sioux Center, in late October. He announced the end of his campaign on November 2, 2015.

== Electoral College reform ==
In 2017, Lessig announced a movement to challenge the winner-take-all Electoral College vote allocation in the various states, called &quot;Equal Votes&quot;. Lessig was also a counsel for electors in the Supreme Court case &quot;Chiafalo v. Washington&quot; where the court decided states could force electors to follow the popular vote for their state.

== Amendment Fourteen, section three ==
In 2023, Lessig wrote an editorial in &quot;Slate&quot; suggesting that the electoral college should be the body that decides whether Donald Trump engaged in insurrection under the U.S. Constitution. He explained that it was better &quot;that the college called into being for the sole purpose of selecting a president decide the matter than for sitting politicians or state officials.&quot;

== Awards and honors ==
In 2002, Lessig received the Award for the Advancement of Free Software from the Free Software Foundation (FSF). He also received the Scientific American 50 Award for having &quot;argued against interpretations of copyright that could stifle innovation and discourse online.&quot; In 2006, Lessig was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

In 2011, Lessig was named to the Fastcase 50, &quot;honoring the law&#x27;s smartest, most courageous innovators, techies, visionaries, and leaders.&quot; Lessig was awarded honorary doctorates by the Faculty of Social Sciences at Lund University, Sweden in 2013 and by the Université catholique de Louvain in 2014. Lessig received the 2014 Webby Lifetime Achievement award for co-founding Creative Commons and defending net neutrality and the free and open software movement.

== Personal life ==
In May 2005, it was revealed that Lessig had experienced sexual abuse by the director at the American Boychoir School, which he had attended as an adolescent. Lessig reached a settlement with the school in the past, under confidential terms. He revealed his experiences in the course of representing another student victim, John Hardwicke, in court. In August 2006, he succeeded in persuading the New Jersey Supreme Court to radically restrict the scope of immunity, which had protected nonprofits that failed to prevent sexual abuse from legal liability.

Lessig is married to Bettina Neuefeind, a German-born Harvard University colleague. The two married in 1999. He and Neuefeind have three children: Willem, Coffy, and Tess.

=== Defamation lawsuit against &quot;The New York Times&quot; ===
In 2019, during the criminal investigation of Jeffrey Epstein, it was discovered that the MIT Media Lab, under former director Joichi Ito, had accepted secret donations from Epstein after Epstein had been convicted on criminal charges. Ito eventually resigned as director of the MIT Media Lab following this discovery. After making supportive comments to Ito, Lessig wrote a Medium post in September 2019 to explain his stance. In his post, Lessig acknowledged that universities should not take donations from convicted criminals such as Epstein who had become wealthy through actions unrelated to their criminal convictions; however, if such donations were to be accepted, it was better to take them secretly rather than publicly connect the university to the criminal. Lessig&#x27;s essay drew criticism, and about a week later, Nellie Bowles of &quot;The New York Times&quot; had an interview with Lessig in which he reiterated his stance related to such donations broadly. The article used the headline &quot;A Harvard Professor Doubles Down: If You Take Epstein’s Money, Do It in Secret&quot;, which Lessig confirmed was based on a statement he had made to the &quot;Times&quot;. Lessig took issue with the headline overlooking his argument that MIT should not accept such donations in the first place and also criticized the first two lines of the article which read &quot;It is hard to defend soliciting donations from the convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. But Lawrence Lessig, a Harvard Law professor, has been trying.&quot; He subsequently accused the &quot;Times&quot; of writing clickbait with the headline crafted to defame him, and stated that the circulation of the article on social media had hurt his reputation.

In January 2020, Lessig filed a defamation lawsuit against the &quot;Times&quot;, including writer Bowles, business editor Ellen Pollock, and executive editor Dean Baquet. The &quot;Times&quot; stated they would &quot;vigorously&quot; defend against Lessig&#x27;s claim, and believed that what they had published was accurate and had been reviewed by senior editors following Lessig&#x27;s initial complaints.

In April 2020, &quot;The New York Times&quot; changed its original headline to read: &quot;What Are the Ethics of Taking Tainted Funds? A conversation with Lawrence Lessig about Jeffrey Epstein, M.I.T. and reputation laundering.&quot; Lessig reported he subsequently withdrew his defamation lawsuit.

== Notable cases ==
* &quot;Golan v. Gonzales&quot; (representing multiple plaintiffs)
* &quot;Eldred v. Ashcroft&quot; (representing plaintiff Eric Eldred) Lost
* &quot;Kahle v. Gonzales&quot; (also see Brewster Kahle) Dismissed
* &quot;United States v. Microsoft&quot; (special master and author of an amicus brief addressing the Sherman Act)
** Lessig was appointed special master by Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson in 1997; the appointment was vacated by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit; the appellate court ruled that the powers granted to Lessig exceeded the scope of the Federal statute providing for special masters; Judge Jackson then solicited Lessig&#x27;s amicus brief
** Lessig said about this appointment: &quot;Did Justice Jackson pick me to be his special master because he had determined I was the perfect mix of Holmes, and Ed Felten? No, I was picked because I was a Harvard Law Professor teaching the law of cyberspace. Remember: So is &#x27;fame&#x27; made.&quot;
* &quot;MPAA v. 2600&quot; (submitted an amicus brief with Yochai Benkler in support of 2600)
* &quot;McCutcheon v. FEC&quot; (submitted an amicus brief in support of FEC)
* &quot;Chiafalo v. Washington&quot; (representing Chiafalo)

== Bibliography ==

* &quot;Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace&quot; (Basic Books, 1999) 
* &quot;The Future of Ideas&quot; (Vintage Books, 2001) 
* &quot;Free Culture&quot; (Penguin, 2004) 
* &quot;&quot; (Basic Books, 2006) 
* &quot;Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy&quot; (Penguin, 2008) 
* &quot;Republic, Lost: How Money Corrupts Congress—and a Plan to Stop It&quot; (Twelve, 2011) 
* &quot;One Way Forward: The Outsider&#x27;s Guide to Fixing the Republic&quot; (Kindle Single/Amazon, 2012)
* &quot;Lesterland: The Corruption of Congress and How to End It&quot; (2013, CC BY-NC) 
* &quot;Republic, Lost: The Corruption of Equality and the Steps to End It&quot; (Twelve, rev. ed., 2015) 
* &quot;America, Compromised&quot; (University of Chicago Press, 2018) 
* &quot;Fidelity &amp; Constraint: How the Supreme Court Has Read the American Constitution&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2019) 
* &quot;They Don&#x27;t Represent Us: Reclaiming Our Democracy&quot; (Dey Street/William Morrow, 2019) 
* &quot;How to Steal a Presidential Election&quot; (Yale University Press, 2024) 

== Filmography ==
* &quot;RiP!: A Remix Manifesto&quot;, a 2008 documentary film
*&quot;The Internet&#x27;s Own Boy: The Story of Aaron Swartz&quot;, 2014 documentary film
* &quot;Killswitch&quot;, 2015 documentary film
* &quot;The Swamp&quot;, 2020 documentary film
* &quot;Meeting Snowden&quot;, a 2017 documentary film where Lessig goes to Moscow to meet Edward Snowden
* &quot;Kim Dotcom: The Most Wanted Man Online&quot;, 2021 documentary film
* Additionally, Lessig himself was portrayed by Christopher Lloyd in season 6 of political drama &quot;The West Wing&quot; in the episode &quot;The Wake Up Call.&quot;

== See also ==
* List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 9)
* Copyleft
* Free software movement
* Free content
* FreeCulture.org
* Open educational resources
* Gratis versus libre
* Open content
* Law of the Horse
* Lobbying in the United States
* Second Constitutional Convention of the United States proposal for constitutional reform

== References ==
== External links ==

* (includes Curriculum Vitae and Lessig blog 2002–2009)
* Lessig Blog, beyond 2009
* (Presidential Campaign site)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217790" start="0" end="15" title="Lawrence Lessig" label="Lester Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217790" start="22" end="27" title="Lawrence Lessig" label="Larry"/>
<link wikidata="Q217790" start="34" end="44" title="Lawrence Lessig" label="Lessig III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="98" end="116" title="political activist" label="political activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="162" end="180" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971924" start="212" end="245" title="Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics" label="Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="249" end="267" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="290" end="306" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741342" start="314" end="328" title="Equal Citizens" label="Equal Citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20926395" start="343" end="352" title="Lawrence Lessig presidential campaign, 2016" label="candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="361" end="377" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="400" end="430" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="438" end="469" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="565" end="589" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016159" start="860" end="886" title="Williamsport, Pennsylvania" label="Williamsport, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="910" end="936" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="966" end="968" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="972" end="981" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="988" end="990" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1022" end="1032" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="1036" end="1062" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297864" start="1077" end="1079" title="Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin)" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="1182" end="1214" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="1238" end="1253" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="1284" end="1286" title="Juris Doctor" label="JD"/>
<link wikidata="Q883231" start="1343" end="1352" title="law clerk" label="law clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q533583" start="1357" end="1371" title="Richard Posner" label="Richard Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q250451" start="1379" end="1424" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="1465" end="1479" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="1487" end="1505" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="1568" end="1600" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="1759" end="1778" title="Georgia (country)" label="Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="1830" end="1848" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801605" start="1928" end="1975" title="Berkman Klein Center for Internet &amp;amp; Society" label="Berkman Klein Center for Internet &amp;amp; Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="2000" end="2019" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801612" start="2046" end="2086" title="Stanford Center for Internet and Society" label="Stanford Center for Internet and Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="2456" end="2465" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="2467" end="2476" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="2482" end="2497" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="2569" end="2585" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="2796" end="2815" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2891" end="2912" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="2949" end="2973" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394821" start="2978" end="3005" title="Software Freedom Law Center" label="Software Freedom Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072969" start="3044" end="3060" title="Public Knowledge" label="Public Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499957" start="3065" end="3075" title="Free Press (advocacy group)" label="Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="3085" end="3115" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3139" end="3169" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443223" start="3299" end="3331" title="Second Constitutional Convention of the United States" label="Second Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="3373" end="3399" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089747" start="3418" end="3428" title="Mayday PAC" label="Mayday PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="3473" end="3481" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="3497" end="3520" title="Campaign finance reform in the United States" label="campaign finance reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366676" start="3555" end="3567" title="Rootstrikers" label="Rootstrikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753725" start="3593" end="3601" title="MapLight" label="MapLight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018394" start="3606" end="3618" title="Represent.Us" label="Represent.Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640493" start="3695" end="3714" title="Sunlight Foundation" label="Sunlight Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="3896" end="3905" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q20926395" start="4002" end="4023" title="Lawrence Lessig presidential campaign, 2016" label="to become a candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4037" end="4053" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007300" start="4054" end="4077" title="Democratic Party presidential candidates, 2016" label="presidential nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="4129" end="4152" title="Campaign finance reform in the United States" label="campaign finance reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="4157" end="4173" title="electoral reform" label="electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4554" end="4563" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="4657" end="4668" title="libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098040" start="4746" end="4765" title="Teenage Republicans" label="Teenage Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053937" start="4830" end="4855" title="YMCA Youth and Government" label="YMCA Youth and Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4886" end="4896" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="5001" end="5008" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="5244" end="5256" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="5299" end="5313" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="5370" end="5382" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q533583" start="5397" end="5411" title="Richard Posner" label="Richard Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="5424" end="5438" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q883231" start="5467" end="5476" title="law clerk" label="law clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="5919" end="5930" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131562" start="5955" end="5963" title="fair use" label="fair use"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="5986" end="5993" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="6196" end="6212" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="6287" end="6298" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="6365" end="6378" title="statutory law" label="statutory law"/>
<link wikidata="Q356761" start="6412" end="6445" title="Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace" label="Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="6515" end="6529" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298098" start="6800" end="6813" title="remix culture" label="remix culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311931" start="6864" end="6881" title="Remix (book)" label="&amp;quot;Remix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="7308" end="7319" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="7452" end="7476" title="Creative Commons license" label="Creative Commons license"/>
<link wikidata="Q898144" start="7680" end="7692" title="Free-culture movement" label="free culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="7717" end="7746" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883433" start="7751" end="7764" title="open spectrum" label="open spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q660739" start="7808" end="7844" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Open Source Convention" label="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Open Source Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q913351" start="7889" end="7904" title="software patent" label="software patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="7944" end="7957" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="7959" end="7979" title="open source software" label="open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253341" start="8056" end="8072" title="Digital Universe" label="Digital Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q483279" start="8176" end="8185" title="Wikimania" label="Wikimania"/>
<link wikidata="Q516804" start="8323" end="8358" title="Chaos Communication Congress" label="23C3 &amp;quot;Who can you trust?&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501161" start="8548" end="8557" title="Freesouls" label="Freesouls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169289" start="8870" end="8884" title="copyright term" label="copyright term"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="8970" end="8984" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562548" start="9071" end="9085" title="Michael Powell (attorney)" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131621" start="11288" end="11327" title="Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act" label="Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801605" start="11346" end="11385" title="Berkman Center for Internet and Society" label="Berkman Center for Internet and Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q713593" start="11443" end="11461" title="Eldred v. Ashcroft" label="Eldred v. Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000688" start="11568" end="11581" title="Public domain in the United States" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="11610" end="11615" title="Amicus curiae" label="amici"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="11636" end="11660" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743067" start="11666" end="11703" title="American Association of Law Libraries" label="American Association of Law Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998403" start="11709" end="11735" title="Bureau of National Affairs" label="Bureau of National Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146323" start="11745" end="11768" title="College Art Association" label="College Art Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647316" start="12290" end="12301" title="Lisztomania (song)" label="Lisztomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045752" start="12320" end="12327" title="Phoenix (band)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q753379" start="12413" end="12445" title="Digital Millennium Copyright Act" label="Digital Millennium Copyright Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="12567" end="12597" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275191" start="12602" end="12611" title="Jones Day" label="Jones Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q302817" start="12925" end="12937" title="Aaron Swartz" label="Aaron Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804525" start="12939" end="12945" title="Tim Wu" label="Tim Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="12951" end="12965" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033430" start="13001" end="13024" title="Woodstock Film Festival" label="Woodstock Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="13426" end="13449" title="Campaign finance reform in the United States" label="campaign finance reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281084" start="13593" end="13605" title="Alan Grayson" label="Alan Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="13706" end="13720" title="Net Neutrality" label="Net Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499957" start="13755" end="13765" title="Free Press (advocacy group)" label="Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824706" start="14036" end="14054" title="Richard von Busack" label="Richard von Busack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824706" start="14062" end="14082" title="Metro Silicon Valley" label="Metro Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413231" start="14227" end="14249" title="Orange County Register" label="Orange County Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827845" start="14434" end="14442" title="GeekWire" label="GeekWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994314" start="14798" end="14812" title="Laurence Tribe" label="Laurence Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28059670" start="14825" end="14843" title="The Electors Trust" label="The Electors Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741342" start="14863" end="14879" title="Equal Citizens" label="EqualCitizens.US"/>
<link wikidata="Q127537" start="14891" end="14899" title="pro bono" label="pro bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661188" start="14975" end="14986" title="List of United States presidential electors, 2016" label="538 members"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="14994" end="15025" title="United States Electoral College" label="United States Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q795980" start="15038" end="15056" title="faithless elector" label="vote of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="15065" end="15077" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="15085" end="15106" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655" start="15178" end="15193" title="The Young Turks" label="The Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21708200" start="15311" end="15317" title="OpenAI" label="OpenAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q21715237" start="15385" end="15409" title="Existential risk from artificial general intelligence" label="catastrophic risks of AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572699" start="15551" end="15564" title="Yoshua Bengio" label="Yoshua Bengio"/>
<link wikidata="Q92894" start="15566" end="15581" title="Geoffrey Hinton" label="Geoffrey Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656334" start="15587" end="15601" title="Stuart J. Russell" label="Stuart Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127393140" start="15614" end="15621" title="Safe and Secure Innovation for Frontier Artificial Intelligence Models Act" label="SB 1047"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="15972" end="15984" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="16293" end="16313" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q302817" start="16375" end="16387" title="Aaron Swartz" label="Aaron Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="16452" end="16468" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="16522" end="16526" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256740" start="16639" end="16653" title="Revolving door (politics)" label="revolving-door"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="16722" end="16731" title="Lobbying in the United States" label="lobbyists"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="16808" end="16816" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251797" start="16847" end="16859" title="John Palfrey" label="John Palfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002264" start="16903" end="16948" title="California&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district" label="California&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q160717" start="16998" end="17008" title="Tom Lantos" label="Tom Lantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565655" start="17329" end="17339" title="Joe Trippi" label="Joe Trippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071792" start="17383" end="17398" title="Change Congress" label="Change Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753725" start="17675" end="17687" title="MAPLight.org" label="MAPLight.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071792" start="17773" end="17788" title="Change Congress" label="Change Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366676" start="17856" end="17868" title="Rootstrikers" label="Rootstrikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268776" start="17946" end="17959" title="Dylan Ratigan" label="Dylan Ratigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815199" start="18109" end="18124" title="Demand Progress" label="Demand Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565655" start="18323" end="18333" title="Joe Trippi" label="Joe Trippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029780" start="18675" end="18683" title="Wolf-PAC" label="Wolf-PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691084" start="19108" end="19126" title="Tea Party Patriots" label="Tea Party Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314374" start="19201" end="19215" title="Republic, Lost" label="Republic, Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213526" start="19329" end="19341" title="Dan Froomkin" label="Dan Froomkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180654" start="19383" end="19401" title="Occupy Wall Street" label="Occupy Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352232" start="19783" end="19808" title="public financing of campaigns" label="public campaign financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="19813" end="19830" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="19855" end="19875" title="one person, one vote" label="one person, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q43078905" start="19924" end="19947" title="Coalition for Open Democracy" label="New Hampshire Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097570" start="20241" end="20252" title="Jeff Kurzon" label="Jeff Kurzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q530485" start="20267" end="20296" title="Dixville Notch, New Hampshire" label="Dixville Notch, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328726" start="20698" end="20732" title="Doris Haddock" label="Doris &amp;quot;Granny D&amp;quot; Haddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q302817" start="20768" end="20780" title="Aaron Swartz" label="Aaron Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="21345" end="21361" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004294" start="21362" end="21372" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2016" label="nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="21377" end="21407" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="21415" end="21428" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="21504" end="21513" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21690" end="21708" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="21719" end="21728" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053722" start="21885" end="21909" title="The Citizen Equality Act" label="The Citizen Equality Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="21935" end="21958" title="Campaign finance reform in the United States" label="campaign finance reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838875" start="21992" end="22006" title="Gerrymandering in the United States" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101979" start="22020" end="22033" title="Voter suppression in the United States" label="voting access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="22855" end="22870" title="Plurality voting system" label="winner-take-all"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="22871" end="22888" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22941" end="22952" title="Equal Citizens#Equal Votes" label="Equal Votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751865" start="23031" end="23053" title="Chiafalo v. Washington" label="Chiafalo v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="23241" end="23246" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="23331" end="23343" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389573" start="23643" end="23685" title="Award for the Advancement of Free Software" label="Award for the Advancement of Free Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="23695" end="23719" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="23748" end="23776" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American 50 Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="23930" end="23967" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24003" end="24014" title="Fastcase#Fastcase 50" label="Fastcase 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="24201" end="24216" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q378134" start="24244" end="24276" title="Université catholique de Louvain" label="Université catholique de Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007176" start="24306" end="24337" title="2014 Webby Awards" label="2014 Webby Lifetime Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="24414" end="24436" title="free and open software" label="free and open software"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="24525" end="24537" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743245" start="24561" end="24585" title="American Boychoir School" label="American Boychoir School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001120" start="24865" end="24889" title="New Jersey Supreme Court" label="New Jersey Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904131" start="25310" end="25325" title="Jeffrey Epstein" label="Jeffrey Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="25354" end="25367" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q934616" start="25391" end="25401" title="Joichi Ito" label="Joichi Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="25543" end="25556" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT Media Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186120" start="25639" end="25645" title="Medium (website)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050853" start="26095" end="26108" title="Nellie Bowles" label="Nellie Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26118" end="26136" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17649781" start="26860" end="26869" title="clickbait" label="clickbait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578397" start="27740" end="27757" title="Golan v. Gonzales" label="Golan v. Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q713593" start="27807" end="27825" title="Eldred v. Ashcroft" label="Eldred v. Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386427" start="27856" end="27867" title="Eric Eldred" label="Eric Eldred"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347008" start="27882" end="27899" title="Kahle v. Gonzales" label="Kahle v. Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q92945" start="27916" end="27930" title="Brewster Kahle" label="Brewster Kahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="27950" end="27976" title="United States v. Microsoft" label="United States v. Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574832" start="28081" end="28095" title="special master" label="special master"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160118" start="28105" end="28128" title="Thomas Penfield Jackson" label="Thomas Penfield Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="28173" end="28240" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="28418" end="28430" title="amicus brief" label="amicus brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q360574" start="28580" end="28586" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr." label="Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q92932" start="28592" end="28601" title="Ed Felten" label="Ed Felten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179498" start="28743" end="28755" title="DeCSS" label="MPAA v. 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q982240" start="28794" end="28808" title="Yochai Benkler" label="Yochai Benkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932920" start="28837" end="28854" title="McCutcheon v. FEC" label="McCutcheon v. FEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751865" start="28915" end="28937" title="Chiafalo v. Washington" label="Chiafalo v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q356761" start="28997" end="29030" title="Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace" label="Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q460257" start="29066" end="29085" title="The Future of Ideas" label="The Future of Ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q830526" start="29123" end="29135" title="Free Culture (book)" label="Free Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311931" start="29203" end="29262" title="Remix (book)" label="Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314374" start="29294" end="29308" title="Republic, Lost" label="Republic, Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093348" start="29390" end="29455" title="One Way Forward" label="One Way Forward: The Outsider&amp;#x27;s Guide to Fixing the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071627" start="29569" end="29577" title="CC BY-NC" label="CC BY-NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314374" start="29588" end="29602" title="Republic, Lost" label="Republic, Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q127163434" start="30002" end="30038" title="How to Steal a Presidential Election" label="How to Steal a Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30103" end="30126" title="RiP!: A Remix Manifesto" label="RiP!: A Remix Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997214" start="30165" end="30219" title="The Internet&amp;#x27;s Own Boy" label="The Internet&amp;#x27;s Own Boy: The Story of Aaron Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321648" start="30257" end="30267" title="Killswitch (film)" label="Killswitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846899" start="30305" end="30314" title="The Swamp (documentary)" label="The Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30352" end="30367" title="Meeting Snowden" label="Meeting Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="30420" end="30426" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="30435" end="30449" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30458" end="30496" title="Kim Dotcom: The Most Wanted Man Online (documentary)" label="Kim Dotcom: The Most Wanted Man Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="30574" end="30591" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577037" start="30629" end="30642" title="The West Wing (TV series)" label="The West Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625078" start="30712" end="30781" title="List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 9)" label="List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q133475" start="30784" end="30792" title="Copyleft" label="Copyleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076638" start="30795" end="30817" title="Free software movement" label="Free software movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14075" start="30820" end="30832" title="Free content" label="Free content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752868" start="30835" end="30850" title="FreeCulture.org" label="FreeCulture.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q116781" start="30853" end="30879" title="Open educational resources" label="Open educational resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415025" start="30882" end="30901" title="Gratis versus libre" label="Gratis versus libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14075" start="30904" end="30916" title="Open content" label="Open content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092813" start="30919" end="30935" title="Law of the Horse" label="Law of the Horse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30938" end="30967" title="Lobbying in the United States#Methodological problems" label="Lobbying in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443223" start="30970" end="31023" title="Second Constitutional Convention of the United States" label="Second Constitutional Convention of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
