<doc id="52686" wikidata="Q46261" url="?curid=52686" title="Romanesque architecture">
<text>Romanesque architecture is an architectural style of medieval Europe that was predominant in the 11th and 12th centuries. The style eventually developed into the Gothic style with the shape of the arches providing a simple distinction: the Romanesque is characterized by semicircular arches, while the Gothic is marked by the pointed arches. The Romanesque emerged nearly simultaneously in multiple countries (France, Germany, Italy, Spain); its examples can be found across the continent, making it the first pan-European architectural style since Imperial Roman architecture. Similarly to Gothic, the name of the style was transferred onto the contemporary Romanesque art.

Combining features of ancient Roman and Byzantine buildings and other local traditions, Romanesque architecture is known by its massive quality, thick walls, round arches, sturdy pillars, barrel vaults, large towers and decorative arcading. Each building has clearly defined forms, frequently of very regular, symmetrical plan. The overall appearance is one of simplicity when compared with the Gothic buildings that were to follow. The style can be identified right across Europe, despite regional characteristics and different materials.

Many castles were built during this period, but they are greatly outnumbered by churches. The most significant are the great abbey churches, many of which are still standing, more or less complete and frequently in use. The enormous quantity of churches built in the Romanesque period was succeeded by the still busier period of Gothic architecture, which partly or entirely rebuilt most Romanesque churches in prosperous areas like England and Portugal. The largest groups of Romanesque survivors are in areas that were less prosperous in subsequent periods, including parts of southern France, rural Spain and rural Italy. Survivals of unfortified Romanesque secular houses and palaces, and the domestic quarters of monasteries are far rarer, but these used and adapted the features found in church buildings, on a domestic scale.
==Definition==
The French term &quot;&quot; or the English &quot;Romanesque&quot;, meaning &quot;in the manner of Romans&quot;, has been used to describe the architectural style of the Mediaeval era, preceding the more easily recognizable Gothic architecture, since early in the 19th century. It describes the architectural style which flourished across Europe from the 11th to the 13th century, and is distinguished from the Gothic style that followed by semi-circular arches and more massive forms. The development of vaults from barrel and groin vaults to ribbed vaults was the main structural innovation of this period. 

==Use of the term &quot;Romanesque&quot;==

The distinction between the style of architecture now known as Romanesque, and the succeeding style of Gothic architecture was recognised as early as the 15th century, as demonstrated by some artworks of that period. Robert Campin clearly presented the division in his &quot;Marriage of the Virgin&quot;; on the left side, representing the Old Testament, the building is in the Romanesque style, while that on the right, representing the New Testament, is Gothic. Until the 19th century, however, the style preceding Gothic was not recognized as a whole, and was instead, just like Gothic at the time, treated as a multitude of styles: Giorgio Vasari and Christopher Wren were writing about &quot;Tuscan&quot;, &quot;Saxon&quot;, or &quot;Norman&quot; architectures.

The word &quot;Romanesque&quot; (&quot;in the manner of Romans&quot;) appeared in English by 1666, and was used to designate what are now called Romance languages. Definition of &quot;Romanesque architecture&quot; changed over time; the development of the modern English meaning of the word involved primarily two steps: 
* in 1813 William Gunn used the term to broadly describe the pre-Gothic architecture of the Western Europe, all the way from the 4th century to the 12th. Gunn&#x27;s work, &quot;An Inquiry into the Origin and Influence of Gothic Architecture&quot; (London 1819), was published later, in 1819. The word was used by Gunn to describe the style that was identifiably medieval and prefigured the Gothic, yet maintained the rounded Roman arch and thus appeared to be a continuation of the Roman tradition of building;
* over the course of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century the definition narrowed to a shorter period, typically from 11th (or late 10th) to 12th century. In the process, scholars (with notable contributions by Robert de Lasteyrie and Henri Focillon) changed the original definition of Romanesque as a sub-Roman or Roman-like architecture to a stylistic label describing the arrangements of mass and space that found acceptance at the turn of the 11th century. The new definition also marks the watershed between the tribal/dynastic treatment of architectural styles (Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Merovingian, Carolingian, etc.) and a feature-based one (Gothic, Renaissance, Mannerist, Baroque).

The French term &quot;&quot; was first used in the architectural sense by archaeologist Charles de Gerville in a letter of 18 December 1818 to Auguste Le Prévost to describe what Gerville sees as a &quot;debased Roman architecture&quot;. In an 1823 public lecture (published in 1824) Gerville&#x27;s friend Arcisse de Caumont adopted the label &quot;&quot; to describe the &quot;degraded&quot; European architecture from the 5th to the 13th centuries, in his &quot;Essai sur l&#x27;architecture religieuse du moyen-âge, particulièrement en Normandie&quot;, at a time when the actual dates of many of the buildings so described had not been ascertained:
The term &quot;Pre-romanesque&quot; is sometimes applied to architecture in Germany of the Carolingian and Ottonian periods and Visigothic, Mozarab and Asturian constructions between the 8th and the 10th centuries in the Iberian Peninsula while &quot;First Romanesque&quot; is applied to buildings in north of Italy and Spain and parts of France that have Romanesque features but pre-date the influence of the Abbey of Cluny. The Romanesque style in England and Sicily is still referred to as Norman architecture. A &quot;dazzling&quot; style developed in Pisa in the mid-11th century is called &quot;Pisan Romanesque&quot;.

Eric Fernie writes that by the beginning of the 21st century there is &quot;something like agreement&quot; on the characteristics of the Romanesque style. Some researchers argue that due to an &quot;astonishing diversity&quot; of the Romanesque buildings, a unanimous definition is impossible: &quot;[n]o single model, no single rule, ever seems adequate to prevail&quot;, and the Romanesque should be treated as a &quot;collection of trends&quot;. Despite disagreement, the term became a &quot;common currency&quot;, and is universally accepted at least for convenience.

==Scope==

Buildings of every type were constructed in the Romanesque style, with evidence remaining of simple domestic buildings, elegant town houses, grand palaces, commercial premises, civic buildings, castles, city walls, bridges, village churches, abbey churches, abbey complexes and large cathedrals. Of these types of buildings, domestic and commercial buildings are the most rare, with only a handful of survivors in the United Kingdom, several clusters in France, isolated buildings across Europe and by far the largest number, often unidentified and altered over the centuries, in Italy. Many castles exist, the foundations of which date from the Romanesque period. Most have been substantially altered, and many are in ruins.

By far the greatest number of surviving Romanesque buildings are churches. These range from tiny chapels to large cathedrals. Although many have been extended and altered in different styles, a large number remain either substantially intact or sympathetically restored, demonstrating the form, character and decoration of Romanesque church architecture.

==History==
===Origins===
Romanesque architecture was the first distinctive style to spread across Europe since the Roman Empire. With the decline of Rome, Roman building methods survived to an extent in Western Europe, where successive Merovingian, Carolingian and Ottonian architects continued to build large stone buildings such as monastery churches and palaces. In the more northern countries, Roman building styles and techniques had never been adopted except for official buildings, while in Scandinavia they were unknown. Although the round arch continued in use, the engineering skills required to vault large spaces and build large domes were lost. There was a loss of stylistic continuity, particularly apparent in the decline of the formal vocabulary of the Classical Orders. In Rome several great Constantinian basilicas continued in use as an inspiration to later builders. Some traditions of Roman architecture also survived in Byzantine architecture with the 6th-century octagonal Byzantine Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna being the inspiration for the greatest building of the Early Middle Ages in Europe, the Emperor Charlemagne&#x27;s Palatine Chapel, Aachen, Germany, built around the year AD 800.

Dating shortly after the Palatine Chapel is a remarkable 9th-century Swiss manuscript known as the Plan of Saint Gall and showing a very detailed plan of a monastic complex, with all its various monastic buildings and their functions labelled. The largest building is the church, the plan of which is distinctly Germanic, having an apse at both ends, an arrangement not generally seen elsewhere. Another feature of the church is its regular proportion, the square plan of the crossing tower providing a module for the rest of the plan. These features can both be seen at the Proto-Romanesque St. Michael&#x27;s Church, Hildesheim, 1001–1030.

Architecture of a Romanesque style also developed simultaneously in the north of Italy, parts of France and in the Iberian Peninsula in the 10th century and prior to the later influence of the Abbey of Cluny. The style, sometimes called First Romanesque or Lombard Romanesque, is characterised by thick walls, lack of sculpture and the presence of rhythmic ornamental arches known as a Lombard band.


===Politics===
Charlemagne was crowned by Pope Leo III in Old St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica on Christmas Day of 800, with an aim to re-establishing the old Roman Empire. Charlemagne&#x27;s political successors continued to rule much of Europe, with a gradual emergence of the separate political states that were eventually to become welded into nations, either by allegiance or defeat, into the Kingdom of Germany giving rise to the Holy Roman Empire. The invasion of England by William, Duke of Normandy, in 1066, saw the building of both castles and churches that reinforced the Norman presence. Several significant churches that were built at this time were founded by rulers as seats of temporal and religious power, or places of coronation and burial. These include the Abbaye-Saint-Denis, Speyer Cathedral and Westminster Abbey (where little of the Pre-Conquest church now remains).

At a time when the remaining architectural structures of the Roman Empire were falling into decay and much of its learning and technology lost, the building of masonry domes and the carving of decorative architectural details continued unabated, though greatly evolved in style since the fall of Rome, in the enduring Byzantine Empire. The domed churches of Constantinople and Eastern Europe were to greatly affect the architecture of certain towns, particularly through trade and through the Crusades. The most notable single building that demonstrates this is St Mark&#x27;s Basilica, Venice, but there are many lesser-known examples, particularly in France, such as the church of Saint-Front, Périgueux and Angoulême Cathedral.

Much of Europe was affected by feudalism in which peasants held tenure from local rulers over the land that they farmed in exchange for military service. The result of this was that they could be called upon, not only for local and regional spats, but to follow their lord to travel across Europe to the Crusades, if they were required to do so. The Crusades, 1095–1270, brought about a very large movement of people and, with them, ideas and trade skills, particularly those involved in the building of fortifications and the metal working needed for the provision of arms, which was also applied to the fitting and decoration of buildings. The continual movement of people, rulers, nobles, bishops, abbots, craftsmen and peasants, was an important factor in creating a homogeneity in building methods and a recognizable &quot;Romanesque style&quot;, despite regional differences.

Life became generally less secure after the Carolingian period. This resulted in the building of castles at strategic points, many of them being constructed as strongholds of the Normans, descendants of the Vikings who invaded northern France under Rollo in 911. Political struggles also resulted in the fortification of many towns, or the rebuilding and strengthening of walls that remained from the Roman period. One of the most notable surviving fortifications is that of the city of Carcassonne. The enclosure of towns brought about a lack of living space within the walls, and resulted in a style of town house that was tall and narrow, often surrounding communal courtyards, as at San Gimignano in Tuscany and Bologna and Pavia in Lombardy.

In Germany, the Holy Roman Emperors built a number of residences, fortified, but essentially palaces rather than castles, at strategic points and on trade routes. The Imperial Palace of Goslar (heavily restored in the 19th century) was built in the early 11th century by Otto III and Henry III, while the ruined Palace at Gelnhausen was received by Frederick Barbarossa prior to 1170. The movement of people and armies also brought about the building of bridges, some of which have survived, including the 12th-century bridge at Besalú, Catalonia, the 11th-century Puente de la Reina, Navarre and the Pont-Saint-Bénézet, Avignon.

===Religion===
Across Europe, the late 11th and 12th centuries saw an unprecedented growth in the number of churches. A great number of these buildings, both large and small, remain, some almost intact and in others altered almost beyond recognition in later centuries. They include many very well known churches such as Santa Maria in Cosmedin in Rome, the Baptistery in Florence and San Zeno Maggiore in Verona. In France, the famous abbeys of Aux Dames and Les Hommes at Caen and Mont Saint-Michel date from this period, as well as the abbeys of the pilgrimage route to Santiago de Compostela. Many cathedrals owe their foundation to this date, with others beginning as abbey churches, and later becoming cathedrals. In England, of the cathedrals of ancient foundation, all were begun in this period with the exception of Salisbury, where the monks relocated from the Norman church at Old Sarum, and several, such as Canterbury, which were rebuilt on the site of Saxon churches. In Spain, the most famous church of the period is Santiago de Compostela. In Germany, the Rhine and its tributaries were the location of many Romanesque abbeys, notably Mainz, Worms, Speyer and Bamberg. In Cologne, then the largest city north of the Alps, a very important group of large city churches survived largely intact. As monasticism spread across Europe, Romanesque churches sprang up in Scotland, Scandinavia, Poland, Hungary, Sicily, Serbia and Tunisia. Several important Romanesque churches were built in the Crusader kingdoms.

====Monasticism====
The system of monasticism in which the religious become members of an order, with common ties and a common rule, living in a mutually dependent community, rather than as a group of hermits living in proximity but essentially separate, was established by the monk Benedict in the 6th century. The Benedictine monasteries spread from Italy throughout Europe, being always by far the most numerous in England. They were followed by the Cluniac order, the Cistercians, Carthusians and Augustinian Canons. During the Crusades, the military orders of the Knights Hospitaller and the Knights Templar were founded.

The monasteries, which sometimes also functioned as cathedrals, and the cathedrals that had bodies of secular clergy often living in community, were a major source of power in Europe. Bishops and the abbots of important monasteries lived and functioned like princes. The monasteries were the major seats of learning of all sorts. Benedict had ordered that all the arts were to be taught and practiced in the monasteries. Within the monasteries books were transcribed by hand, and few people outside the monasteries could read or write.

In France, Burgundy was the centre of monasticism. The enormous and powerful monastery at Cluny was to have lasting effect on the layout of other monasteries and the design of their churches. Very little of the abbey church at Cluny remains; the &quot;Cluny II&quot; rebuilding of 963 onwards has completely vanished, but we have a good idea of the design of &quot;Cluny III&quot; from 1088 to 1130, which until the Renaissance remained the largest building in Europe. However, the church of St. Sernin at Toulouse, 1080–1120, has remained intact and demonstrates the regularity of Romanesque design with its modular form, its massive appearance and the repetition of the simple arched window motif.

====Pilgrimage and Crusade====
One of the effects of the Crusades, which were intended to wrest the Holy Places of the Levant from Islamic control, was to excite a great deal of religious fervour, which in turn inspired great building programs. The Nobility of Europe, upon safe return, thanked God by the building of a new church or the enhancement of an old one. Likewise, those who did not return from the Crusades could be suitably commemorated by their family in a work of stone and mortar.

The Crusades resulted in the transfer of, among other things, a great number of Holy Relics of saints and apostles. Many churches, like Saint-Front, Périgueux, had their own home grown saint while others, most notably Santiago de Compostela, claimed the remains and the patronage of a powerful saint, in this case one of the Twelve Apostles. Santiago de Compostela, located in the Kingdom of Galicia (present day Galicia, Spain) became one of the most important pilgrimage destinations in Europe. Most of the pilgrims travelled the Way of St. James on foot, many of them barefooted as a sign of penance. They moved along one of the four main routes that passed through France, congregating for the journey at Jumièges, Paris, Vézelay, Cluny, Arles and St. Gall in Switzerland. They crossed two passes in the Pyrenees and converged into a single stream to traverse north-western Spain. Along the route they were urged on by those pilgrims returning from the journey. On each of the routes abbeys such as those at Moissac, Toulouse, Roncesvalles, Conques, Limoges and Burgos catered for the flow of people and grew wealthy from the passing trade. Saint-Benoît-du-Sault, in the Berry province, is typical of the churches that were founded on the pilgrim route.

==Characteristics==

The general impression given by Romanesque architecture, in both ecclesiastical and secular buildings, is one of massive solidity and strength. In contrast with both the preceding Roman and later Gothic architecture, in which the load-bearing structural members are, or appear to be, columns, pilasters and arches, Romanesque architecture, in common with Byzantine architecture, relies upon its walls, or sections of walls called piers.

Romanesque architecture is often divided into two periods known as the &quot;First Romanesque&quot; style and the &quot;Romanesque&quot; style. The difference is chiefly a matter of the expertise with which the buildings were constructed. The First Romanesque employed rubble walls, smaller windows and unvaulted roofs. A greater refinement marks the Second Romanesque, along with increased use of the vault and dressed stone.

===Walls===
The walls of Romanesque buildings are often of massive thickness with few and comparatively small openings. They are often double shells, filled with rubble.

The building material differs greatly across Europe, depending upon the local stone and building traditions. In Italy, Poland, much of Germany and parts of the Netherlands, brick is generally used. Other areas saw extensive use of limestone, granite and flint. The building stone was often used in comparatively small and irregular pieces, bedded in thick mortar. Smooth ashlar masonry was not a distinguishing feature of the style (especially not in the earlier part of the period), but it did occur, chiefly where easily worked limestone was available.

===Buttresses===
Because of the massive nature of Romanesque walls, buttresses are not a highly significant feature, as they are in Gothic architecture. Romanesque buttresses are generally of flat square profile and do not project a great deal beyond the wall. In the case of aisled churches, barrel vaults, or half-barrel vaults over the aisles helped to buttress the nave, if it was vaulted.

In the cases where half-barrel vaults were used, they effectively became like flying buttresses. Often aisles extended through two storeys, rather than the one usual in Gothic architecture, so as to better support the weight of a vaulted nave. In the case of Durham Cathedral, flying buttresses have been employed, but are hidden inside the triforium gallery.

===Arches and openings===
The arches used in Romanesque architecture are nearly always semicircular, for openings such as doors and windows, for vaults and for arcades. Wide doorways are usually surmounted by a semi-circular arch, except where a door with a lintel is set into a large arched recess and surmounted by a semi-circular &quot;lunette&quot; with decorative carving. These doors sometimes have a carved central jamb.

Narrow doors and small windows might be surmounted by a solid stone lintel. Larger openings are nearly always arched. A characteristic feature of Romanesque architecture, both ecclesiastic and domestic, is the pairing of two arched windows or arcade openings, separated by a pillar or colonette and often set within a larger arch. Ocular windows are common in Italy, particularly in the façade gable and are also seen in Germany. Later Romanesque churches may have wheel windows or rose windows with plate tracery.

There are a very small number of buildings in the Romanesque style, such as Autun Cathedral in France and Monreale Cathedral in Sicily in which pointed arches have been used extensively, apparently for stylistic reasons. It is believed that in these cases there is a direct imitation of Islamic architecture. At other late Romanesque churches such as Durham Cathedral, and Cefalù Cathedral, the pointed arch was introduced as a structural device in ribbed vaulting. Its increasing application was fundamental to the development of Gothic architecture.

===Arcades===
An arcade is a row of arches, supported on piers or columns. They occur in the interior of large churches, separating the nave from the aisles, and in large secular interiors spaces, such as the great hall of a castle, supporting the timbers of a roof or upper floor. Arcades also occur in cloisters and atriums, enclosing an open space.

Arcades can occur in storeys or stages. While the arcade of a cloister is typically of a single stage, the arcade that divides the nave and aisles in a church is typically of two stages, with a third stage of window openings known as the clerestory rising above them. Arcading on a large scale generally fulfils a structural purpose, but it is also used, generally on a smaller scale, as a decorative feature, both internally and externally where it is frequently &quot;blind arcading&quot; with only a wall or a narrow passage behind it.

===Piers===
In Romanesque architecture, piers were often employed to support arches. They were built of masonry and square or rectangular in section, generally having a horizontal moulding representing a capital at the springing of the arch. Sometimes piers have vertical shafts attached to them, and may also have horizontal mouldings at the level of the base.

Although basically rectangular, piers can often be of highly complex form, with half-segments of large hollow-core columns on the inner surface supporting the arch, or a clustered group of smaller shafts leading into the mouldings of the arch.

Piers that occur at the intersection of two large arches, such as those under the crossing of the nave and transept, are commonly cruciform in shape, each arch having its own supporting rectangular pier at right angles to the other.

===Columns===
Columns are an important structural feature of Romanesque architecture. Colonnettes and attached shafts are also used structurally and for decoration. Monolithic columns cut from a single piece of stone were frequently used in Italy, as they had been in Roman and Early Christian architecture. They were also used, particularly in Germany, when they alternated between more massive piers. Arcades of columns cut from single pieces are also common in structures that do not bear massive weights of masonry, such as cloisters, where they are sometimes paired.

====Salvaged columns====
In Italy, during this period, a great number of antique Roman columns were salvaged and reused in the interiors and on the porticos of churches. The most durable of these columns are of marble and have the stone horizontally bedded. The majority are vertically bedded and are sometimes of a variety of colours. They may have retained their original Roman capitals, generally of the Corinthian or Roman Composite style.
Some buildings, like Santa Maria in Cosmedin and the atrium at San Clemente in Rome, may have an odd assortment of columns in which large capitals are placed on short columns and small capitals are placed on taller columns to even the height. Architectural compromises of this type are seen where materials have been salvaged from a number of buildings. Salvaged columns were also used to a lesser extent in France.

====Drum columns====
In most parts of Europe, Romanesque columns were massive, as they supported thick upper walls with small windows, and sometimes heavy vaults. The most common method of construction was to build them out of stone cylinders called drums, as in the crypt at Speyer Cathedral.

====Hollow core columns====
Where really massive columns were called for, such as those at Durham Cathedral, they were constructed of ashlar masonry and the hollow core was filled with rubble. These huge untapered columns are sometimes ornamented with incised decorations.

====Alternating supports====

A common characteristic of Romanesque buildings, occurring both in churches and in the arcades that separate large interior spaces of castles, is the alternation of piers and columns.

The most simple form that this takes is to have a column between each adjoining pier. Sometimes the columns are in multiples of two or three. At St. Michael&#x27;s, Hildesheim, an A B B A alternation occurs in the nave while an A B A alternation can be seen in the transepts.

At Jumièges there are tall drum columns between piers each of which has a half-column supporting the arch. There are many variations on this theme, most notably at Durham Cathedral where the mouldings and shafts of the piers are of exceptional richness and the huge masonry columns are deeply incised with geometric patterns.

Often the arrangement was made more complex by the complexity of the piers themselves, so that it was not piers and columns that alternated, but rather, piers of entirely different form from each other, such as those of Sant&#x27; Ambrogio, Milan, where the nature of the vault dictated that the alternate piers bore a great deal more weight than the intermediate ones and are thus very much larger.

====Capitals====
The foliate Corinthian style provided the inspiration for many Romanesque capitals, and the accuracy with which they were carved depended very much on the availability of original models, those in Italian churches such as Pisa Cathedral or church of Sant&#x27;Alessandro in Lucca and southern France being much closer to the Classical than those in England.

The Corinthian capital is essentially round at the bottom where it sits on a circular column and square at the top, where it supports the wall or arch. This form of capital was maintained in the general proportions and outline of the Romanesque capital. This was achieved most simply by cutting a rectangular block and taking the four lower corners off at an angle so that the block was square at the top, but octagonal at the bottom, as can be seen at St. Michael&#x27;s Hildesheim.
This shape lent itself to a wide variety of superficial treatments, sometimes foliate in imitation of the source, but often figurative. In Northern Europe the foliate capitals generally bear far more resemblance to the intricacies of manuscript illumination than to Classical sources. In parts of France and Italy, there are strong links to the pierced capitals of Byzantine architecture. It is in the figurative capitals that the greatest originality is shown. While some are dependent on manuscripts illustrations of Biblical scenes and depictions of beasts and monsters, others are lively scenes of the legends of local saints.

The capitals, while retaining the form of a square top and a round bottom, were often compressed into little more than a bulging cushion-shape. This is particularly the case on large masonry columns, or on large columns that alternate with piers as at Durham.

===Vaults and roofs===
The majority of buildings have wooden roofs, generally of a simple &quot;truss&quot;, &quot;tie beam&quot; or &quot;king post&quot; form. In the case of trussed rafter roofs, they are sometimes lined with wooden ceilings in three sections like those that survive at Ely and Peterborough cathedrals in England. In churches, typically the aisles are vaulted, but the nave is roofed with timber, as is the case at both Peterborough and Ely. In Italy where open wooden roofs are common, and tie beams frequently occur in conjunction with vaults, the timbers have often been decorated as at San Miniato al Monte, Florence.

Vaults of stone or brick took on several different forms and showed marked development during the period, evolving into the pointed ribbed arch characteristic of Gothic architecture.

====Barrel vault====
The simplest type of vaulted roof is the barrel vault in which a single arched surface extends from wall to wall, the length of the space to be vaulted, for example, the nave of a church. An important example, which retains medieval paintings, is the vault of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe, France, of the early 12th century. However, the barrel vault generally required the support of solid walls, or walls in which the windows were very small.

====Groin vault====
Groin vaults occur in early Romanesque buildings, notably at Speyer Cathedral where the high vault of about 1060 is the first employment in Romanesque architecture of this type of vault for a wide nave. In later buildings employing ribbed vaultings, groin vaults are most frequently used for the less visible and smaller vaults, particularly in crypts and aisles. A groin vault is almost always square in plan and is constructed of two barrel vaults intersecting at right angles. Unlike a ribbed vault, the entire arch is a structural member. Groin vaults are frequently separated by transverse arched ribs of low profile as at Speyer and Santiago de Compostela. At Sainte Marie Madeleine, Vézelay, the ribs are square in section, strongly projecting and polychrome.

====Ribbed vault====
Ribbed vaults came into general use in the 12th century. In ribbed vaults, not only are there ribs spanning the vaulted area transversely, but each vaulted bay has diagonal ribs, following the same course as the groins in a groin vault. However, whereas in a groin vault, the vault itself is the structural member, in a ribbed vault, it is the ribs that are the structural members, and the spaces between them can be filled with lighter, non-structural material.

Because Romanesque arches are nearly always semi-circular, the structural and design problem inherent in the ribbed vault is that the diagonal span is larger and therefore higher than the transverse span. The Romanesque builders used a number of solutions to this problem. One was to have the centre point where the diagonal ribs met as the highest point, with the infill of all the surfaces sloping upwards towards it, in a domical manner. This solution was employed in Italy at San Michele, Pavia, and Sant&#x27; Ambrogio, Milan.

The solution employed in England was to stilt the transverse ribs, maintaining a horizontal central line to the roof like that of a barrel vault. The diagonal ribs could also be depressed, a solution used on the sexpartite vaults at both the Saint-Étienne, (Abbaye-aux-Hommes) and Sainte-Trinité, (Abbaye-aux-Dames) at Caen, France, in the late 11th and early 12th centuries.

====Pointed arched vault====
The problems encountered in the structure and appearance of vaults was solved late in the Romanesque period with the introduction of pointed arched ribs which allowed the height of both diagonal and transverse ribs to be varied in proportion to each other. Pointed ribs made their first appearance in the transverse ribs of the vaults at Durham Cathedral in northern England, dating from 1128. Durham is a cathedral of massive Romanesque proportions and appearance, yet its builders introduced several structural features that were new to architectural design and were later to be hallmark features of the Gothic style. Another Gothic structural feature employed at Durham is the flying buttress. However, these are hidden beneath the roofs of the aisles.
The earliest pointed vault in France is that of the narthex of La Madeleine, Vézelay, dating from 1130. They were subsequently employed with the development of the Gothic style at the east end of the Basilica of St Denis in Paris in 1140. An early ribbed vault in the Romanesque architecture of Sicily is that of the chancel at the Cathedral of Cefalù.

====Domes====

Domes in Romanesque architecture are generally found within crossing towers at the intersection of a church&#x27;s nave and transept, which conceal the domes externally. Called a &quot;tiburio&quot;, this tower-like structure often has a blind arcade near the roof. Romanesque domes are typically octagonal in plan and use corner squinches to translate a square bay into a suitable octagonal base. Octagonal cloister vaults appear &quot;in connection with basilicas almost throughout Europe&quot; between 1050 and 1100. The precise form differs from region to region.

==Ecclesiastical architecture==
===Plan===
Many parish churches, abbey churches and cathedrals are in the Romanesque style, or were originally built in the Romanesque style and have subsequently undergone changes.
The simplest Romanesque churches are aisleless halls with a projecting apse at the chancel end, or sometimes, particularly in England, a projecting rectangular chancel with a chancel arch that might be decorated with mouldings. More ambitious churches have aisles separated from the nave by arcades.

Abbey and cathedral churches generally follow the Latin Cross plan. In England, the extension eastward may be long, while in Italy it is often short or non-existent, the church being of T plan, sometimes with apses on the transept ends as well as to the east. In France the church of St Front, Périgueux, appears to have been modelled on St. Mark&#x27;s Basilica, Venice, or the Byzantine Church of the Holy Apostles and is of a Greek cross plan with five domes. In the same region, Angoulême Cathedral is an aisleless church of the Latin cross plan, more usual in France, but is also roofed with domes.
In Germany, Romanesque churches are often of distinctive form, having apses at both east and west ends, the main entrance being central to one side. It is probable that this form came about to accommodate a baptistery at the west end.

NOTE: The plans below do not show the buildings in their current states.

The Abbey Church of St. Gall, Switzerland, shows the plan that was to become common throughout Germanic Europe. It is a Latin Cross with a comparatively long nave and short transepts and eastern end, which is apsidal. The nave is aisled, but the chancel and transepts are not. It has an apsidal west end, which was to become a feature of Churches of Germany, such as Worms Cathedral. Speyer Cathedral, Germany, also has aisleless transept and chancel. It has a markedly modular look. A typical Germanic characteristic is the presence of towers framing the chancel and the west end. There is marked emphasis on the western entrance, called &quot;Westwerk&quot;, which is seen in several other churches. Each vault compartment covers two narrow bays of the nave.

At Autun Cathedral, France, the pattern of the nave bays and aisles extends beyond the crossing and into the chancel, each aisle terminating in an apse. Each nave bay is separated at the vault by a transverse rib. Each transept projects to the width of two nave bays. The entrance has a narthex which screens the main portal. This type of entrance was to be elaborated in the Gothic period on the transepts at Chartres. Angoulême Cathedral, France, is one of several instances in which the Byzantine churches of Constantinople seem to have been influential in the design in which the main spaces are roofed by domes. This structure has necessitated the use of very thick walls, and massive piers from which the domes spring. There are radiating chapels around the apse, which is a typically French feature and was to evolve into the chevet.

As was typically the case in England, Ely Cathedral was a Benedictine monastery, serving both monastic and secular function. To facilitate this, the chancel or &quot;presbytery&quot; is longer than usually found in Europe, as are the aisled transepts which contained chapels. In England, emphasis was placed on the orientation of the chapels to the east. The very large piers at the crossing signify that there was once a tower. The western end having two round towers flanking a tall central tower was unique in Britain. Ely Cathedral was never vaulted and retains a wooden ceiling over the nave.

The cathedral of Santiago de Compostela shares many features with Ely, but is typically Spanish in its expansive appearance. Santiago held the body of St. James and was the most significant pilgrimage site in Europe. The narthex, the aisles, the large aisled transepts and numerous projecting chapels reflect this. The chancel is short, compared to that of Ely, and the altar set so as to provide clear view to a vast congregation simultaneously.

The basilica Saint-Sernin of Toulouse is a typical example of a pilgrimage church. It is very large and its interior plan made it possible to direct traffic. With double side aisles and with an aisled transept and an ambulatory surrounding the apse, pilgrims could make the circuit around the church and were able to stop for meditation and prayer at the apsidal chapels of the transept and the radiating chapels of the choir.

Modena Cathedral shows a typically Italian Romanesque plan, often architecturally termed a &quot;basilica&quot;, because of its similarity in plan to a Roman basilicas.

===Section===
In section, the typical aisled church or cathedral has a nave with a single aisle on either side. The nave and aisles are separated by an arcade carried on piers or on columns. The roof of the aisle and the outer walls help to buttress the upper walls and vault of the nave, if present. Above the aisle roof are a row of windows known as the clerestory, which give light to the nave. During the Romanesque period there was a development from this two-stage elevation to a three-stage elevation in which there is a gallery, known as a &quot;triforium&quot;, between the arcade and the clerestory. This varies from a simple blind arcade decorating the walls, to a narrow arcaded passage, to a fully developed second story with a row of windows lighting the gallery.

===Church and cathedral east ends===
The eastern end of a Romanesque church is almost always semi-circular, with either a high chancel surrounded by an ambulatory as in France, or a square end from which an apse projects as in Germany and Italy. Where square ends exist in English churches, they are probably influenced by Anglo-Saxon churches. Peterborough and Norwich Cathedrals have retained round east ends in the French style. However, in France, simple churches without apses and with no decorative features were built by the Cistercians who also founded many houses in England, frequently in remote areas.

===Church and cathedral façades and external decoration===
Romanesque church façades, generally to the west end of the building, are usually symmetrical, have a large central portal made significant by its mouldings or porch, and an arrangement of arched-topped windows. In Italy there is often a single central ocular or wheel window. The common decorative feature is arcading.

Smaller churches often have a single tower that is usually placed to the western end in France or England, either centrally or to one side, while larger churches and cathedrals often have two.

In France, Saint-Étienne, Caen, presents the model of a large French Romanesque façade. It is a symmetrical arrangement of nave flanked by two tall towers each with two buttresses of low flat profile that divide the façade into three vertical units. The lowest stage is marked by large doors, each set within an arch in each of the three vertical sections. The wider central section has two tiers of three identical windows, while in the outer sections there are two tiers of single windows, giving emphasis to the mass of the towers. The towers rise above the façade through three further tiers, the lowest of tall blind arcading, the next of arcading pierced by two narrow windows and the third of two large windows, divided into two lights by a colonnette.

This façade can be seen as the foundation for many other buildings, including both French and English Gothic churches. While the form is typical of northern France, its various components were common to many Romanesque churches of the period across Europe. Similar façades are found in Portugal. In England, Southwell Cathedral has maintained this form, despite the insertion of a huge Gothic window between the towers. Lincoln and Durham must once have looked like this. In Germany, Limburg Cathedral has a rich variety of openings and arcades in horizontal storeys of varying heights.

The churches of San Zeno Maggiore, Verona, and San Michele, Pavia, present two types of façade that are typical of Italian Romanesque, that which reveals the architectural form of the building, and that which screens it. At San Zeno, the components of nave and aisles are made clear by the vertical shafts that rise to the level of the central gable and by the varying roof levels. At San Miniato al Monte the definition of the architectural parts is made even clearer by the polychrome marble, a feature of many Italian medieval façades, particularly in Tuscany.
At San Michele the vertical definition is present as at San Zeno, but the rooflines are screened behind a single large gable decorated with stepped arcading. At Santa Maria della Pieve, Arezzo, this screening is carried even further, as the roofline is horizontal and the arcading rises in many different levels while the colonettes that support them have a great diversity of decoration.

In the Rhineland and Netherlands the Carolingian form of west end known as the westwerk prevailed. Towers and apse of the western end are often incorporated into a multi-storey structure that bears little structural or visual relationship to the building behind it. These westwerks take a great variety of forms as may be seen at Maria Laach Abbey, St Gertrude, Nivelles, and St Serviatius, Maastricht.

===Church towers===
Towers were an important feature of Romanesque churches and a great number of them are still standing. They take a variety of forms: square, circular and octagonal, and are positioned differently in relation to the church building in different countries. In northern France, two large towers, such as those at Caen, were to become an integral part of the façade of any large abbey or cathedral. In central and southern France this is more variable and large churches may have one tower or a central tower. Large churches of Spain and Portugal usually have two towers.

Many abbeys of France, such as that at Cluny, had many towers of varied forms. This is also common in Germany, where the apses were sometimes framed with circular towers and the crossing surmounted by an octagonal tower as at Worms Cathedral. Large paired towers of square plan could also occur on the transept ends, such as those at Tournai Cathedral in Belgium. In Germany, where four towers frequently occur, they often have spires that may be four or eight sided, or the distinctive &quot;Rhenish helm&quot; shape seen on the cathedrals of Limburg or Speyer.

In England, for large abbeys and cathedral buildings, three towers were favoured, with the central tower being the tallest. This was often not achieved, through the slow process of the building stages, and in many cases the upper parts of the tower were not completed until centuries later as at Durham and Lincoln. Large Norman towers exist at the cathedrals of Durham, Exeter, Southwell, Norwich and Tewkesbury Abbey. Such towers were often topped during the late medieval period with a Gothic spire of wooden construction covered with lead, copper or shingles. In the case of Norwich Cathedral, the huge, ornate, 12th-century crossing-tower received a 15th-century masonry spire rising to a height of 320 feet and remaining to this day.

In Italy towers are almost always free standing and the position is often dictated by the landform of the site, rather than aesthetics. This is the case in nearly all Italian churches both large and small, except in Sicily where a number of churches were founded by the Norman rulers and are more French in appearance.

As a general rule, large Romanesque towers are square with corner buttresses of low profile, rising without diminishing through the various stages. Towers are usually marked into clearly defined stages by horizontal courses. As the towers rise, the number and size of openings increases as can be seen on the right tower of the transept of Tournai Cathedral where two narrow slits in the fourth level from the top becomes a single window, then two windows, then three windows at the uppermost level. This sort of arrangement is particularly noticeable on the towers of Italian churches, which are usually built of brick and may have no other ornament. Two fine examples occur at Lucca, at the church of San Frediano and at the &quot;Duomo&quot;. It is also seen in Spain.

In Italy there are a number of large free-standing towers that are circular, the most famous of these being the Leaning Tower of Pisa. In other countries where circular towers occur, such as Germany, they are usually paired and often flank an apse. Circular towers are uncommon in England, but occur throughout the early medieval period in Ireland.

Polygonal towers were often used on crossings and occur in France, Germany, Italy and Spain such as that of the Old Cathedral, Salamanca, which is covered by a dome supported on a ribbed vault.

Smaller churches sometimes had bell-gables instead of towers, a feature which, according to some authors, is characteristic of the simplicity of much architecture in the Romanesque style.
===Portals===
Romanesque churches generally have a single portal centrally placed on the west front, the focus of decoration for the façade of the building. Some churches such as Saint-Étienne, Caen, (11th century) and Pisa Cathedral (late 12th century) had three western portals, in the manner of Early Christian basilicas. Many churches, both large and small, had lateral entrances that were commonly used by worshippers.

Romanesque doorways have a character form, with the jambs having a series of receding planes, into each of which is set a circular shaft, all surmounted by a continuous abacus. The semi-circular arch which rises from the abacus has the same series planes and circular mouldings as the jambs. There are typically four planes containing three shafts, but there may be as many as twelve shafts, symbolic of the apostles.

The opening of the portal may be arched, or may be set with a lintel supporting a tympanum, generally carved, but in Italy sometimes decorated with mosaic or fresco. A carved tympanum generally constitutes the major sculptural work of a Romanesque church. The subject of the carving on a major portal may be Christ in Majesty or the Last Judgement. Lateral doors may include other subjects such as the Birth of Christ. The portal may be protected by a porch, with simple open porches being typical of Italy, and more elaborate structures typical of France and Spain.
===Interiors===
The structure of large churches differed regionally and developed across the centuries. The use of piers of rectangular plan to support arcades was common, as at Mainz Cathedral and St Gertrude Nivelle, and remained usual in smaller churches across Europe, with the arcades often taking the form of openings through the surface of a wall. In Italy, where there was a strong tradition of using marble columns, complete with capital, base and abacus, this remained prevalent, often reusing existent ancient columns, as at San Miniato al Monte. A number of 11th-century churches have naves distinguished by huge circular columns with no clerestory, or a very small one as at St Philibert, Tournus. In England stout columns of large diameter supported decorated arches, gallery and clerestory, as at the nave of Malmesbury Abbey (see &quot;Piers and columns&quot;, above). By the early 12th century composite piers had evolved, in which the attached shafts swept upward to a ribbed vault or were continued into the mouldings of the arcade, as at Vézelay Abbey, Saint-Étienne, Caen, and Peterborough Cathedral.

The nature of the internal roofing varied greatly, from open timber roofs, and wooden ceilings of different types, which remained common in smaller churches, to simple barrel vaults and groin vaults and increasingly to the use of ribbed vaults in the late 11th and 12th centuries, which were to become a common feature of larger abbey churches and cathedrals. A number of Romanesque churches are roofed with a series of Domes. At Fontevrault Abbey the nave is covered by four domes, while at the Church of Saint Front, Périgueux, the church is of Greek cross plan, with a central dome surrounded by four smaller domes over the nave, chancel and transepts.

Internal decoration varied across Europe. Where wide expanses of wall existed, they were often plastered and painted. Wooden ceilings and timber beams were decorated. In Italy walls were sometimes faced with polychrome marble. Where buildings were constructed of stone that was suitable for carving, many decorative details occur, including ornate capitals and mouldings.

The apsidal east end was often a focus of decoration, with both architectonic forms such as arcading and pictorial features such as carved figures, murals and occasionally mosaics. Stained glass came into increasing use from the 11th century. In many churches the eastern end has been rebuilt in a later style. Of England&#x27;s Norman cathedrals, no eastern end remains unchanged. In France the eastern terminals of the important abbeys of Caen, Vézelay and, most significantly, the Basilica of St Denis were completely rebuilt in the Gothic style. In Germany, major reconstructions of the 19th century sought to return many Romanesque buildings to their original form. Examples of simple Romanesque apses can be seen in the images of St Gertrude, Nivelles; St Philibert, Tournus, and San Miniato al Monte.

===Other structures===
Among the structures associated with church buildings are crypts, porches, chapter houses, cloisters and baptisteries.

Crypts are often present as an underlying structure to a substantial church, and are generally a completely discrete space, but occasionally, as in some Italian churches, may be a sunken space under a raised chancel and open, via steps, to the body of the nave. Romanesque crypts have survived in many instances, such as Canterbury Cathedral, when the church itself has been rebuilt.
The usual construction of a Romanesque crypt is with many short stout columns carrying groin vaults, as at Worcester Cathedral.

Porches sometimes occur as part of the original design of a façade. This is very much the case in Italy, where they are usually only one bay deep and are supported on two columns, often resting on couchant lions, as at St Zeno, Verona. Elsewhere, porches of various dates have been added to the façade or side entrance of existent churches and may be quite a substantial structure, with several bays of vaulting supported on an open or partially open arcade, and forming a sort of narthex as at the Church of St Maria, Laach. In Spain, Romanesque churches often have large lateral porches, like loggias.

Chapter houses often occur adjacent to monastic or cathedral churches. Few have survived intact from the Romanesque period. Early chapter houses were rectangular in shape, with the larger ones sometimes having groin or ribbed vaults supported on columns. Later Romanesque chapter houses sometimes had an apsidal eastern end. The chapter house at Durham Cathedral is a wide space with a ribbed vault, restored as originally constructed in 1130. The circular chapter house at Worcester Cathedral, built by Bishop Wulfstan (1062–95), was the first circular chapter house in Europe and was much imitated in England.

Cloisters are generally part of any monastic complex and also occur at cathedral and collegiate churches. They were essential to the communal way of life, a place for both working during daylight hours and relaxing during inclement weather. They usually abut the church building and are enclosed with windowless walls on the outside and an open arcade on the inside, looking over a courtyard or &quot;cloister garth&quot;. They may be vaulted or have timber roofs. The arcades are often richly decorated and are home to some of the most fanciful carved capitals of the Romanesque period with those of Santo Domingo de Silos in Spain and the Abbey of St Pierre Moissac, being examples. Many Romanesque cloisters have survived in Spain, France, Italy and Germany, along with some of their associated buildings.

Baptisteries often occur in Italy as a free standing structure, associated with a cathedral. They are generally octagonal or circular and domed. The interior may be arcaded on several levels as at Pisa Cathedral. Other notable Romanesque baptisteries are that at Parma Cathedral remarkable for its galleried exterior, and the polychrome Baptistery of San Giovanni of Florence Cathedral, with vault mosaics of the 13th century including Christ in Majesty, possibly the work of the almost legendary Coppo di Marcovaldo.

===Decoration===

====Architectural embellishment====
Arcading is the single most significant decorative feature of Romanesque architecture. It occurs in a variety of forms, from the Lombard band, which is a row of small arches that appear to support a roofline or course, to shallow blind arcading that is often a feature of English architecture and is seen in great variety at Ely Cathedral, to the open dwarf gallery, first used at Speyer Cathedral and widely adopted in Italy as seen on both Pisa Cathedral and its famous Leaning Tower. Arcades could be used to great effect, both externally and internally, as exemplified by the church of Santa Maria della Pieve, in Arezzo.

====Architectural sculpture====
The Romanesque period produced a profusion of sculptural ornamentation. This most frequently took a purely geometric form and was particularly applied to mouldings, both straight courses and the curved moldings of arches. In La Madeleine, Vezelay, for example, the polychrome ribs of the vault are all edged with narrow filets of pierced stone. Similar decoration occurs around the arches of the nave and along the horizontal course separating arcade and clerestory. Combined with the pierced carving of the capitals, this gives a delicacy and refinement to the interior.

In England, such decoration could be discrete, as at Hereford and Peterborough cathedrals, or have a sense of massive energy as at Durham where the diagonal ribs of the vaults are all outlined with chevrons, the mouldings of the nave arcade are carved with several layers of the same and the huge columns are deeply incised with a variety of geometric patterns creating an impression of directional movement. These features combine to create one of the richest and most dynamic interiors of the Romanesque period.

Although much sculptural ornament was sometimes applied to the interiors of churches, the focus of such decoration was generally the west front, and in particular, the portals. Chevrons and other geometric ornaments, referred to by 19th-century writers as &quot;barbaric ornament&quot;, are most frequently found on the mouldings of the central door. Stylized foliage often appears, sometimes deeply carved and curling outward after the manner of the acanthus leaves on Corinthian capitals, but also carved in shallow relief and spiral patterns, imitating the intricacies of manuscript illuminations. In general, the style of ornament was more classical in Italy, such as that seen around the door of San Giusto in Lucca, and more &quot;barbaric&quot; in England, Germany and Scandinavia, such as that seen at Lincoln and Speyer Cathedrals. France produced a great range of ornament, with particularly fine interwoven and spiralling vines in the &quot;manuscript&quot; style occurring at Saint-Sernin, Toulouse.

====Figurative sculpture====

The name of the architectural style was transferred onto the art of he period. Romanesque art provided fine examples of painting and sculpture, but, while the Romanesque churches were flush with colours, most large paintings were lost. The period brought a major revival of sculpture.

With the fall of the Roman Empire, the tradition of carving large works in stone and sculpting figures in bronze died out. The best-known surviving large sculptural work of Proto-Romanesque Europe is the life-size wooden Crucifix commissioned by Archbishop Gero of Cologne in about 960–65. During the 11th and 12th centuries, figurative sculpture flourished in a distinctly Romanesque style that can be recognised across Europe, although the most spectacular sculptural projects are concentrated in South-Western France, Northern Spain and Italy.

Major figurative decoration occurs particularly around the portals of cathedrals and churches, ornamenting the tympanum, lintels, jambs and central posts. The tympanum is typically decorated with the imagery of Christ in Majesty with the symbols of the Four Evangelists, drawn directly from the gilt covers of medieval Gospel Books. This style of doorway occurs in many places and continued into the Gothic period. A rare survival in England is that of the &quot;Prior&#x27;s Door&quot; at Ely Cathedral. In France, many have survived, with impressive examples at the Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac, the Abbey of Sainte-Marie, Souillac, and Abbey of la Madaleine, Vézelay – all daughter houses of Cluny, with extensive other sculpture remaining in cloisters and other buildings. Nearby, Autun Cathedral has a Last Judgement of great rarity in that it has uniquely been signed by its creator Giselbertus (who was perhaps the patron rather than the sculptor). The same artist is thought to have worked at la Madeleine Vezelay which uniquely has two elaborately carved tympanum, the early inner one representing the Last Judgement and that on the outer portal of the narthex representing Jesus sending forth the Apostles to preach to the nations.

It is a feature of Romanesque art, both in manuscript illumination and sculptural decoration, that figures are contorted to fit the space that they occupy. Among the many examples that exist, one of the finest is the figure of the Prophet Jeremiah from the pillar of the portal of the Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac, France, from about 1130. A significant motif of Romanesque design is the spiral, a form applied to both plant motifs and drapery in Romanesque sculpture. An outstanding example of its use in drapery is that of the central figure of Christ on the outer portal at La Madaleine, Vezelay.

Many of the smaller sculptural works, particularly capitals, are Biblical in subject and include scenes of Creation and the Fall of Man, episodes from the life of Christ and those Old Testament scenes that prefigure his Death and Resurrection, such as Jonah and the Whale and Daniel in the lions&#x27; den. Many Nativity scenes occur, the theme of the Three Kings being particularly popular. The cloisters of Santo Domingo de Silos Abbey in Northern Spain, and Moissac are fine examples surviving complete.
====Murals====
The large wall surfaces and plain curving vaults of the Romanesque period lent themselves to mural decoration. Many of these early wall paintings have been destroyed by damp or the walls have been replastered and painted over. In most of Northern Europe such pictures were systematically destroyed in bouts of Reformation iconoclasm. In other countries they have suffered from war, neglect and changing fashion.

A classic scheme for the full painted decoration of a church, derived from earlier examples often in mosaic, had, as its focal point in the semi-dome of the apse, Christ in Majesty or Christ the Redeemer enthroned within a mandorla and framed by the four winged beasts, symbols of the Four Evangelists, comparing directly with examples from the gilt covers or the illuminations of Gospel Books of the period. If the Virgin Mary was the dedicatee of the church, she might replace Christ here. On the apse walls below would be saints and apostles, perhaps including narrative scenes, for example of the saint to whom the church was dedicated. On the sanctuary arch were figures of apostles, prophets or the twenty-four &quot;elders of the Apocalypse&quot;, looking in towards a bust of Christ, or his symbol the Lamb, at the top of the arch. The north wall of the nave would contain narrative scenes from the Old Testament, and the south wall from the New Testament. On the rear west wall would be a Doom painting or Last Judgement, with an enthroned and judging Christ at the top.

One of the most intact schemes to exist is that at Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe in France. The long barrel vault of the nave provides an excellent surface for fresco, and is decorated with scenes of the Old Testament, showing the Creation, the Fall of Man and other stories including a lively depiction of Noah&#x27;s Ark complete with a fearsome figurehead and numerous windows through with can be seen the Noah and his family on the upper deck, birds on the middle deck, while on the lower are the pairs of animals. Another scene shows with great vigour the swamping of Pharaoh&#x27;s army by the Red Sea. The scheme extends to other parts of the church, with the martyrdom of the local saints shown in the crypt, and Apocalypse in the narthex and Christ in Majesty. The range of colours employed is limited to light blue-green, yellow ochre, reddish brown and black. Similar paintings exist in Serbia, Spain, Germany, Italy and elsewhere in France.

====Stained glass====

The oldest-known fragments of medieval pictorial stained glass appear to date from the 10th century. The earliest intact figures are five prophet windows at Augsburg, dating from the late 11th century. The figures, though stiff and formalised, demonstrate considerable proficiency in design, both pictorially and in the functional use of the glass, indicating that their maker was well accustomed to the medium. At Canterbury and Chartres Cathedrals, a number of panels of the 12th century have survived, including, at Canterbury, a figure of Adam digging, and another of his son Seth from a series of Ancestors of Christ. Adam represents a highly naturalistic and lively portrayal, while in the figure of Seth, the robes have been used to great decorative effect, similar to the best stone carving of the period.

Many of the magnificent stained glass windows of France, including the famous windows of Chartres, date from the 13th century. Far fewer large windows remain intact from the 12th century. One such is the Crucifixion of Poitiers, a remarkable composition that rises through three stages, the lowest with a quatrefoil depicting the Martyrdom of St Peter, the largest central stage dominated by the crucifixion and the upper stage showing the Ascension of Christ in a mandorla. The figure of the crucified Christ is already showing the Gothic curve. The window is described by George Seddon as being of &quot;unforgettable beauty&quot;.

===Transitional style and the continued use of Romanesque forms===
During the 12th century, features that were to become typical of Gothic architecture began to appear. It is not uncommon, for example, for a part of building that has been constructed over a lengthy period extending into the 12th century, to have very similar arcading of both semi-circular and pointed shape, or windows that are identical in height and width, but in which the later ones are pointed. This can be seen on the towers of Tournai Cathedral and on the western towers and façade at Ely Cathedral. Other variations that appear to hover between Romanesque and Gothic occur, such as the façade designed by Abbot Suger at the Abbey of Saint-Denis, which retains much that is Romanesque in its appearance, and the façade of Laon Cathedral, which, despite its Gothic form, has round arches.

Abbot Suger&#x27;s innovative choir of the Abbey of Saint-Denis, 1140–44, led to the adoption of the Gothic style by Paris and its surrounding area, but other parts of France were slower to take it up, and provincial churches continued to be built in the heavy manner and rubble stone of the Romanesque, even when the openings were treated with the fashionable pointed arch.

In England, the Romanesque groundplan, which in that country commonly had a very long nave, continued to affect the style of building of cathedrals and those large abbey churches which were also to become cathedrals at the dissolution of the monasteries in the 16th century. Despite the fact that English cathedrals were built or rebuilt in many stages, substantial areas of Norman building can be seen in many of them, particularly in the nave arcades. In the case of Winchester Cathedral, the Gothic arches were literally carved out of the existent Norman piers. Other cathedrals have sections of their building which are clearly an intermediate stage between Norman and Gothic, such as the western towers of Ely Cathedral and part of the nave at Worcester Cathedral. The first truly Gothic building in England is the long eastern end of Canterbury Cathedral commenced in 1175.

In Italy, although many churches such as Florence Cathedral and Santa Maria Novella were built in the Gothic style, or utilising the pointed arch and window tracery, Romanesque features derived from the Roman architectural heritage, such as sturdy columns with capitals of a modified Corinthian form, continued to be used. The pointed vault was utilised where convenient, but it is commonly interspersed with semicircular arches and vaults wherever they conveniently fit. The façades of Gothic churches in Italy are not always easily distinguishable from the Romanesque.

Germany was not quick to adopt the Gothic style, and when it did so in the 1230s, the buildings were often modelled very directly upon French cathedrals, as Cologne Cathedral was modelled on Amiens. The smaller churches and abbeys continued to be constructed in a more provincial Romanesque manner, the date only being registered by the pointed window openings.

==Romanesque castles, houses and other buildings==

The Romanesque period was a time of great development in the design and construction of defensive architecture. After churches and the monastic buildings with which they are often associated, castles are the most numerous type of building of the period. While most are in ruins through the action of war and politics, others, like William the Conqueror&#x27;s White Tower within the Tower of London have remained almost intact.

In some regions, particularly Germany, large palaces were built for rulers and bishops. Local lords built great halls in the countryside, while rich merchants built grand town houses. In Italy, city councils constructed town halls (called Broletto or Arengario), while wealthy cities of Northern Europe protected their trading interests with warehouses and commercial premises. All over Europe, dwellers of the town and country built houses to live in, some of which, sturdily constructed in stone, have remained to this day with sufficient of their form and details intact to give a picture of the style of domestic architecture that was in fashion at the time.

Examples of all these types of buildings can be found scattered across Europe, sometimes as isolated survivals like the two merchants&#x27; houses on opposite sides of Steep Hill in Lincoln, England, and sometimes giving form to a whole medieval city like San Gimignano in Tuscany, Italy. These buildings are the subject of a separate article.

==Romanesque Revival==
 &quot;See also&quot; Romanesque Revival architecture in the United Kingdom
During the 19th century, when Gothic Revival architecture was fashionable, buildings were occasionally designed in the Romanesque style. There are a number of Romanesque Revival churches, dating from as early as the 1830s and continuing into the 20th century where the massive and &quot;brutal&quot; quality of the Romanesque style was appreciated and designed in brick.

The Natural History Museum, London, designed by Alfred Waterhouse, 1879, on the other hand, is a Romanesque revival building that makes full use of the decorative potential of Romanesque arcading and architectural sculpture. The Romanesque appearance has been achieved while freely adapting an overall style to suit the function of the building. The columns of the foyer, for example, give an impression of incised geometric design similar to those of Durham Cathedral. However, the sources of the incised patterns are the trunks of palms, cycads and tropical tree ferns. The animal motifs, of which there are many, include rare and exotic species.

The type of modern buildings for which the Romanesque style was most frequently adapted was the warehouse, where a lack of large windows and an appearance of great strength and stability were desirable features. These buildings, generally of brick, frequently have flattened buttresses rising to wide arches at the upper levels after the manner of some Italian Romanesque façades. This style was adapted to suit commercial buildings by opening the spaces between the arches into large windows, the brick walls becoming a shell to a building that was essentially of modern steel-frame construction, the architect Henry Hobson Richardson giving his name to the style, Richardsonian Romanesque. Good examples of the style are Marshall Field&#x27;s Wholesale Store, Chicago, by H.H. Richardson, 1885, and the Chadwick Lead Works in Boston, United States, by William Preston, 1887. The style also lent itself to the building of cloth mills, steelworks and powerstations.

==Notes==
==See also==
*Regional Styles
**France
**Poland
**Portugal
**Sardinia
**Spain
*List of Romanesque buildings
*List of Brick Romanesque buildings
*Mendicant monasteries in Mexico

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
==Further reading==
* V.I. Atroshenko and Judith Collins, &quot;The Origins of the Romanesque&quot;, Lund Humphries, London, 1985, 
* Rolf Toman, &quot;Romanesque: Architecture, Sculpture, Painting&quot;, Könemann, (1997), 
* Banister Fletcher, &quot;A History of Architecture on the Comparative method&quot; (2001). Elsevier Science &amp; Technology. .
*Alfred Clapham, &quot;Romanesque Architecture in England&quot; British Council (1950)
* Helen Gardner; Fred S. Kleiner, Christin J. Mamiya, &quot;Gardner&#x27;s Art through the Ages&quot;. Thomson Wadsworth, (2004) .
* George Holmes, editor, &quot;The Oxford Illustrated History of Medieval Europe&quot;, Oxford University Press, (1992) 
* René Huyghe, &quot;Larousse Encyclopedia of Byzantine and Medieval Art&quot;, Paul Hamlyn, (1958)
* François Ischer, &quot;Building the Great Cathedrals&quot;. Harry N. Abrams, (1998). .
* Nikolaus Pevsner, &quot;An Outline of European Architecture&quot;. Pelican Books (1964)
* John Beckwith, &quot;Early Medieval Art&quot;, Thames and Hudson, (1964)
* Peter Kidson, &quot;The Medieval World&quot;, Paul Hamlyn, (1967)
* T. Francis Bumpus, &quot;The Cathedrals and Churches of Belgium&quot;, T. Werner Laurie. (1928)
* Alec Clifton-Taylor, &quot;The Cathedrals of England&quot;, Thames and Hudson (1967)
* John Harvey, &quot;English Cathedrals&quot;, Batsford (1961).
* Trewin Copplestone, &quot;World Architecture, and Illustrated History&quot;, Paul Hamlyn, (1963)
* Tadhg O&#x27;Keefe, &quot;Archeology and the Pan-European Romanesque &quot;, Duckworth Publishers, (2007), 
* Mary Curtis Webb &quot;Ideas and images in twelfth century sculpture &quot;, https://lib.ugent.be/fulltxt/RUG01/001/879/684/RUG01-001879684_2012_0001_AC.pdf, privately published (2012)


==External links==

*Corpus of Romanesque Sculpture in Britain and Ireland
*French Romanesque art through 300 places 
*Romanesque Churches in Southern Burgundy 
*Círculo Románico – Visigothic, Mozarabic and Romanesque art in Europe
*Satan in the Groin – exhibitionist carvings on medieval churches
* Saint-Trophime Digital Media Archive (creative commons-licensed HD documentation) on the Romanesque Church of St. Trophime, using data from a World Monuments Fund/CyArk research partnership</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="0" end="23" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="30" end="49" title="architectural style" label="architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="53" end="68" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="162" end="174" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898821" start="271" end="288" title="semicircular arch" label="semicircular arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635434" start="326" end="338" title="pointed arch" label="pointed arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="549" end="576" title="Roman architecture" label="Imperial Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46805" start="659" end="673" title="Romanesque art" label="Romanesque art"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="698" end="711" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="716" end="725" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335297" start="855" end="862" title="Pier (architecture)" label="pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q917098" start="864" end="876" title="barrel vault" label="barrel vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="907" end="915" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcading"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="986" end="997" title="symmetrical" label="symmetrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="1071" end="1077" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="1222" end="1228" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="1342" end="1347" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="1796" end="1811" title="southern France" label="southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362465" start="1867" end="1885" title="Romanesque secular and domestic architecture" label="Romanesque secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898821" start="2506" end="2524" title="semi-circular arch" label="semi-circular arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="2823" end="2842" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80442" start="2937" end="2950" title="Robert Campin" label="Robert Campin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18508779" start="2995" end="3017" title="Marriage of the Virgin (Campin)" label="Marriage of the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="3060" end="3073" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="3158" end="3171" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="3356" end="3370" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="3375" end="3391" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3633" end="3650" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010271" start="3820" end="3832" title="William Gunn (writer)" label="William Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="3902" end="3916" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434784" start="4552" end="4571" title="Robert de Lasteyrie" label="Robert de Lasteyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422961" start="4576" end="4590" title="Henri Focillon" label="Henri Focillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q963774" start="5121" end="5140" title="Charles-Alexis-Adrien Duhérissier de Gerville" label="Charles de Gerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q766727" start="5176" end="5194" title="Auguste Le Prévost" label="Auguste Le Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860647" start="5340" end="5358" title="Arcisse de Caumont" label="Arcisse de Caumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q708807" start="5701" end="5715" title="Pre-Romanesque art and architecture" label="Pre-romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337737" start="5777" end="5788" title="Carolingian architecture" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588393" start="5793" end="5801" title="Ottonian architecture" label="Ottonian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5814" end="5824" title="Visigothic art and architecture#Visigothic architecture" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5826" end="5833" title="Mozarabic art and architecture#Architecture" label="Mozarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748473" start="5838" end="5846" title="Asturian architecture" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722661" start="5937" end="5953" title="First Romanesque" label="First Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="6096" end="6110" title="Abbey of Cluny" label="Abbey of Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="6179" end="6198" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="6242" end="6246" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940633" start="6287" end="6303" title="Pisan Romanesque" label="Pisan Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386479" start="6312" end="6323" title="Eric Fernie" label="Eric Fernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="7720" end="7726" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="7737" end="7746" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8095" end="8107" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="8135" end="8157" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman building methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q988346" start="8216" end="8227" title="Merovingian art and architecture" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337737" start="8229" end="8240" title="Carolingian architecture" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588393" start="8245" end="8253" title="Ottonian architecture" label="Ottonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="8749" end="8765" title="Architectural orders" label="Classical Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="8789" end="8802" title="Constantine I" label="Constantinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="8803" end="8811" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="8922" end="8944" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q721817" start="8986" end="9008" title="Basilica of San Vitale" label="Basilica of San Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="9012" end="9019" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="9075" end="9092" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="9108" end="9127" title="Emperor Charlemagne" label="Emperor Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458522" start="9135" end="9158" title="Palatine Chapel, Aachen" label="Palatine Chapel, Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426702" start="9299" end="9317" title="Plan of Saint Gall" label="Plan of Saint Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="9532" end="9536" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q158324" start="9792" end="9829" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Hildesheim" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="9958" end="9975" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="10036" end="10050" title="Abbey of Cluny" label="Abbey of Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722661" start="10080" end="10096" title="First Romanesque" label="First Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083873" start="10100" end="10118" title="Lombard architecture" label="Lombard Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q338504" start="10229" end="10241" title="Lombard band" label="Lombard band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="10260" end="10271" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="10287" end="10299" title="Pope Leo III" label="Pope Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="10303" end="10332" title="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="10397" end="10409" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="10636" end="10654" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="10674" end="10691" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="10720" end="10745" title="William, Duke of Normandy" label="William, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="10975" end="10985" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="11016" end="11034" title="Basilica of St Denis" label="Abbaye-Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="11036" end="11052" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="11057" end="11074" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="11192" end="11204" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11449" end="11465" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11489" end="11503" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="11624" end="11632" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="11693" end="11716" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="11718" end="11724" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736213" start="11814" end="11825" title="Périgueux Cathedral" label="Saint-Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="11827" end="11836" title="Périgueux" label="Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736169" start="11841" end="11860" title="Angoulême Cathedral" label="Angoulême Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="11894" end="11903" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="11999" end="12015" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="12213" end="12221" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q273773" start="12995" end="13000" title="Rollo" label="Rollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="13233" end="13244" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q91413" start="13433" end="13446" title="San Gimignano" label="San Gimignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="13450" end="13457" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="13462" end="13469" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="13474" end="13479" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="13483" end="13491" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="13510" end="13528" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q632379" start="13661" end="13686" title="Imperial Palace of Goslar" label="Imperial Palace of Goslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q494733" start="13816" end="13826" title="Gelnhausen" label="Gelnhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12586" start="14023" end="14029" title="Besalú" label="Besalú"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="14031" end="14040" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="14079" end="14086" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="14115" end="14122" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q609293" start="14446" end="14469" title="Santa Maria in Cosmedin" label="Santa Maria in Cosmedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q732511" start="14483" end="14505" title="Florence Baptistry" label="Baptistery in Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763642" start="14510" end="14527" title="Basilica of San Zeno, Verona" label="San Zeno Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="14608" end="14625" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205136" start="14698" end="14720" title="Santiago de Compostela Cathedral" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q782719" start="15013" end="15022" title="Old Sarum" label="Old Sarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="15045" end="15055" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q205136" start="15157" end="15179" title="Santiago de Compostela Cathedral" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q666960" start="15276" end="15281" title="Mainz Cathedral" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q701996" start="15283" end="15288" title="Worms Cathedral" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="15290" end="15296" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924" start="15301" end="15308" title="Bamberg Cathedral" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="15313" end="15320" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q869691" start="15380" end="15408" title="Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne" label="group of large city churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="15628" end="15644" title="Crusader kingdom" label="Crusader kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265" start="15931" end="15939" title="Benedict of Nursia" label="Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="15964" end="15975" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326484" start="16101" end="16108" title="Cluniacs" label="Cluniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="16120" end="16131" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="16133" end="16143" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q89566537" start="16149" end="16167" title="Augustinian Canons" label="Augustinian Canons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="16180" end="16188" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="16217" end="16236" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="16245" end="16260" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="16903" end="16908" title="Cluny Abbey" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010268" start="17305" end="17315" title="Basilica of St. Sernin, Toulouse" label="St. Sernin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="17319" end="17327" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="17571" end="17579" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="17645" end="17650" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="17809" end="17812" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="18091" end="18102" title="Relic" label="Holy Relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="18106" end="18111" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="18117" end="18125" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="18147" end="18169" title="Périgueux" label="Saint-Front, Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="18229" end="18251" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="18336" end="18351" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="18353" end="18375" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q303421" start="18392" end="18410" title="Kingdom of Galicia" label="Kingdom of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="18424" end="18431" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="18543" end="18559" title="Way of St. James" label="Way of St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q658613" start="18720" end="18728" title="Jumièges" label="Jumièges"/>
<link wikidata="Q204979" start="18737" end="18744" title="Vézelay" label="Vézelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q192982" start="18746" end="18751" title="Cluny" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="18753" end="18758" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180936" start="18763" end="18771" title="St. Gall" label="St. Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="18819" end="18827" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q383089" start="19023" end="19030" title="Moissac" label="Moissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="19032" end="19040" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q917891" start="19042" end="19054" title="Roncesvalles" label="Roncesvalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q317349" start="19056" end="19063" title="Conques" label="Conques"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="19065" end="19072" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q9580" start="19077" end="19083" title="Burgos" label="Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q625293" start="19156" end="19177" title="Saint-Benoît-du-Sault" label="Saint-Benoît-du-Sault"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="19471" end="19476" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="19487" end="19506" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="19646" end="19668" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722661" start="19806" end="19822" title="First Romanesque" label="First Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="20699" end="20705" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="20952" end="20960" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690580" start="21357" end="21372" title="flying buttress" label="flying buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="21785" end="21791" title="vault (architecture)" label="vaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="21898" end="21904" title="Lintel (architecture)" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="22516" end="22524" title="church architecture" label="churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="22551" end="22562" title="rose window" label="rose window"/>
<link wikidata="Q847108" start="22569" end="22582" title="plate tracery" label="plate tracery"/>
<link wikidata="Q611944" start="22661" end="22676" title="Autun Cathedral" label="Autun Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303856" start="22691" end="22709" title="Monreale Cathedral" label="Monreale Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="22872" end="22892" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="22936" end="22952" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354756" start="22958" end="22974" title="Cefalù Cathedral" label="Cefalù Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="23116" end="23135" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="23729" end="23739" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q883746" start="23961" end="23975" title="Blind arcade" label="blind arcading"/>
<link wikidata="Q335297" start="24071" end="24075" title="Pier (architecture)" label="pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="25853" end="25863" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q734649" start="25867" end="25882" title="Composite order" label="Roman Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q609293" start="25911" end="25934" title="Santa Maria in Cosmedin" label="Santa Maria in Cosmedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q385910" start="25953" end="25965" title="Basilica di San Clemente" label="San Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="26583" end="26599" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="26693" end="26709" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q158324" start="27236" end="27266" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s, Hildesheim" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s, Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q658613" start="27371" end="27379" title="Jumièges" label="Jumièges"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="27532" end="27548" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071570" start="27915" end="27941" title="Sant&amp;#x27; Ambrogio, Milan" label="Sant&amp;#x27; Ambrogio, Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="28125" end="28135" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754247" start="28335" end="28349" title="Pisa Cathedral" label="Pisa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672336" start="28363" end="28392" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Alessandro, Lucca" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Alessandro in Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="29190" end="29213" title="manuscript illumination" label="manuscript illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="29321" end="29343" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q579004" start="30138" end="30141" title="Ely Cathedral" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259104" start="30146" end="30158" title="Peterborough Cathedral" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q844337" start="30458" end="30478" title="San Miniato al Monte" label="San Miniato al Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="30653" end="30672" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q917098" start="30737" end="30749" title="barrel vault" label="barrel vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774129" start="30956" end="30980" title="Abbey Church of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe" label="Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14089752" start="31158" end="31169" title="Groin vault" label="Groin vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="31219" end="31235" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q425972" start="31742" end="31757" title="transverse arch" label="transverse arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="31797" end="31819" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q217452" start="31824" end="31855" title="Vézelay Abbey" label="Sainte Marie Madeleine, Vézelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q935723" start="31947" end="31959" title="Ribbed vault" label="Ribbed vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055129" start="32891" end="32909" title="San Michele, Pavia" label="San Michele, Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071570" start="32915" end="32941" title="Sant&amp;#x27; Ambrogio, Milan" label="Sant&amp;#x27; Ambrogio, Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q376932" start="33202" end="33219" title="Abbaye-aux-Hommes" label="Abbaye-aux-Hommes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754399" start="33242" end="33258" title="Église de la Ste.-Trinité, Caen" label="Abbaye-aux-Dames"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="33688" end="33704" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690580" start="34030" end="34045" title="flying buttress" label="flying buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q217452" start="34169" end="34190" title="Vézelay Abbey" label="La Madeleine, Vézelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="34306" end="34326" title="Basilica of St Denis" label="Basilica of St Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354756" start="34438" end="34457" title="Cathedral of Cefalù" label="Cathedral of Cefalù"/>
<link wikidata="Q728243" start="34535" end="34549" title="Crossing (architecture)" label="crossing tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="34590" end="34594" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="34599" end="34607" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431515" start="34805" end="34812" title="squinch" label="squinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q200674" start="35609" end="35620" title="Latin Cross" label="Latin Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="35897" end="35929" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Venice" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q586568" start="35948" end="35975" title="Church of the Holy Apostles" label="Church of the Holy Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894479" start="35988" end="35999" title="Greek cross" label="Greek cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736169" start="36042" end="36061" title="Angoulême Cathedral" label="Angoulême Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q155699" start="36477" end="36501" title="Abbey of St. Gall" label="Abbey Church of St. Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q200674" start="36593" end="36604" title="Latin Cross" label="Latin Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q701996" start="36840" end="36855" title="Worms Cathedral" label="Worms Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="36857" end="36873" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q611944" start="37238" end="37253" title="Autun Cathedral" label="Autun Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736169" start="37655" end="37674" title="Angoulême Cathedral" label="Angoulême Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="38068" end="38074" title="chevet" label="chevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q579004" start="38115" end="38128" title="Ely Cathedral" label="Ely Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q205136" start="38676" end="38715" title="Santiago de Compostela Cathedral" label="The cathedral of Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010268" start="39124" end="39161" title="Basilica of Saint-Sernin, Toulouse" label="The basilica Saint-Sernin of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q753721" start="39552" end="39568" title="Modena Cathedral" label="Modena Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="39649" end="39657" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="39704" end="39709" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q751239" start="40276" end="40285" title="triforium" label="triforium"/>
<link wikidata="Q537454" start="40824" end="40835" title="Anglo-Saxon architecture" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="41033" end="41044" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q376932" start="41700" end="41719" title="Abbaye-aux-Hommes" label="Saint-Étienne, Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492345" start="42758" end="42777" title="Southwell Cathedral" label="Southwell Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="42870" end="42877" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="42882" end="42888" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q564957" start="42934" end="42951" title="Limburg Cathedral" label="Limburg Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763642" start="43054" end="43079" title="San Zeno Maggiore, Verona" label="San Zeno Maggiore, Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055129" start="43085" end="43103" title="San Michele, Pavia" label="San Michele, Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844337" start="43423" end="43443" title="San Miniato al Monte" label="San Miniato al Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="43514" end="43524" title="polychrome" label="polychrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475948" start="43763" end="43786" title="Santa Maria della Pieve" label="Santa Maria della Pieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="43788" end="43794" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="43999" end="44008" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461541" start="44071" end="44079" title="westwerk" label="westwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q334032" start="44322" end="44339" title="Maria Laach Abbey" label="Maria Laach Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381806" start="44341" end="44362" title="Collegiate Church of Saint Gertrude, Nivelles" label="St Gertrude, Nivelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q253935" start="44368" end="44381" title="Basilica of Saint Servatius" label="St Serviatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362467" start="44940" end="44945" title="Romanesque architecture in Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16482064" start="44950" end="44958" title="Portuguese Romanesque architecture" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701996" start="45211" end="45226" title="Worms Cathedral" label="Worms Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q391229" start="45319" end="45336" title="Tournai Cathedral" label="Tournai Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q564957" start="45529" end="45536" title="Limburger Dom" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="45540" end="45546" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131208" start="45920" end="45926" title="Exeter Cathedral" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492345" start="45928" end="45937" title="Southwell Minster" label="Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q768692" start="45939" end="45946" title="Norwich Cathedral" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="45951" end="45967" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="46038" end="46044" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227106" start="46103" end="46111" title="roof shingle" label="shingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q391229" start="46950" end="46967" title="Tournai Cathedral" label="Tournai Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q13373" start="47289" end="47294" title="Lucca" label="Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q762111" start="47313" end="47325" title="Basilica di San Frediano" label="San Frediano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282278" start="47343" end="47348" title="Lucca Cathedral" label="Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362467" start="47375" end="47380" title="Romanesque architecture in Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39054" start="47495" end="47516" title="Leaning Tower of Pisa" label="Leaning Tower of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047420" start="47845" end="47869" title="Old Cathedral, Salamanca" label="Old Cathedral, Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12558" start="47959" end="47969" title="bell-gable" label="bell-gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q376932" start="48295" end="48308" title="Abbaye aux Hommes" label="Saint-Étienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754247" start="48335" end="48349" title="Pisa Cathedral" label="Pisa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q429811" start="48414" end="48429" title="Early Christian architecture" label="Early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083867" start="49362" end="49377" title="Nativity in art" label="Birth of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q283254" start="51080" end="51097" title="Fontevrault Abbey" label="Fontevrault Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="51169" end="51178" title="Périgueux" label="Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894479" start="51197" end="51208" title="Greek cross" label="Greek cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="52164" end="52184" title="Basilica of St Denis" label="Basilica of St Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="52632" end="52637" title="Crypt" label="Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="52953" end="52973" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630367" start="53123" end="53142" title="Worcester Cathedral" label="Worcester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q816741" start="53145" end="53150" title="Porch" label="Porch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="53750" end="53763" title="Chapter house" label="Chapter house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="54363" end="54371" title="Cloister" label="Cloister"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54399" end="54415" title="Romanesque secular and domestic architecture#Monastic buildings" label="monastic complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766072" start="54964" end="54986" title="Santo Domingo de Silos" label="Santo Domingo de Silos"/>
<link wikidata="Q334208" start="55004" end="55022" title="Moissac Abbey" label="Abbey of St Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="55173" end="55185" title="Baptistery" label="Baptisteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754247" start="55370" end="55384" title="Pisa Cathedral" label="Pisa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287889" start="55436" end="55451" title="Parma Cathedral" label="Parma Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q732511" start="55510" end="55536" title="Florence Baptistery" label="Baptistery of San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q15796" start="55670" end="55689" title="Coppo di Marcovaldo" label="Coppo di Marcovaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q338504" start="55875" end="55887" title="Lombard band" label="Lombard band"/>
<link wikidata="Q579004" start="56071" end="56084" title="Ely Cathedral" label="Ely Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="56127" end="56143" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754247" start="56188" end="56202" title="Pisa Cathedral" label="Pisa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170526" start="56218" end="56231" title="Leaning Tower" label="Leaning Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q429379" start="57031" end="57039" title="Hereford Cathedral" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q26935196" start="57176" end="57183" title="Chevron (insignia)" label="chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="57963" end="57982" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3670688" start="58194" end="58204" title="San Giusto, Lucca" label="San Giusto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13373" start="58208" end="58213" title="Lucca" label="Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="58303" end="58310" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q22720" start="58315" end="58331" title="Speyer Cathedral" label="Speyer Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010268" start="58481" end="58493" title="Basilica of Saint-Sernin, Toulouse" label="Saint-Sernin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46805" start="58615" end="58629" title="Romanesque art" label="Romanesque art"/>
<link wikidata="Q561828" start="59068" end="59094" title="Gero (Archbishop of Cologne)" label="Archbishop Gero of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q223209" start="59481" end="59489" title="Tympanum (architecture)" label="tympanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q972213" start="59581" end="59598" title="Christ in Majesty" label="Christ in Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q472773" start="59623" end="59639" title="Four Evangelists" label="Four Evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q690851" start="59689" end="59700" title="Gospel Book" label="Gospel Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q579004" start="59860" end="59873" title="Ely Cathedral" label="Ely Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q334208" start="59938" end="59968" title="Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac" label="Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59974" end="60005" title="Abbey of Sainte-Marie, Souillac" label="Abbey of Sainte-Marie, Souillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q217452" start="60011" end="60041" title="Abbey of la Madaleine, Vézelay" label="Abbey of la Madaleine, Vézelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q611944" start="60157" end="60172" title="Autun Cathedral" label="Autun Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="60179" end="60193" title="Last Judgement" label="Last Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="60561" end="60587" title="Great Commission" label="sending forth the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="60846" end="60862" title="Jeremiah (prophet)" label="Prophet Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q334208" start="60900" end="60930" title="Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac" label="Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q217452" start="61194" end="61215" title="Vézelay Abbey" label="La Madaleine, Vezelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="61325" end="61333" title="Genesis creation myth" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="61342" end="61353" title="Adam and Eve" label="Fall of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="61398" end="61411" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480072" start="61424" end="61433" title="Typology (theology)" label="prefigure"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="61438" end="61443" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="61448" end="61460" title="Resurrection" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468262" start="61470" end="61489" title="Jonah" label="Jonah and the Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219183" start="61494" end="61523" title="Daniel in the lions&amp;#x27; den" label="Daniel in the lions&amp;#x27; den"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083867" start="61530" end="61538" title="Nativity of Jesus in art" label="Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="61570" end="61581" title="Biblical Magi" label="Three Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340405" start="61627" end="61655" title="Santo Domingo de Silos Abbey" label="Santo Domingo de Silos Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q383089" start="61679" end="61686" title="Moissac" label="Moissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="62050" end="62061" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="62062" end="62072" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="62254" end="62260" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955008" start="62293" end="62302" title="semi-dome" label="semi-dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q972213" start="62316" end="62333" title="Christ in Majesty" label="Christ in Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431666" start="62376" end="62384" title="mandorla" label="mandorla"/>
<link wikidata="Q472773" start="62438" end="62454" title="Four Evangelists" label="Four Evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q690851" start="62534" end="62545" title="Gospel Book" label="Gospel Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="62569" end="62580" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314138" start="62876" end="62900" title="Heavenly host" label="elders of the Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297072" start="63151" end="63164" title="Doom paintings" label="Doom painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="63168" end="63182" title="Last Judgement" label="Last Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774129" start="63285" end="63309" title="Abbey Church of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe" label="Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="63433" end="63446" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="63460" end="63468" title="Genesis creation myth" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="63474" end="63485" title="Adam and Eve" label="Fall of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q126553" start="63536" end="63551" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="63950" end="63960" title="Apocalypse" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="64255" end="64268" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q51630" start="64808" end="64827" title="Ancestors of Christ" label="Ancestors of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806857" start="65045" end="65066" title="Medieval stained glass" label="stained glass windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="65461" end="65480" title="Ascension of Christ" label="Ascension of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="65788" end="65807" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q391229" start="66159" end="66176" title="Tournai Cathedral" label="Tournai Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q579004" start="66217" end="66230" title="Ely Cathedral" label="Ely Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q137934" start="66338" end="66349" title="Abbot Suger" label="Abbot Suger"/>
<link wikidata="Q585947" start="66454" end="66468" title="Laon Cathedral" label="Laon Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="66564" end="66584" title="Abbey of Saint-Denis" label="Abbey of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="67120" end="67150" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q476529" start="67366" end="67386" title="Winchester Cathedral" label="Winchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630367" start="67646" end="67665" title="Worcester Cathedral" label="Worcester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="67737" end="67757" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="67819" end="67837" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51175" start="67842" end="67861" title="Santa Maria Novella" label="Santa Maria Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="68507" end="68524" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="69148" end="69163" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="69239" end="69245" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q256915" start="69300" end="69310" title="great hall" label="great hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="69365" end="69375" title="town house" label="town house"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="69414" end="69423" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q263529" start="69433" end="69441" title="Broletto" label="Broletto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789011" start="69445" end="69454" title="Arengario" label="Arengario"/>
<link wikidata="Q181623" start="69536" end="69545" title="warehouse" label="warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="70040" end="70056" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q91413" start="70114" end="70127" title="San Gimignano" label="San Gimignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020423" start="70248" end="70301" title="Romanesque Revival architecture in the United Kingdom" label="Romanesque Revival architecture in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="70332" end="70359" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="70678" end="70708" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q339830" start="70722" end="70739" title="Alfred Waterhouse" label="Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q723234" start="71936" end="71959" title="Henry Hobson Richardson" label="Henry Hobson Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501297" start="71990" end="72014" title="Richardsonian Romanesque" label="Richardsonian Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773569" start="72047" end="72084" title="Marshall Field&amp;#x27;s Wholesale Store" label="Marshall Field&amp;#x27;s Wholesale Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="72152" end="72158" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009572" start="72178" end="72193" title="William G. Preston" label="William Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159155" start="72333" end="72339" title="French Romanesque architecture" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159154" start="72342" end="72348" title="Romanesque architecture in Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16482064" start="72351" end="72359" title="Portuguese Romanesque architecture" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q963612" start="72362" end="72370" title="Romanesque architecture in Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362467" start="72373" end="72378" title="Romanesque architecture in Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595856" start="72380" end="72408" title="List of Romanesque buildings" label="List of Romanesque buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q798512" start="72410" end="72444" title="List of Brick Romanesque buildings" label="List of Brick Romanesque buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021574" start="72446" end="72477" title="Mendicant monasteries in Mexico" label="Mendicant monasteries in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634186" start="72751" end="72768" title="Banister Fletcher" label="Banister Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997910" start="72880" end="72894" title="Alfred Clapham" label="Alfred Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702331" start="72968" end="72981" title="Helen Gardner (art historian)" label="Helen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="73409" end="73425" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788518" start="74687" end="74709" title="Church of St. Trophime" label="Church of St. Trophime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297150" start="74729" end="74749" title="World Monuments Fund" label="World Monuments Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376844" start="74750" end="74755" title="CyArk" label="CyArk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52687" wikidata="Q4198718" url="?curid=52687" title="Classical architecture">
<text>Classical architecture usually denotes architecture which is more or less consciously derived from the principles of Greek and Roman architecture of classical antiquity, or sometimes more specifically, from &quot;De architectura&quot; (c. 10 AD) by the Roman architect Vitruvius. Different styles of classical architecture have arguably existed since the Carolingian Renaissance, and prominently since the Italian Renaissance. Although classical styles of architecture can vary greatly, they can in general all be said to draw on a common &quot;vocabulary&quot; of decorative and constructive elements. In much of the Western world, different classical architectural styles have dominated the history of architecture from the Renaissance until World War II. Classical architecture continues to inform many architects.

The term classical architecture also applies to any mode of architecture that has evolved to a highly refined state, such as classical Chinese architecture, or classical Mayan architecture. It can also refer to any architecture that employs classical aesthetic philosophy. The term might be used differently from &quot;traditional&quot; or &quot;vernacular architecture&quot; although it can share underlying axioms with it.

For contemporary buildings following authentic classical principles, the term New Classical architecture is sometimes used.

==History==

===Origins===
Classical architecture is derived from the architecture of ancient Greece and ancient Rome. With the collapse of the western part of the Roman empire, the architectural traditions of the Roman empire ceased to be practised in large parts of western Europe. In the Byzantine Empire, the ancient ways of building lived on but relatively soon developed into a distinct Byzantine style. The first conscious efforts to bring back the disused language of form of classical antiquity into Western architecture can be traced to the Carolingian Renaissance of the late 8th and 9th centuries. The gatehouse of Lorsch Abbey (), in present-day Germany thus displays a system of alternating attached columns and arches which could be an almost direct paraphrase of e.g., that of the Colosseum in Rome. Byzantine architecture, just as Romanesque and even to some extent Gothic architecture (with which classical architecture is often posed), can also incorporate classical elements and details but do not to the same degree reflect a conscious effort to draw upon the architectural traditions of antiquity; for example, they do not observe the idea of a systematic order of proportions for columns. In general, therefore, they are not considered classical architectural styles in a strict sense.

===Development===

During the Italian Renaissance and with the demise of Gothic style, major efforts were made by architects such as Leon Battista Alberti, Sebastiano Serlio and Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola to revive the language of architecture of first and foremost ancient Rome. This was done in part through the study of the ancient Roman architectural treatise by Vitruvius, and to some extent by studying the actual remains of ancient Roman buildings in Italy. Nonetheless, the classical architecture of the Renaissance from the outset represents a highly specific interpretation of the classical ideas. In a building like the Ospedale degli Innocenti in Florence by Filippo Brunelleschi, one of the earliest Renaissance buildings (built 1419–1445), the treatment of the columns for example has no direct antecedent in ancient Roman architecture. During this time period, the study of ancient architecture developed into the architectural theory of classical architecture; somewhat over-simplified, that classical architecture in its variety of forms ever since have been interpretations and elaborations of the architectural rules set down during antiquity.

Most of the styles originating in post-Renaissance Europe can be described as classical architecture. This broad use of the term is employed by Sir John Summerson in &quot;The Classical Language of Architecture&quot;. The elements of classical architecture have been applied in radically different architectural contexts than those for which they were developed, however. For example, Baroque or Rococo architecture are styles which, although classical at root, display an architectural language much in their own right. During these periods, architectural theory still referred to classical ideas but rather less sincerely than during the Renaissance.

The Palladian architecture developed from the style of the Venetian architect Andrea Palladio (1508–1580) had a great influence long after his death, above all in Britain, where it was adopted for many of the grander buildings of the Georgian architecture of the 18th and early 19th century.

As a reaction to late Baroque and Rococo forms, architectural theorists from through what became known as Neoclassicism again consciously and earnestly attempted to emulate antiquity, supported by recent developments in Classical archaeology and a desire for an architecture based on clear rules and rationality. Claude Perrault, Marc-Antoine Laugier and Carlo Lodoli were among the first theorists of Neoclassicism, while Étienne-Louis Boullée, Claude Nicolas Ledoux, Friedrich Gilly and John Soane were among the more radical and influential. Neoclassical architecture held a particularly strong position on the architectural scene –1850. The competing neo-Gothic style however rose to popularity during the early 1800s, and the later part the 19th century was characterised by a variety of styles, some of them only slightly or not at all related to classicism (such as Art Nouveau), and Eclecticism. Although classical architecture continued to play an important role and for periods of time at least locally dominated the architectural scene, as exemplified by the Nordic Classicism during the 1920s, classical architecture in its stricter form never regained its former dominance. With the advent of Modernism during the early 20th century, classical architecture arguably almost ceased to be practised.

==Scope==

As noted above, classical styles of architecture dominated Western architecture for a long time, roughly from the Renaissance until the advent of Modernism. That is to say, that classical antiquity at least in theory was considered the prime source of inspiration for architectural endeavours in the West for much of Modern history. Even so, because of liberal, personal or theoretically diverse interpretations of the antique heritage, classicism covers a broad range of styles, some even so to speak cross-referencing, like Neo-Palladian architecture, which draws its inspiration from the works of Italian Renaissance architect Andrea Palladio, who himself drew inspiration from ancient Roman architecture. Furthermore, it can be argued that styles of architecture not typically considered classical, like Gothic, can contain classical elements. Therefore, a simple delineation of the scope of classical architecture is difficult to make. The more or less defining characteristic can still be said to be a reference to ancient Greek or Roman architecture, and the architectural rules or theories that derived from that architecture.

==Petrification==

In the grammar of architecture, the word &quot;petrification&quot; is often used when discussing the development of sacred structures such as temples, mainly with reference to developments in the Greek world. During the Archaic and early Classical periods (about the 6th and early 5th centuries BC), the architectural forms of the earliest temples had solidified and the Doric emerged as the predominant element. The most widely accepted theory in classical studies is that the earliest temple structures were of wood and the great forms, or elements of architectural style, were codified and rather permanent by the time the Archaic became emergent and established. It was during this period, at different times and places in the Greek world, that the use of dressed and polished stone replaced the wood in these early temples, but the forms and shapes of the old wooden styles were retained in a skeuomorphic fashion, just as if the wooden structures had turned to stone, thus the designation &quot;petrification&quot; or sometimes &quot;petrified carpentry&quot; for this process.

This careful preservation of the traditional wooden appearance in the stone fabric of the newer buildings was scrupulously observed and this suggests that it may have been dictated by religion rather than aesthetics, although the exact reasons are now lost in antiquity. Not everyone within the reach of Hellenic civilization made this transition. The Etruscans in Italy were, from their earliest period, greatly influenced by their contact with Greek culture and religion, but they retained their wooden temples (with some exceptions) until their culture was completely absorbed into the Roman world, with the great wooden Temple of Jupiter on the Capitol in Rome itself being a good example. Nor was it the lack of knowledge of stone working on their part that prevented them from making the transition from timber to dressed stone.

==See also==

* Neoclassical architecture
* New Classical architecture
* Outline of classical architecture
* Seven Wonders of the Ancient World

== References ==
==Further reading==
*Sir John Summerson (rev. 1980) &quot;The Classical Language of Architecture&quot; .
*Gromort Georges (Author), Richard Sammons (Introductory Essay). &quot;The Elements of Classical Architecture (Classical America Series in Art and Architecture)&quot;, 2001, .
*OpenSource Classicism – project for free educational content about classical architecture (video on YouTube)
*The Foundations of Classical Architecture Part Two: Greek Classicism – free educational program by the ICAA (published August 29, 2018)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="0" end="22" title="Classical architecture" label="Classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="39" end="51" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="117" end="122" title="Ancient Greek architecture" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="127" end="145" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="149" end="168" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232238" start="213" end="228" title="De architectura" label="De architectura"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="269" end="278" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="290" end="296" title="Architectural style" label="styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="355" end="378" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="406" end="425" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="618" end="631" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="653" end="672" title="architectural style" label="architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="726" end="737" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="744" end="756" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="1165" end="1188" title="vernacular architecture" label="vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q50084199" start="1323" end="1349" title="New Classical architecture" label="New Classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350094" start="1498" end="1546" title="Deposition of Romulus Augustulus" label="collapse of the western part of the Roman empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1661" end="1677" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="1763" end="1778" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337737" start="1921" end="1944" title="Carolingian architecture" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q157550" start="1997" end="2009" title="Lorsch Abbey" label="Lorsch Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2029" end="2036" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="2167" end="2176" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="2186" end="2208" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="2218" end="2228" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="2253" end="2272" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="2535" end="2580" title="Classical order" label="a systematic order of proportions for columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="2710" end="2729" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="2813" end="2834" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q452318" start="2836" end="2853" title="Sebastiano Serlio" label="Sebastiano Serlio"/>
<link wikidata="Q297565" start="2858" end="2884" title="Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola" label="Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="3047" end="3056" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257947" start="3311" end="3335" title="Ospedale degli Innocenti" label="Ospedale degli Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3339" end="3347" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="3351" end="3371" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="3503" end="3529" title="ancient Roman architecture" label="ancient Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3883" end="3894" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="3992" end="4006" title="John Summerson" label="John Summerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723310" start="4016" end="4054" title="The Classical Language of Architecture" label="The Classical Language of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="4229" end="4236" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4240" end="4259" title="Rococo architecture#Rococo Palace Architecture" label="Rococo architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47537" start="4387" end="4407" title="architectural theory" label="architectural theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="4502" end="4524" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="4557" end="4565" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="4576" end="4591" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="4732" end="4753" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="4897" end="4910" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669589" start="5011" end="5032" title="Classical archaeology" label="Classical archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q347699" start="5104" end="5119" title="Claude Perrault" label="Claude Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892528" start="5121" end="5141" title="Marc-Antoine Laugier" label="Marc-Antoine Laugier"/>
<link wikidata="Q601642" start="5146" end="5158" title="Carlo Lodoli" label="Carlo Lodoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q289220" start="5214" end="5235" title="Étienne-Louis Boullée" label="Étienne-Louis Boullée"/>
<link wikidata="Q552700" start="5237" end="5258" title="Claude Nicolas Ledoux" label="Claude Nicolas Ledoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q62973" start="5260" end="5275" title="Friedrich Gilly" label="Friedrich Gilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q549786" start="5280" end="5290" title="John Soane" label="John Soane"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="5446" end="5462" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="neo-Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="5664" end="5675" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479493" start="5682" end="5693" title="Eclecticism in architecture" label="Eclecticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788409" start="5861" end="5878" title="Nordic Classicism" label="Nordic Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="5997" end="6006" title="Modern architecture" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="6430" end="6444" title="Modern history" label="Modern history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6639" end="6665" title="Palladian architecture#Neo-Palladianism" label="Neo-Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="6743" end="6758" title="Andrea Palladio" label="Andrea Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47848" start="7384" end="7401" title="Sacral architecture" label="sacred structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="7488" end="7495" title="Archaic Greece" label="Archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="7506" end="7515" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="7639" end="7644" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="8705" end="8714" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="8977" end="8994" title="Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill)" label="Temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="9205" end="9230" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q50084199" start="9233" end="9259" title="New Classical architecture" label="New Classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920566" start="9262" end="9295" title="Outline of classical architecture" label="Outline of classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="9298" end="9332" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328872" start="9483" end="9498" title="Richard Sammons" label="Richard Sammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="9733" end="9740" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52688" wikidata="Q808561" url="?curid=52688" title="Baroque painting">
<text>Baroque painting is the painting associated with the Baroque cultural movement. The movement is often identified with Absolutism, the Counter Reformation and Catholic Revival, but the existence of important Baroque art and architecture in non-absolutist and Protestant states throughout Western Europe underscores its widespread popularity.

Baroque painting encompasses a great range of styles, as most important and major painting during the period beginning around 1600 and continuing throughout the 17th century, and into the early 18th century is identified today as Baroque painting. In its most typical manifestations, Baroque art is characterized by great drama, rich, deep colour, and intense light and dark shadows, but the classicism of French Baroque painters like Poussin and Dutch genre painters such as Vermeer are also covered by the term, at least in English. As opposed to Renaissance art, which usually showed the moment before an event took place, Baroque artists chose the most dramatic point, the moment when the action was occurring: Michelangelo, working in the High Renaissance, shows his David composed and still before he battles Goliath; Bernini&#x27;s Baroque David is caught in the act of hurling the stone at the giant. Baroque art was meant to evoke emotion and passion instead of the calm rationality that had been prized during the Renaissance.

Among the greatest painters of the Baroque period are Velázquez, Caravaggio, Rembrandt, Rubens, Poussin, and Vermeer. Caravaggio is an heir of the humanist painting of the High Renaissance. His realistic approach to the human figure, painted directly from life and dramatically spotlit against a dark background, shocked his contemporaries and opened a new chapter in the history of painting. Baroque painting often dramatizes scenes using chiaroscuro light effects; this can be seen in works by Rembrandt, Vermeer, Le Nain and La Tour.
The Flemish painter Anthony van Dyck developed a graceful but imposing portrait style that was very influential, especially in England.

The prosperity of 17th century Holland led to an enormous production of art by large numbers of painters who were mostly highly specialized and painted only genre scenes, landscapes, still lifes, portraits or history paintings. Technical standards were very high, and Dutch Golden Age painting established a new repertoire of subjects that was very influential until the arrival of Modernism.

== History ==

The Council of Trent (1545–1563), in which the Roman Catholic Church answered many questions of internal reform raised by both Protestants and by those who had remained inside the Catholic Church, addressed the representational arts in a short and somewhat oblique passage in its decrees. This was subsequently interpreted and expounded by a number of clerical authors like Molanus, who demanded that paintings and sculptures in church contexts should depict their subjects clearly and powerfully, and with decorum, without the stylistic airs of Mannerism.
This return toward a populist conception of the function of ecclesiastical art is seen by many art historians as driving the innovations of Caravaggio and the Carracci brothers, all of whom were working (and competing for commissions) in Rome around 1600, although unlike the Carracci, Caravaggio persistently was criticised for lack of decorum in his work.
However, although religious painting, history painting, allegories, and portraits were still considered the most noble subjects, landscape, still life, and genre scenes were also becoming more common in Catholic countries, and were the main genres in Protestant ones.

===The term===
The term &quot;Baroque&quot; was initially used with a derogatory meaning, to underline the excesses of its emphasis. Others derive it from the mnemonic term &quot;Baroco&quot; denoting, in logical &quot;Scholastica&quot;, a supposedly laboured form of syllogism.
In particular, the term was used to describe its eccentric redundancy and noisy abundance of details, which sharply contrasted the clear and sober rationality of the Renaissance. It was first rehabilitated by the Swiss-born art historian, Heinrich Wölfflin (1864–1945) in his &quot;Renaissance und Barock&quot; (1888); Wölfflin identified the Baroque as &quot;movement imported into mass&quot;, an art antithetic to Renaissance art. He did not make the distinctions between Mannerism and Baroque that modern writers do, and he ignored the later phase, the academic Baroque that lasted into the 18th century. Writers in French and English did not begin to treat Baroque as a respectable study until Wölfflin&#x27;s influence had made German scholarship pre-eminent.

==National variations==
Led by Italian Baroque painting, Mediterranean countries, slowly followed by most of the Holy Roman Empire in Germany and Central Europe, generally adopted a full-blooded Baroque approach.

A rather different art developed out of northern realist traditions in 17th century Dutch Golden Age painting, which had very little religious art, and little history painting, instead playing a crucial part in developing secular genres such as still life, genre paintings of everyday scenes, and landscape painting. While the Baroque nature of Rembrandt&#x27;s art is clear, the label is less used for Vermeer and many other Dutch artists. Most Dutch art lacks the idealization and love of splendour typical of much Baroque work, including the neighbouring Flemish Baroque painting which shared a part in Dutch trends, while also continuing to produce the traditional categories in a more clearly Baroque style.

In France a dignified and graceful classicism gave a distinctive flavour to Baroque painting, where the later 17th century is also regarded as a golden age for painting. Two of the most important artists, Nicolas Poussin and Claude Lorrain, remained based in Rome, where their work, almost all in easel paintings, was much appreciated by Italian as well as French patrons.

==Baroque painters==

===British===
*William Dobson (1611–1646)
*George Jamesone (1587–1644)
*Godfrey Kneller (1646–1723)
*Peter Lely (1618–1680)
*Daniël Mijtens (1590–1648)
*John Michael Wright (1617–1694)

===Dutch===
===Czech (Bohemian)===
*Václav Hollar (1607–1677)
*Karel Škréta (1610–1674)
*Petr Brandl (1668–1735)
*Václav Vavřinec Reiner (1686–1743)

===Flemish===
===French===
===German===
*Cosmas Damian Asam (1686–1739)
*Wolfgang Heimbach (1605-1678)
*Adam Elsheimer (1578–1610)
*Johann Liss (1590–1627)
*Sebastian Stoskopff (1597–1657)

===Hungarian===
*Ádám Mányoki (1673–1757)

===Italian===
===Polish===
===Portuguese===
===Spanish===
==Gallery==

==See also==
*Baroque illusionistic painting
*History of painting
*Western painting
*Rococo Painting

==References==
==Reading==
* 
* Mark Getlein, &quot;Living With Art, 8th edition&quot;.
*Gombrich, E.H., &quot;The Story of Art&quot;, Phaidon, 1995. 
*Christine Buci-Glucksmann, Baroque Reason: The Aesthetics of Modernity, Sage, 1994
*Michael Kitson, 1966. &quot;The Age of Baroque&#x27;
*Heinrich Wölfflin, 1964. &quot;Renaissance and Baroque&quot; (Reprinted 1984; originally published in German, 1888) The classic study. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q808561" start="0" end="16" title="Baroque painting" label="Baroque painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="24" end="32" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="53" end="60" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198855" start="61" end="78" title="cultural movement" label="cultural movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="118" end="128" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="Absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="134" end="153" title="Counter Reformation" label="Counter Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="223" end="235" title="Baroque architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="258" end="268" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="572" end="579" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="734" end="744" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="777" end="784" title="Poussin" label="Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047337" start="795" end="809" title="genre painters" label="genre painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="818" end="825" title="Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="891" end="906" title="Renaissance art" label="Renaissance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="1057" end="1069" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="1086" end="1102" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179900" start="1114" end="1119" title="David (Michelangelo)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q192785" start="1157" end="1164" title="Goliath" label="Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="1166" end="1173" title="Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q766487" start="1189" end="1194" title="David (Bernini)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="1415" end="1422" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="1434" end="1443" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="1445" end="1455" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="1457" end="1466" title="Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="1468" end="1474" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="1476" end="1483" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="1489" end="1496" title="Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="1527" end="1535" title="Humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="1552" end="1568" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="1574" end="1583" title="realism (visual arts)" label="realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219540" start="1820" end="1831" title="chiaroscuro" label="chiaroscuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q809658" start="1896" end="1903" title="Le Nain" label="Le Nain"/>
<link wikidata="Q203371" start="1908" end="1915" title="Georges de La Tour" label="La Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="1937" end="1953" title="Anthony van Dyck" label="Anthony van Dyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q214127" start="2211" end="2223" title="genre painting" label="genre scenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="2225" end="2235" title="Landscape art" label="landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="2237" end="2247" title="still life" label="still life"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="2250" end="2258" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="2263" end="2279" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="2322" end="2347" title="Dutch Golden Age painting" label="Dutch Golden Age painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="2436" end="2445" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="2467" end="2483" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2510" end="2531" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2590" end="2601" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2660" end="2695" title="Art in Roman Catholicism#Council of Trent" label="addressed the representational arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q89381" start="2837" end="2844" title="Molanus" label="Molanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="2864" end="2872" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="2878" end="2887" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="3009" end="3018" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="3041" end="3049" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="3115" end="3129" title="Art history" label="art historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="3160" end="3170" title="Michelangelo Merisi" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594649" start="3179" end="3187" title="The Carracci" label="Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864737" start="3396" end="3414" title="sacred art" label="religious painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="3416" end="3432" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="3434" end="3444" title="allegories" label="allegories"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="3450" end="3459" title="portraits" label="portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="3507" end="3516" title="Landscape art" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="3518" end="3528" title="still life" label="still life"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="3915" end="3924" title="syllogism" label="syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4139" end="4149" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss-born"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="4150" end="4163" title="Art History" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123466" start="4165" end="4182" title="Heinrich Wölfflin" label="Heinrich Wölfflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4342" end="4353" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="4400" end="4409" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092666" start="4723" end="4747" title="Italian Baroque painting" label="Italian Baroque painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4805" end="4822" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="4838" end="4852" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="4990" end="5015" title="Dutch Golden Age painting" label="Dutch Golden Age painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="5065" end="5081" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="5151" end="5161" title="still life" label="still life"/>
<link wikidata="Q214127" start="5163" end="5177" title="genre painting" label="genre painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="5203" end="5221" title="landscape painting" label="landscape painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="5309" end="5316" title="Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994273" start="5464" end="5488" title="Flemish Baroque painting" label="Flemish Baroque painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="5825" end="5840" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214074" start="5845" end="5859" title="Claude Lorrain" label="Claude Lorrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q939611" start="5917" end="5931" title="easel painting" label="easel painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q58303" start="6031" end="6045" title="William Dobson" label="William Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725308" start="6059" end="6074" title="George Jamesone" label="George Jamesone"/>
<link wikidata="Q65317" start="6088" end="6103" title="Godfrey Kneller" label="Godfrey Kneller"/>
<link wikidata="Q161336" start="6117" end="6127" title="Peter Lely" label="Peter Lely"/>
<link wikidata="Q655535" start="6141" end="6155" title="Daniël Mijtens" label="Daniël Mijtens"/>
<link wikidata="Q381698" start="6169" end="6188" title="John Michael Wright" label="John Michael Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q448555" start="6238" end="6251" title="Václav Hollar" label="Václav Hollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q728117" start="6265" end="6277" title="Karel Škréta" label="Karel Škréta"/>
<link wikidata="Q558499" start="6291" end="6302" title="Petr Brandl" label="Petr Brandl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357856" start="6316" end="6338" title="Wenzel Lorenz Reiner" label="Václav Vavřinec Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q715693" start="6393" end="6411" title="Cosmas Damian Asam" label="Cosmas Damian Asam"/>
<link wikidata="Q113411" start="6425" end="6442" title="Wolfgang Heimbach" label="Wolfgang Heimbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q310285" start="6456" end="6470" title="Adam Elsheimer" label="Adam Elsheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q700279" start="6484" end="6495" title="Johann Liss" label="Johann Liss"/>
<link wikidata="Q706913" start="6509" end="6528" title="Sebastian Stoskopff" label="Sebastian Stoskopff"/>
<link wikidata="Q350369" start="6559" end="6571" title="Ádám Mányoki" label="Ádám Mányoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121876" start="6670" end="6700" title="Baroque illusionistic painting" label="Baroque illusionistic painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772393" start="6702" end="6721" title="History of painting" label="History of painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756540" start="6723" end="6739" title="Western painting" label="Western painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5668507" start="6741" end="6756" title="Rococo Painting" label="Rococo Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q78504" start="6847" end="6861" title="Ernst Gombrich" label="Gombrich, E.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q384688" start="6910" end="6935" title="Christine Buci-Glucksmann" label="Christine Buci-Glucksmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831899" start="6994" end="7008" title="Michael Kitson" label="Michael Kitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123466" start="7048" end="7065" title="Heinrich Wölfflin" label="Heinrich Wölfflin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52691" wikidata="Q1900271" url="?curid=52691" title="Morris dance">
<text>Morris dancing is a form of English folk dance. It is based on rhythmic stepping and the execution of choreographed figures by a group of dancers in costume, usually wearing bell pads on their shins, their shoes or both. A band or single musician, also costumed, will accompany them. Sticks, swords, handkerchiefs, and a variety of other implements may be wielded by the dancers.

Morris dancing first appeared in England in the 15th century. Its earliest surviving mention dates to 1448 and records the payment of seven shillings to Morris dancers by the Goldsmiths&#x27; Company in London. The term &quot;Morris&quot; comes from a Flemish form of &quot;Moorish&quot;, although Morris dancing has no known historical connection to the Moors.

Three prominent groups organise and support Morris in England: Morris Ring, Morris Federation and Open Morris; all three organisations have members from other countries as well.

There are around 150 Morris sides (or teams) in the United States. English immigrants form a large part of the Morris tradition in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Hong Kong. There are relatively isolated groups in other countries, for example those in Utrecht and Helmond, Netherlands; the Arctic Morris Group of Helsinki, Finland and Stockholm, Sweden; as well as in Cyprus and St Petersburg, Russia.

==Name and origins==
Throughout its history, the Morris seems to have been common. It was imported from village festivities into popular entertainment after the invention of the court masque by Henry VIII. The word Morris apparently derived from &quot;morisco&quot;, meaning &#x27;Moorish&#x27;. Cecil Sharp, whose collecting of Morris dances preserved many from extinction, suggested that it might have arisen from the dancers&#x27; blacking their faces as part of the necessary ritual disguise.

The name is first recorded in English in the mid-15th century as , , , i.e. &#x27;Moorish dance&#x27;. The term entered English via Flemish . Comparable terms in other languages include German (also from the 15th century), French , Croatian , and , or in Italy and Spain. The modern spelling &quot;Morris-dance&quot; first appeared in the 17th century. In Edward Phillips&#x27;s &quot;The New World of English Words&quot;, first published in 1658, the term &quot;morisco&quot; was referenced as both &quot;a Moor&quot; and &quot;the Morris dance, as it were the Moorish dance&quot;, while John Bullokar defined it in 1695 as &quot;a certain dance used among the Moors; whence our Morris dance&quot;.

It is unclear how the dance came to be referred to as Moorish, &quot;unless in reference to fantastic dancing or costumes&quot;, i.e. the deliberately &quot;exotic&quot; flavour of the performance. The English dance thus apparently arose as part of a wider 15th-century European fashion for supposedly &quot;Moorish&quot; spectacle, which also left traces in Spanish and Italian folk dance. The means and chronology of the transmission of this fashion is now difficult to trace; the &quot;London Chronicle&quot; recorded &quot;spangled Spanish dancers&quot; performed an energetic dance before King Henry VII at Christmas in 1494, but Heron&#x27;s accounts also mention &quot;&quot; four days earlier, and the attestation of the English term from the mid-15th century establishes that there was a &quot;Moorish dance&quot; performed in England decades prior to 1494.

An alternative derivation from the Latin , (custom and usage) has also been suggested.

It has been suggested that the tradition of rural English dancers blackening their faces may be a form of disguise, or a reference either to the Moors or to miners; the origins of the practice remain unclear and are the subject of ongoing debate. In June 2020 the Joint Morris Organisation called for the use of black makeup to be discontinued, in response to the Black Lives Matter movement. Groups that used face paint changed to blue, green, or yellow and black stripes.

==History in England==
The earliest (15th-century) references place the Morris dance in a courtly setting. The dance became part of performances for the lower classes by the later 16th century. Henry VIII owned a gold salt cellar which depicted a Morris dance with five dancers and a &quot;tabrett&quot;. A &quot;tabret&quot; is a small tabor drum. On 4 January 1552, George Ferrers, the Lord of Misrule of Edward VI, put on a show in London which included &quot;mores danse, dansyng with a tabret&quot;. In 1600, the Shakespearean actor William Kempe Morris danced from London to Norwich, an event chronicled in his &quot;Nine Daies Wonder&quot; (1600).

Almost nothing is known about the folk dances of England prior to the mid-17th century. While it is possible to speculate on the transition of &quot;Morris dancing&quot; from the courtly to a rural setting, it may have acquired elements of pre-Elizabethan (medieval) folk dance, such proposals will always be based on an argument from silence as there is no direct record of what such elements would have looked like. In the Elizabethan period, there was significant cultural contact between Italy and England, and it has been suggested that much of what is now considered traditional English folk dance, and especially English country dance, is descended from Italian dances imported in the 16th century.

By the mid 17th century, the working peasantry took part in Morris dances, especially at Whitsun. The Puritan government of Oliver Cromwell, however, suppressed Whitsun ales and other such festivities. When the crown was restored by Charles II, the springtime festivals were restored. In particular, Whitsun Ales came to be celebrated on Whitsunday (Pentecost), as the date was close to the birthday of Charles II.

A regional reference occurs in Horsham, Sussex in 1750.

Morris dancing continued in popularity until the Industrial Revolution and its accompanying social changes. Four teams claim a continuous lineage of tradition within their village or town: Abingdon (their Morris team was kept going by the Hemmings family), Bampton, Headington Quarry, and Chipping Campden. Other villages have revived their own traditions, and hundreds of other teams across the globe have adopted (and adapted) these traditions, or have created their own styles from the basic building blocks of Morris stepping and figures.

By the late 19th century, and in the West Country at least, Morris dancing was fast becoming more a local memory than an activity. D&#x27;Arcy Ferris (or de Ferrars), a Cheltenham-based singer, music teacher and organiser of pageants, became intrigued by the tradition and sought to revive it. He first encountered Morris in Bidford and organised its revival. Over the following years he took the side to several places in the West Country, from Malvern to Bicester and from Redditch to Moreton in Marsh. By 1910, he and Cecil Sharp were in correspondence on the subject.

Several English folklorists were responsible for recording and reviving the tradition in the early 20th century, often from a bare handful of surviving members of mid-19th-century village sides. Among these, the most notable are Cecil Sharp and Mary Neal.

===Revival===
Boxing Day 1899 is widely regarded as the starting point for the Morris revival. Cecil Sharp was visiting at a friend&#x27;s house in Headington, near Oxford, when the Headington Quarry Morris side arrived to perform. Sharp was intrigued by the music and collected several tunes from the side&#x27;s musician, William Kimber, including Country Gardens. A decade later he began collecting the dances, spurred and at first assisted by Mary Neal, a founder of the Espérance Club (a dressmaking co-operative and club for young working women in London), and Herbert MacIlwaine, musical director of the Espérance Club. Neal was looking for dances for her girls to perform, and so the first revival performance was by young women in London.

===Organisations===

In the first few decades of the 20th century, several men&#x27;s sides were formed, and in 1934 the Morris Ring was founded by six revival sides:

*Cambridge Morris Men
*Letchworth Morris
*Thaxted Morris Men
*East Surrey Morris Men
*Greensleeves Morris Men (based in Wimbledon)
*Oxford Morris (which was not at the initial ring meeting at Thaxted but was influential in the creation of the Ring&#x27;s constitution).

In the 1950s and especially the 1960s, there was an explosion of new dance teams, some of them women&#x27;s or mixed sides. At the time, there was often heated debate over the propriety and even legitimacy of women dancing the Morris, even though there is evidence as far back as the 16th century that there were female Morris dancers. There are now male, female and mixed sides to be found.

Partly because women&#x27;s and mixed sides were not eligible for full membership of the Morris Ring (this has now changed), two other national (and international) bodies were formed, the Morris Federation and Open Morris. All three bodies provide communication, advice, insurance, instructionals (teaching sessions) and social and dancing opportunities to their members. The three bodies co-operate on some issues, while maintaining their distinct identities. An umbrella body that includes all three, the Joint Morris Organisation, organises joint events and discusses issues that affect all members, such as access to both public liability and personal insurance cover.

== Morris dancing in Wales ==
The United Kingdom experienced a revival in folk dancing and Morris dancing in the 1960s. In Wales this meant, in part, a resurgence in interest in the Nantgarw tradition from sides who were looking for Welsh dances to add to their English ones. Cardiff Morris Men began piecing together a Morris dance from the notes that had been written down by Ceinwen Thomas on one particular dance that she called &quot;Y Gaseg Eira&quot;. After this &#x27;original&#x27; dance had been pieced back together sides began to create more dances that were &#x27;in the style of&#x27; this traditional Nantgarw Morris dance. Many of these new creations, such as &quot;Y Derwydd&quot;, are now held to be just as much a part of the Nantgarw tradition as the original dance. Today there are five Morris dances that are commonly recognised as being a part of the Nantgarw tradition. The five dances in the Nantgarw tradition include: &quot;Y Gaseg Eira&quot; (The Snow Mare), &quot;Hela&#x27;r Sgwarnog&quot; (Hunting the Hare), &quot;Ty Coch Caerdydd&quot; (Red House of Cardiff), &quot;Y Derwydd&quot; (The Druid) and &quot;Y Goron&quot; (The Crown).

There are no hard and fast rules as to which Morris sides can perform dances from a tradition, but the original Nantgarw dance, &quot;Y Gaseg Eira&quot;, is considered to be a dance for the Welsh sides. Consequently, it is often performed by the sides Isca Morris and Cardiff Morris. It was members of Cardiff Morris who developed the modern Nantgarw dances and so they are the most common performers of these dances.

It has been pointed out that there are &quot;obvious&quot; similarities between the Welsh Nantgarw style of Morris dance and the English Lichfield style of Morris dance. It is known that there were potteries in Nantgarw and these were largely staffed by workers from Staffordshire where Lichfield Morris was danced.

=== Dances ===

==== &quot;Y Gaseg Eira&quot; (The Snow Mare) ====

This handkerchief dance has a pattern entirely peculiar to itself and was the first Nantgarw dance to see the light of day with the Cardiff Morris. The name of the dance is a Welsh idiom for a very large snowball, and it is so named because at one point in the dance the hand waving movements resemble the movements of somebody rolling a large snowball. This is the original Nantgarw dance and was being danced by Cardiff Morris by 1974. An article in the Welsh Folk Dance Magazine published in 1959 featured an article on this dance along with a photograph of a side performing it.

==== &quot;Hela&#x27;r Sgwarnog&quot; (Hunting the Hare) ====
This is the first of three dances which conform to a standard pattern; which can, with a little care, be memorised and need, therefore, no calling. Like &quot;Y Gaseg Eira&quot; it is a handkerchief dance. The current practise with the music is to use hornpipe time, which lends a lilt to the dance that some people find attractive. It had been added to the Nantgarw repertoire by 1984.

==== &quot;Ty Coch Caerdydd&quot; (The Red House of Cardiff) ====
Sixteen sticks lend a certain weight to the stick bag, if not the proceedings. The sticks are held skiing-fashion (as in downhill, not slalom or cross-country) and are brought up in front of the face to clash. It was being danced by 1984.

==== &quot;Y Derwydd&quot; (The Druid) ====
Previously known as &quot;Y Gamel&quot; (The Camel) until it was renamed after the tune it is danced to. There are only eight sticks in this dance and no clashing except in the chorus. The dance pattern is identical to that of Hunting the Hare, even down to the half-heys in the chorus, except that the corner figures are completely replaced with Stars. It was put together in 1991.

==== &quot;Y Goron&quot; (The Crown) ====
This is a stick dance based around circular hays.

==== &quot;Nos Galan&quot; (New Year&#x27;s Eve) ====
This is a processional dance. Unlike the other dances which take place in one location this dance takes the dancers from one place to another. It takes its name from an old Welsh carol, the tune for which was used for the melody of &quot;Deck the Halls&quot;.

=== The Moves ===

==== Figures ====
The figures can be summarised as Foot Up, Corners Change, Top Hey, Bottom Hey and Circular Hey, with usually a distinctive verse figure unique to each dance.

==== Steps ====
There is double step throughout, except when &#x27;chipping&#x27; (hopping in one spot whilst simultaneously rotating). The basic pattern is two double steps followed by four capers. There had been a tendency to truncate the second double step and leap straight into the capers, leading to a loss of balance and poise. The hand movements are straight up-and-down, with Adderbury-style circular movements at waist level for the capers. In the &#x27;chipping&#x27; sequences in &quot;Y Gaseg Eira&quot; and &quot;Hunting the Hare&quot; the arms are raised in turn and in time with the single stepping which accompanies it.

== Morris dancing in the United States ==
Morris dancing has been practiced in the United States since at least 1908, although an article published by the Country Dance and Song Society points to 1910 as the year Morris dancing truly took off in America. The primary organization supporting Morris Dance in the US is the North American Morris Dance Organization, which is affiliated with the Country Dance and Song Society as well as the Morris Ring, Morris Federation, and Open Morris. British-American musician and folklorist Tony Barrand was key in developing and documenting Morris history in the US, including founding the Marlboro Morris Men as well as the Marlboro Morris Ale.

Most Morris sides in the United States are concentrated on the East Coast, particularly in the Boston-Washington development corridor. Large regular events in this part of the country include the Marlboro Morris Ale and Dancing America Rapper Tournament (the American offshoot of Dancing England Rapper Tournament). Minneapolis is the hub for Morris dancing in the Midwest, with 6 teams in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area and 9 teams in the whole of Minnesota. Dancing the sun up on May Day is an important activity for many American Morris dance teams.

== Styles ==
Today, there are six predominant styles of Morris dancing, and different dances or traditions within each style named after their region of origin.
* Cotswold Morris: dances from an area mostly in Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire; an established misnomer, since the Cotswolds overlap this region only partially. Normally danced with handkerchiefs or sticks to accompany the hand movements. Dances are usually for 6 or 8 dancers, but solo and duo dances (known as single or double jigs) also occur.
* North West Morris: more military in style and often processional, that developed out of the mills in the North-West of England in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
* Border Morris from the English-Welsh border: a simpler, looser, more vigorous style, occasionally danced with blackened or coloured faces.
* Long Sword dance from Yorkshire and southern County Durham, danced with long, rigid metal or wooden swords for, usually, six or eight dancers.
* Rapper sword from the Northumberland and Durham Coalfield, danced with short flexible sprung steel swords, usually for five dancers.
* Molly dance from Cambridgeshire. Traditionally danced on Plough Monday, they were feast dances that were danced to collect money during harsh winters. One of the dancers would be dressed as a woman, hence the name. Joseph Needham identified two separate families of Molly dances, one from three villages in the Cambridge area and one from two in the Ely area.
* Ploughstots (alternatively Vessel Cupping and Plew-ladding) from the East and North ridings of Yorkshire, also danced on Plough Monday. The dancers often held &quot;flags&quot;, used similarly to handkerchiefs in Cotswold and Border dances to emphasise hand movements, or rattling bones, rather than wearing bells but for the same purpose.
* A similar Plough Monday tradition exists in the East Midlands; some of these dances involve swords, usually danced over in a similar manner to baccapipes jigs from Oxfordshire.

===Cotswold===
Lionel Bacon records Cotswold Morris traditions from these towns and villages:
Abingdon, Adderbury, Ascot-under-Wychwood, Badby, Bampton, Bidford, Bledington, Brackley, Bucknell, Chipping Campden, Ducklington, Eynsham, Headington Quarry, Hinton-in-the-Hedges, Ilmington, Kirtlington, Leafield (Field Town), Longborough, Oddington, Sherbourne, Stanton Harcourt, Upton-upon-Severn and Wheatley.

Bacon also lists the tradition from Lichfield, which is Cotswold-like despite that city&#x27;s distance from the Cotswold Morris area; the authenticity of this tradition has been questioned. In 2006, a small number of dances from a previously unknown tradition was discovered by Barry Care, MBE, keeper of The Morris Ring Photographic Archive, and a founding member of Moulton Morris Men (Ravensthorpe, Northamptonshire)—two of them danceable.

Other dances listed by Bacon include Border Morris dances from Brimfield, Bromsberrow Heath, Evesham, Leominster, Much Wenlock, Pershore, Upton-upon-Severn, Upton Snodsbury, White Ladies Aston, and miscellaneous non-Cotswold, non-Border dances from Steeple Claydon and Winster. There are a number of traditions which have been collected since the mid-twentieth century, though few have been widely adopted. Examples are Broadwood, Duns Tew, and Ousington-under-Wash in the Cotswold style, and Upper and Lower Penn in the Border style. In fact, for many of the &quot;collected&quot; traditions in Bacon, only sketchy information is available about the way they were danced in the nineteenth century, and they have been reconstructed to a degree that makes them largely twentieth-century inventions as well. Some traditions have been reconstructed in several strikingly disparate ways; an example would be Adderbury, danced very differently by the Adderbury Morris Men and the Adderbury Village Morris.

===North West===

The North West tradition is named after the North West region of England and has always featured mixed and female sides, at least as far back as the 18th century. There is a picture of Eccles Wakes painted in 1822 that shows both male and female dancers.

Historically, most sides danced in various styles of shoes or boots, although dancing in clogs was also very common. Modern revivalist sides have tended more towards the wearing of clogs. The dances were often associated with rushcarts at the local wakes or holidays, and many teams rehearsed only for these occasions. While some teams continue to rehearse and dance for a single local festival or event (such as the Abram Morris Dancers), the majority of teams now rehearse throughout the year, with the majority of performances occurring in the spring and summer. The dances themselves were often called &#x27;maze&#x27; or &#x27;garland dances&#x27; as they involved a very intricate set of movements in which the dancers wove in and out of each other. Some dances were performed with a wicker hoop (decorated with garlands of flowers) held above the dancer&#x27;s head. Some dancers were also associated with a tradition of mumming and hold a pace egging play in their area.
The Britannia Coconut Dancers, named after a mill not far from Bacup, are unique in the tradition, in that they used sawn bobbins to make a noise, and perform to the accompaniment of a brass ensemble. They are one of the few North West Morris groups that still black up their faces. It is said that the dance found its way to the area through Cornishmen who migrated to work in the Rossendale quarries.

Carnival morris dancing shares a parallel history with North West morris dancing but began to evolve independently from around the 1940s onwards. It remains extremely popular with upwards of 8000 current dancers.

Girls&#x27; carnival morris dancing is highly competitive and characterised by precise, synchronous routines with pom-poms (or &#x27;shakers&#x27;) executed to pop music. It is performed almost exclusively by girls and women in Lancashire, Cheshire and parts of North Wales. Performances typically take place in sports halls and community centres and participants more closely align with British carnival performances such as jazz kazoo marching bands, entertainer troupes and majorettes, than with the morris performances of the folk revival.

In 2005, playwright Helen Blakeman staged &#x27;The Morris&#x27; at the Liverpool Everyman, inspired by her childhood experience as a carnival morris dancer. In 2017, an exhibition of photographs taken at a carnival morris dancing competition in Southport by artist, Lucy Wright was presented at Cecil Sharp House.

===Border===
The term &quot;Border Morris&quot; was first used by E. C. Cawte in a 1963 article on the Morris dance traditions of Herefordshire, Shropshire and Worcestershire: counties along the border with Wales. Characteristics of the tradition as practised in the 19th and early 20th centuries include: blackface or coloured facepaint (in some areas), use of either a small strip of bells (in some areas) or no bells at all (in others), costume often consisting of ordinary clothes decorated with ribbons, strips of cloth, or pieces of coloured paper (known as &#x27;raggies&#x27;); or sometimes &quot;fancy dress&quot;, small numbers of traditional dances in the team repertoire, often only one and rarely more than two, highly variable number of dancers in the set and configurations of the set (some sides had different versions of a dance for different numbers of dancers), and an emphasis on stick dances almost to the exclusion of hankie dances.

===Sword dancing===
Usually regarded as a type of Morris, although many of the performers themselves consider it as a traditional dance form in its own right, is the sword dance tradition, which includes both rapper sword and longsword traditions. In both styles the &quot;swords&quot; are not actual swords, but implements specifically made for the dance. The dancers are usually linked one to another via the swords, with one end of each held by one dancer and the other end by another. Rapper sides consist of five dancers, who are permanently linked-up during the dance. The rapper sword is a very flexible strip of spring-steel with a wooden handle at each end. The longsword is about long, with a wooden handle at one end, a blunt tip, and no edge. Sometimes ribbons are threaded through a hole in the tip of the sword, and the dancers grab on to them during the course of the dance. Longsword sides consist usually of five to eight dancers. In both rapper and longsword there is often a supernumerary &quot;character&quot;, who dances around, outside, and inside the set.

===Mumming===
The English mummers play occasionally involves Morris or sword dances either incorporated as part of the play or performed at the same event. Mummers plays are often performed in the streets near Christmas to celebrate the New Year and the coming springtime. In these plays are central themes of death and rebirth.

===Other traditions===
Other forms include Molly dance from Cambridgeshire. Molly dance, which is associated with Plough Monday, is a parodic form danced in work boots and with at least one Molly man dressed as a woman. The largest Molly Dance event is the Whittlesea Straw Bear Festival, established in 1980, held at Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire in January.

There is also Stave dancing from the south-west and the Abbots Bromley Horn Dance.

Another expression of the Morris tradition is Vessel Cupping. This was practised in the East Riding of Yorkshire until the 1920s. It was a form danced by itinerant ploughboys in sets of three or four, about the time of Candlemas.

Additionally, there is a specifically Welsh version of the art that is distinct from the Borders Morris style. This style is called Nantgarw tradition after a small village in the Taff Valley. One Nantgarw dance, Y Caseg Eira, is derived directly from notes made on traditional Welsh dances from the 1890s. These notes were made by Ceinwen Thomas in the 1950s from the childhood recollections of her mother, Catherine Margretta Thomas. Others are more modern inventions made in the style of older dances. Dances in the Nantgarw style include; Caseg Eira (The Snow Mare), Hela&#x27;r Sgwarnog (Hunting The Hare) and Ty Coch Caerdydd (The Red House of Cardiff).

==Music==

Music was traditionally provided by either a pipe and tabor or a fiddle. These are still used today, but the most common instrument is the melodeon. Accordions and concertinas are also common, and other instruments are sometimes used. Often drums are employed.

Cotswold and sword dancers are most often accompanied by a single player, but Northwest and Border sides often have a band, usually including a drum.

For Cotswold and (to a degree) Border dances, the tunes are traditional and specific: the name of the dance is often actually the name of the tune, and dances of the same name from different traditions will have slightly different tunes. For Northwest and sword dancing there is less often a specific tune for a dance: the players may use several tunes, and will often change tunes during a dance.

For dances which have set tunes, there is often a short song set to the tune. This is sung by the musician(s) or by the whole side as an introduction to the tune before the dance. The songs are usually rural in focus (i.e. related to agricultural practices or village life) and often bawdy or vulgar. Songs for some dances vary from side to side, and some sides omit songs altogether.

Several notable albums have been released, in particular the &quot;Morris On&quot; series, which consists of &quot;Morris On&quot;, &quot;Son of Morris On&quot;, &quot;Grandson of Morris On&quot;, &quot;Great Grandson of Morris On&quot;, &quot;Morris on the Road&quot;, and &quot;Mother of all Morris&quot;.

==Terminology==

Like many activities, Morris dancing has a range of words and phrases that it uses in special ways.

Many participants refer to the world of Morris dancing as a whole as &quot;the Morris&quot;.

A Morris troupe is usually referred to as a &quot;side&quot; or a &quot;team&quot;. The two terms are interchangeable. Despite the terminology, Morris dancing is hardly ever competitive.

A &quot;set&quot; (which can also be referred to as a &quot;side&quot;) is a number of dancers in a particular arrangement for a dance. Most Cotswold Morris dances are danced in a rectangular set of six dancers, and most Northwest dances in a rectangular set of eight; but there are many exceptions.

A &quot;jig&quot; is a dance performed by one (or sometimes two) dancers, rather than by a set. Its music does not usually have the rhythm implied by the word &quot;jig&quot; in other contexts.

The titles of officers vary from side to side, but most sides have at least the following:
* The role of the &quot;squire&quot; varies. In some sides the squire is the leader, who speaks for the side in public, usually leads or &quot;calls&quot; the dances, and often decides the programme for a performance. In other sides the squire is more an administrator, with the foreman taking the lead, and the dances called by any experienced dancer.
* The &quot;foreman&quot; teaches and trains the dancers, and is responsible for the style and standard of the side&#x27;s dancing. The foreman is often &quot;active&quot; with the &quot;passive&quot; dancers.
* The &quot;bagman&quot; is traditionally the keeper of the &quot;bag&quot;—that is to say, the side&#x27;s funds and equipment. In some sides today, the bagman acts as secretary (particularly bookings secretary) and there is often a separate treasurer.
* On some sides a &quot;ragman&quot; manages and co-ordinates the team&#x27;s &quot;kit&quot; or costume. This may include making bell-pads, ribbon bads, sashes and other accoutrements.

Many sides have one or more &quot;fools&quot;. A fool is usually extravagantly dressed, and communicates directly with the audience in speech or mime. The fool often dances around and even through a dance without appearing really to be a part of it, but it takes a talented dancer to pull off such fooling while actually adding to and not distracting from the main dance set.

Many sides also have a &quot;beast&quot;: a dancer in a costume made to look like a real or mythical animal. Beasts mainly interact with the audience, particularly children. In some groups this dancer is called the &quot;hobby&quot;.

A &quot;tradition&quot; in Cotswold Morris is a collection of dances that come from a particular area, and have something in common: usually the steps, arm movements, and dance figures. Many newer traditions are invented by revival teams.

Most Cotswold dances alternate &quot;common figures&quot; (or just &quot;figures&quot;) with a &quot;distinctive figure&quot; (or &quot;chorus&quot;). The common figures are common to all (or some) dances in the &quot;tradition&quot;; the distinctive figure distinguishes that dance from others in the same tradition. Sometimes (particularly in &quot;corner&quot; dances) the choruses are not identical, but have their own sequence specific to the tradition. Nevertheless, something about the way the chorus is danced distinguishes that dance from others. Several traditions often have essentially the same dance, where the name, tune, and distinctive figure are the same or similar, but each tradition employs its common figures and style.

In England, an &quot;ale&quot; is a private party where a number of Morris sides get together and perform dances for their own enjoyment rather than for an audience. Food is usually supplied, and sometimes this is a formal meal known as a feast or ale-feast. Occasionally, an evening ale is combined with a day or weekend of dance, where all the invited sides tour the area and perform in public. In North America the term is widely used to describe a full weekend of dancing involving public performances and sometimes workshops. In the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries, the term &quot;ale&quot; referred to a church- or dale-sponsored event where ale or beer was sold to raise funds. Morris dancers were often employed at such events.

==Evolution==
===Continuance of Morris tradition===
The continuance of Morris is as much in the hands of independent groups of enthusiasts as it is in the nationwide groupings such as The Morris Ring or The Morris Federation. So while for some sides there is a feeling that the music and dance recorded in the 19th century should be maintained, there are others who freely reinterpret the music and dance to suit their abilities and including modern influences. In 2008 a front-page article in the &quot;Independent Magazine&quot; noted the rising influence of neopaganism within the modern Morris tradition. The article featured the views of Neopagan sides Wolf&#x27;s Head and Vixen Morris and Hunter&#x27;s Moon Morris and contrasted them with those of the more traditional Long Man Morris Men. The Morris may have become popular in neopaganism thanks to the scholarship of James Frazer, who hypothesized that rural folk traditions were survivals of ancient pagan rituals. Though this view was fiercely criticized even by Frazer&#x27;s contemporaries, it was fully embraced by Sir Edmund Chambers, one of the first to produce serious writing on English folk plays and dances, and who became a major influence on popular understanding of Morris dancing in the 20th century.

===Age and gender issues===
In January 2009 &quot;The Telegraph&quot; published a report predicting the demise of Morris dancing within 20 years, due to the lack of young people willing to take part. This widespread story originated from a senior member of the more traditionally minded Morris Ring, and may only reflect the situation in relation to member groups of that one organisation.

A survey published in December 2020 identified how the profile of morris dancers had evolved since the first survey published in 2014. The number of morris dancers in the UK had increased from 12,800 in 2014 to 13,600 in 2020. The average age of a morris dancer in the UK was 55, up from 52 in 2014. The survey also reported an even balance between male and female performers by 2020.

===Use of the Internet===
The advent of the Internet in the 1990s has also given Morris sides a new platform upon which to perform. Many Morris sides now have entertaining websites which seek to reflect the public persona of the individual sides as much as record their exploits and list forthcoming performances.

Morris sides have traditionally raised funds by collecting cash from spectators, but in the post-Covid moves to a more cashless society, many sides now use portable card payment terminals.

There are also a multitude of thriving Morris-related blogs and forums, and individual sides are to be found maintaining an interactive presence on major social networking sites. Surveys in 2021 of use of social media services by morris sides found that the Westminster Morris Men YouTube channel had received over 100,00 views and the Shrewsbury Morris&#x27;s Twitter account had over 100,000 followers.

===In popular culture===
The success of Terry Pratchett&#x27;s &quot;Discworld&quot; novels has seen the entirely invented Dark Morris tradition being brought to life in some form by genuine Morris sides such as the Witchmen Morris and Jack Frost Morris. Dark Morris has been described as having been &quot;evolved from the border revival of the 1970s which was part of a wider neo-traditionalist surge of interest in regional morris styles&quot;.

==Kit and clothing==

There is great variety shown in how Morris sides dress, from the predominantly white clothing of Cotswold sides to the tattered jackets worn by Border teams. Common items of clothing include
bell pads, baldrics, braces, rosettes, sashes, waistcoats, tatter-coats (or raggies), knee-length breeches, wooden clogs, hats (straw hats, top hats, or bowlers), neckerchiefs, and armbands.

==Namesakes==
* The dance may have given name to the board games three men&#x27;s morris, six men&#x27;s morris and nine men&#x27;s morris.
* Erasmus Grasser, a German sculptor, created 16 realistic animated wooden figures in the late 15th century called the &quot;Morris dancers&quot;.
* Two ships named &quot;Morris Dance&quot; served in the Royal Navy in the 20th century.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* by Tim Plester and Rob Curry


==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General references ===
* Forrest, John (1999). &quot;The History of Morris Dancing, 1458–1750&quot;. Cambridge: James Clarke &amp; Co.

==External links==
* The English Folk Dance and Song Society at Cecil Sharp House, London
* The Morris &amp; Sword: Dances of England</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="0" end="14" title="Morris dance" label="Morris dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q641031" start="28" end="35" title="English folklore" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q201022" start="36" end="46" title="folk dance" label="folk dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="102" end="115" title="choreographed" label="choreographed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="414" end="441" title="England in the Middle Ages" label="England in the 15th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037058" start="556" end="580" title="Goldsmiths&amp;#x27; Company" label="Goldsmiths&amp;#x27; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="633" end="640" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="655" end="662" title="Moors" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913867" start="807" end="818" title="Morris Ring" label="Morris Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913693" start="820" end="837" title="Morris Federation" label="Morris Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096147" start="842" end="853" title="Open Morris" label="Open Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241750" start="1089" end="1098" title="Hong Kong Morris" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q776" start="1178" end="1185" title="Utrecht (province)" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q9844" start="1190" end="1197" title="Helmond" label="Helmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207959" start="1507" end="1519" title="court masque" label="court masque"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1523" end="1533" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="1610" end="1617" title="Moors" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889019" start="1625" end="1636" title="Cecil Sharp" label="Cecil Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611239" start="1763" end="1783" title="blackface and Morris dancing" label="blacking their faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1857" end="1864" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753789" start="2212" end="2242" title="The New World of English Words" label="The New World of English Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093177" start="2899" end="2917" title="Italian folk dance" label="Italian folk dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258942" start="3017" end="3033" title="London Chronicle" label="London Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="3127" end="3136" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3431" end="3436" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q287004" start="3580" end="3598" title="Black Act" label="a form of disguise"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611239" start="3715" end="3729" title="blackface and Morris dancing" label="ongoing debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="3848" end="3866" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="4153" end="4163" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083684" start="4296" end="4301" title="Tabor (instrument)" label="tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539247" start="4327" end="4341" title="George Ferrers" label="George Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054160" start="4347" end="4362" title="Lord of Misrule" label="Lord of Misrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="4366" end="4375" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4477" end="4490" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028014" start="4497" end="4510" title="William Kempe" label="William Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="4540" end="4547" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464035" start="4936" end="4957" title="argument from silence" label="argument from silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="5040" end="5051" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="5235" end="5256" title="English country dance" label="English country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="5411" end="5418" title="Whitsun" label="Whitsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="5424" end="5431" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="5446" end="5461" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137430" start="5483" end="5495" title="Parish ale" label="Whitsun ales"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5555" end="5565" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="5672" end="5681" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q177544" start="5769" end="5776" title="Horsham" label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="5778" end="5784" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="5844" end="5865" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q321381" start="5984" end="5992" title="Abingdon, England" label="Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012293" start="6052" end="6059" title="Bampton, Oxfordshire" label="Bampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689637" start="6061" end="6078" title="Headington Quarry" label="Headington Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q767811" start="6084" end="6100" title="Chipping Campden" label="Chipping Campden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="6376" end="6388" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q623323" start="6785" end="6792" title="Malvern, Worcestershire" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q251903" start="6796" end="6804" title="Bicester" label="Bicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q734743" start="6826" end="6842" title="Moreton in Marsh" label="Moreton in Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780406" start="7157" end="7166" title="Mary Neal" label="Mary Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="7183" end="7193" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090863" start="7317" end="7327" title="Headington" label="Headington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014005" start="7493" end="7507" title="William Kimber" label="William Kimber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177290" start="7519" end="7534" title="Country Gardens" label="Country Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780406" start="7616" end="7625" title="Mary Neal" label="Mary Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399204" start="7644" end="7658" title="Espérance Club" label="Espérance Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913867" start="8039" end="8050" title="Morris Ring" label="Morris Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="8087" end="8096" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801" start="8109" end="8119" title="Letchworth" label="Letchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283481" start="8128" end="8135" title="Thaxted" label="Thaxted"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="8206" end="8215" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="8218" end="8224" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913693" start="8938" end="8955" title="Morris Federation" label="Morris Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096147" start="8960" end="8971" title="Open Morris" label="Open Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q992350" start="9376" end="9392" title="public liability insurance" label="public liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9458" end="9472" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9487" end="9494" title="Border Morris#Border Morris revival" label="revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="9547" end="9552" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964316" start="9606" end="9624" title="Nantgarw tradition" label="Nantgarw tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="9700" end="9707" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104034" start="10404" end="10408" title="Mare" label="Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="10457" end="10461" title="Hare" label="Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="10544" end="10549" title="Druid" label="Druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="11145" end="11154" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="11206" end="11215" title="Pottery" label="potteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130355" start="11219" end="11227" title="Nantgarw" label="Nantgarw"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="11275" end="11288" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="11568" end="11573" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="11574" end="11579" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q734898" start="11597" end="11605" title="snowball" label="snowball"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="12275" end="12280" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547484" start="12291" end="12304" title="Hornpipe" label="hornpipe time"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="12592" end="12598" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q319899" start="12614" end="12622" title="Downhill (ski competition)" label="downhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="12822" end="12827" title="Camel" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287842" start="13546" end="13560" title="Deck the Halls" label="Deck the Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q384748" start="13610" end="13617" title="Dance move" label="figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q352863" start="14150" end="14159" title="Adderbury" label="Adderbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279481" start="14558" end="14588" title="Country Dance and Song Society" label="Country Dance and Song Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994284" start="14931" end="14943" title="Tony Barrand" label="Tony Barrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="15151" end="15161" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="15183" end="15221" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="Boston-Washington development corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215468" start="15368" end="15401" title="Dancing England Rapper Tournament" label="Dancing England Rapper Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="15404" end="15415" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="15453" end="15460" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="15482" end="15513" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area"/>
<link wikidata="Q900013" start="15575" end="15582" title="May Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15743" end="15753" title="#tradition" label="traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="15857" end="15872" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="15877" end="15888" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875856" start="15905" end="15913" title="misnomer" label="misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="15925" end="15934" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944590" start="16326" end="16339" title="Border Morris" label="Border Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762817" start="16467" end="16483" title="Long Sword dance" label="Long Sword dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="16489" end="16498" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="16512" end="16525" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131655" start="16612" end="16624" title="Rapper sword" label="Rapper sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896912" start="16634" end="16669" title="Northumberland and Durham Coalfield" label="Northumberland and Durham Coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896703" start="16747" end="16758" title="Molly dance" label="Molly dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205145" start="16804" end="16817" title="Plough Monday" label="Plough Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="16962" end="16976" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="17665" end="17673" title="Cotswold" label="Cotswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q321381" start="17723" end="17731" title="Abingdon, England" label="Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q352863" start="17733" end="17742" title="Adderbury" label="Adderbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323896" start="17744" end="17764" title="Ascott-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire" label="Ascot-under-Wychwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175017" start="17766" end="17771" title="Badby, Northamptonshire" label="Badby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012293" start="17773" end="17780" title="Bampton, Oxfordshire" label="Bampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925849" start="17791" end="17801" title="Bledington" label="Bledington"/>
<link wikidata="Q671557" start="17803" end="17811" title="Brackley, Northamptonshire" label="Brackley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600307" start="17813" end="17821" title="Bucknell, Oxfordshire" label="Bucknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q767811" start="17823" end="17839" title="Chipping Campden" label="Chipping Campden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785955" start="17841" end="17852" title="Ducklington" label="Ducklington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006767" start="17854" end="17861" title="Eynsham" label="Eynsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689637" start="17863" end="17880" title="Headington Quarry" label="Headington Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442044" start="17882" end="17902" title="Hinton-in-the-Hedges, Northamptonshire" label="Hinton-in-the-Hedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043291" start="17904" end="17913" title="Ilmington" label="Ilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416254" start="17915" end="17926" title="Kirtlington" label="Kirtlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931690" start="17928" end="17936" title="Leafield" label="Leafield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673619" start="17951" end="17962" title="Longborough" label="Longborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077497" start="17964" end="17973" title="Oddington, Gloucestershire" label="Oddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300013" start="17987" end="18003" title="Stanton Harcourt" label="Stanton Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362440" start="18005" end="18022" title="Upton-upon-Severn" label="Upton-upon-Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997905" start="18027" end="18035" title="Wheatley, Oxfordshire" label="Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="18329" end="18332" title="Order of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888251" start="18427" end="18457" title="Ravensthorpe, Northamptonshire" label="Ravensthorpe, Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784017" start="18546" end="18555" title="Brimfield, Herefordshire" label="Brimfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973764" start="18557" end="18574" title="Bromsberrow Heath" label="Bromsberrow Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q585963" start="18576" end="18583" title="Evesham, Worcestershire" label="Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q550424" start="18585" end="18595" title="Leominster" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q201114" start="18597" end="18609" title="Much Wenlock" label="Much Wenlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q767858" start="18611" end="18619" title="Pershore" label="Pershore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182957" start="18640" end="18655" title="Upton Snodsbury" label="Upton Snodsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414483" start="18657" end="18675" title="White Ladies Aston" label="White Ladies Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037493" start="18732" end="18747" title="Steeple Claydon" label="Steeple Claydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001876" start="18752" end="18759" title="Winster" label="Winster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134883" start="19848" end="19853" title="Clog (British)" label="clogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380774" start="19985" end="19993" title="rushcart" label="rushcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961130" start="20008" end="20013" title="Wakes week" label="wakes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20687" end="20694" title="mumming" label="mumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121898" start="20706" end="20722" title="Pace Egg plays" label="pace egging play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969277" start="20742" end="20767" title="Britannia Coconut Dancers" label="Britannia Coconut Dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514944" start="20801" end="20806" title="Bacup" label="Bacup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369790" start="21120" end="21130" title="Rossendale Valley" label="Rossendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="22347" end="22360" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="22362" end="22372" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="22377" end="22391" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q512245" start="23339" end="23350" title="sword dance" label="sword dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131655" start="23382" end="23394" title="rapper sword" label="rapper sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762817" start="23399" end="23408" title="Long Sword dance" label="longsword"/>
<link wikidata="Q350800" start="24279" end="24291" title="mummers play" label="mummers play"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="24643" end="24657" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205145" start="24697" end="24710" title="Plough Monday" label="Plough Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="24779" end="24801" title="cross-dressing" label="man dressed as a woman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24840" end="24870" title="Whittlesey#Whittlesea Straw Bear" label="Whittlesea Straw Bear Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335054" start="24901" end="24911" title="Whittlesey" label="Whittlesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004604" start="24957" end="24970" title="Stave dancing" label="Stave dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664265" start="24999" end="25024" title="Abbots Bromley Horn Dance" label="Abbots Bromley Horn Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23088" start="25115" end="25139" title="East Riding of Yorkshire" label="East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152771" start="25246" end="25255" title="Presentation of Jesus at the Temple" label="Candlemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q988226" start="25975" end="25989" title="pipe and tabor" label="pipe and tabor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25995" end="26001" title="Musical styles (violin)#Fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q379269" start="26069" end="26077" title="diatonic button accordion" label="melodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="26079" end="26088" title="Accordion" label="Accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q593050" start="26094" end="26104" title="concertina" label="concertina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913837" start="27243" end="27252" title="Morris On" label="Morris On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560656" start="27266" end="27282" title="Son of Morris On" label="Son of Morris On"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595538" start="27296" end="27317" title="Grandson of Morris On" label="Grandson of Morris On"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599262" start="27331" end="27358" title="Great Grandson of Morris On" label="Great Grandson of Morris On"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="28303" end="28306" title="jig" label="jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="29477" end="29481" title="Jester" label="fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874964" start="30026" end="30031" title="Hobby horse" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137430" start="31634" end="31665" title="Parish ale" label="church- or dale-sponsored event"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="32322" end="32333" title="neopaganism" label="neopaganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="32404" end="32412" title="Neopagan" label="Neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="32638" end="32650" title="James Frazer" label="James Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913867" start="33325" end="33336" title="Morris Ring" label="Morris Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="34766" end="34781" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="34795" end="34804" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225698" start="35399" end="35406" title="baldric" label="baldric"/>
<link wikidata="Q109742" start="35409" end="35415" title="Suspenders" label="braces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684474" start="35645" end="35668" title="three men&amp;#x27;s morris" label="three men&amp;#x27;s morris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35670" end="35691" title="Nine men&amp;#x27;s morris#Six men&amp;#x27;s morris" label="six men&amp;#x27;s morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q209669" start="35696" end="35718" title="nine men&amp;#x27;s morris" label="nine men&amp;#x27;s morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q896013" start="35722" end="35737" title="Erasmus Grasser" label="Erasmus Grasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877429" start="35885" end="35909" title="HMS Morris Dance" label="&amp;quot;Morris Dance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="35924" end="35934" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804116" start="35987" end="35998" title="Tim Plester" label="Tim Plester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808559" start="36003" end="36012" title="Rob Curry" label="Rob Curry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52693" wikidata="Q1156994" url="?curid=52693" title="Square dance">
<text>A square dance is a dance for four couples, or eight dancers in total, arranged in a square, with one couple on each side, facing the middle of the square. Square dances are part of a broad spectrum of dances known by various names: country dances, traditional dances, folk dances, barn dances, ceilidh dances, contra dances, Playford dances, etc. These dances appear in over 100 different formations, of which the Square and the Longways Set are by far the most popular formations.

Square dances contain elements from numerous traditional dances including English country dances, which were first documented in 17th-century England, and 18th-century French quadrilles and cotillions; square dancing travelled to North America with the European settlers and developed significantly there.

Square dancing is done in many different styles all around the world. In some countries and regions, through preservation and repetition, square dances have attained the status of a folk dance. Square dancing is strongly associated with the United States, in part due to its association with the romanticized image of the American cowboy in the 20th century, and 31 states have designated it as their official state dance. The main North American types of square dances include traditional square dance and modern western square dance, which is widely known and danced worldwide. Other main types popular in England, Ireland, and Scotland include Playford dances, regional folk dances, ceili, Irish set dances, and Scottish country dances.

The couples in a square are numbered, although numbering varies among different types. In many of the types, two of the couples are known as &quot;heads&quot; and the other two are called &quot;sides&quot;. In most American forms of square dance, the dancers are prompted or cued through a sequence of steps by a caller to the beat (and, in some traditions, the phrasing) of music. In other variations, dancers have no caller and instead memorize and perform a specific routine and sequence of steps. Square dance music varies widely, with some forms using traditional tunes and others employing more modern types.

Dances can be organized by square dance clubs, bands, individuals, or similar organizations. Attire varies by type, with some forms possessing a specific dress code and others having no requirements. The standard square formation can also vary at times to include more or fewer dancers or arrange dancers in a different shape.

== History ==

The origins of Square dances can be traced back to steps and figures used in traditional folk dances and social dances from many countries. One of the earliest influences may have been the Morris dance, an English dance for six men involving a line formation and energetic steps. This dance is closely related to another ancestor of square dancing, English country dance, which included a variety of dances for groups of couples arranged in circles, lines, or squares. In 1651, John Playford published 105 of these dances in &quot;The English Dancing Master&quot;, eight of which are square dances exhibiting concepts still in use, such as the head couples performing an action and the side couples repeating it. Three of the dances, such as &quot;Dull Sir John&quot;, specifically use the term &quot;square dance&quot; in the phrase, &quot;A Square Dance for eight thus&quot;. In the early 1800s, English country dances merged with French dances to form the quadrille, a dance for four couples in a square.

These dances further evolved in America, where they arrived with European settlers. After the American Revolution, the quadrille became especially popular. Quadrilles were originally danced from memorized steps and sequences, but as African American slaves played music for the dances, they began calling out the steps. This practice became common by the early 1900s and gave rise to the modern caller. Between 1940 and 1960, modern western square dance evolved from the western style of traditional square dance that had formed in the United States. Traditional western square dancing was promoted beginning in the 1930s by Lloyd Shaw, who solicited definitions from callers across the country in order to preserve that dance form and make it available to other teachers. The American folk music revival in New York City in the 1950s was rooted in the resurgent interest in square dancing and folk dancing there in the 1940s, which gave musicians such as Pete Seeger popular exposure.

Starting in the 1970s, many U.S. states adopted square dance as their state dance, the result of a campaign by square dancers to make it the national dance.

==Main types==
Square dances are considered folk dances in many countries and regions, although the term &quot;square dance&quot; varies. In the United States the term is used for dances in square formations and also refers to the dance events where square dances are performed. In England, Ireland, and Scotland, the term is used less frequently, and many dance events involve dances in square, circle, and line formations. The term has also become associated with barn dances, where many different formations of dance are used.

===United States and Canada===

==== Traditional square dance ====

Also called &quot;old-time square dance&quot; or &quot;quadrilles&quot; by some older New England callers in recognition of the dance it descended from, traditional square dance is not standardized and can be subdivided into three main regional styles: Northeast/New England, Southeast/Appalachian, and Western. The New England and Appalachian styles have been particularly well documented in the early U.S. and have survived to the 21st century. There are several other styles, some of which have survived or been revived while others have not. Where traditional square dance has been revived, it encompasses a wide range of new choreography.

Traditional square dance structure varies by region, but it usually consists of a limited number of calls occurring in a set order. Traditional square dance is frequently presented in alternation with contra dances, particularly in revival groups, or with some form of freestyle couple dancing at surviving local events.

==== Modern western square dance ====

Modern western square dance, which is also called &quot;western square dance&quot;, &quot;contemporary western square dance&quot;, or &quot;modern American square dance&quot;, evolved from the western style of traditional square dance.

Industrialist Henry Ford popularized the form, believing that Jews invented jazz as a plot to corrupt society and that this plot could be counteracted by returning America to dances and musical styles that he saw as traditional and white. As a result, beginning in the early 1920s, he used his wealth to promote square dancing, through books and square dancing events. Ford also promoted square dance classes in public school, which were present in half of all American schools by 1928 as part of the standard physical education curriculum. Modern western square dance evolved in square dance events funded by Ford, using direction and guidance prepared by Colorado school superintendent Lloyd &quot;Pappy&quot; Shaw.

 Since the 1970s, modern western square dance has been promoted and standardized by Callerlab, the International Association of Square Dance Callers.The initial stage reached by all dancers is called Mainstream. This program consists of a core list of about 70 moves which is revised periodically. Modern western square dance is sometimes presented in alternation with round dances. This modern form of square dancing is taught in around 30 countries, including the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Australia, China, Japan, and Russia. Within Europe, the majority of square dance clubs are in Germany and the United Kingdom. All teach the Callerlab syllabus, but there are slight style and call title variations throughout the world. Because of this standardization, anyone with the proper training can dance modern western square dancing in many countries around the world. Instruction is typically given in the local language, but the calls are always in English, allowing people to dance internationally once they learn the calls.

===United Kingdom and Ireland===

==== Playford dances ====
Also called &quot;English country dances&quot;, Playford-style dances originated from the dances published in John Playford&#x27;s book &quot;The English Dancing Master&quot;. Some of the square dances listed in the book, such as &quot;Newcastle&quot;, have survived to the 21st century, and countless new dances have been written in the Playford style. These dances include a range of moves, from smooth, gentle steps to more energetic leaps. They are supported by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.

==== Regional folk dances ====
Many traditional English regional folk dances are square dances that have survived into the 21st century. For instance, in both the Goathland square eight and the Cumberland square eight, which originated from different English villages, dancers perform a series of memorized moves in a square formation. Many of these dances are danced at folk or barn dances, along with other types of square dances including Playford dances; dances derived from the quadrille, such as &quot;La Russe&quot; published by H.D. Willock in the &quot;Manual of Dancing&quot; (); American traditional square dances; and countless new square dances written in the 20th and 21st centuries.

==== Ceili ====

Irish ceili dances cover a wide range of formations, including many square dances. They are often performed at traditional Irish and Scottish social gatherings called &quot;cèilidhs&quot;. Cèilidhs are also held in England, where the same squares may be done as at folk dances or barn dances but with more stepping, including skip steps, hop steps, polka steps, and rants.

==== Irish set dance ====

Irish set dance is a square dance with strong regional associations. The dance involves stepping, often with a flat-foot polka step. Unlike in traditional and modern western square dancing, where couples are designated as &quot;heads&quot; or &quot;sides&quot;, couples in Irish set dances are either &quot;tops&quot; or &quot;sides&quot;. It is traditional to have 4 couples dance together on the sides of a square.

====Scottish country dance====

Scottish country dances cover a wide range of formations, including many square dances. These dances, which are standardized by the Royal Scottish Country Dance Society, involve specific steps and formations that are performed in different sequences for different dances.

===Continental Europe===
Many traditions have square dances. They are usually not called; rather, the sequence of figures is fixed and known by the dancers. Examples include the German &quot;Bekedorfer&quot;, French &quot;Carré de Campagne&quot;, &quot;Mie Katoen&quot; from the Low Countries, and Eastern European Jewish Sher or Sherele. Variations include double squares, with two couples on each side, like the Danish &quot;Sonderborger Doppelkadril&quot; or the Dutch &quot;Vleegerd&quot;. Some are composed of multiple figures, indicating descent from the high-society quadrille.

==Numbering of couples==
The four couples arranged in a square are called a set, and each couple is numbered. Couple numbering in a square dance set usually begins with the couple nearest the head of the hall (the side of the room containing the musicians and caller, or, in the pre-caller era, the royal presence or other hosts or important guests). This couple is the &quot;first&quot; or &quot;number one&quot; couple.

If most figures are danced around the set, with one or more couples visiting the others in turn, the couples are likewise numbered around the set. In most surviving American square dance traditions, the couples are numbered counterclockwise: the second couple is to the first couple&#x27;s right, the third couple is across from the first, and the fourth couple is to the left of the first. The first and third are &quot;head couples&quot; or &quot;heads&quot; (or, in older parlance, the &quot;first four&quot;); the second and fourth are &quot;side couples&quot; or &quot;sides&quot; (formerly &quot;side four&quot; or &quot;second four&quot;).

If most of the figures are danced between facing couples across the set, as in the 19th century quadrille and dances derived from it, the couple opposite the first is the &quot;second couple&quot;. The first and second couples constitute the &quot;head&quot; or &quot;top&quot; couples (or the &quot;head and foot&quot; couples); the third and fourth couples are the &quot;side&quot; couples. In Irish set dances, the third couple (sometimes termed the &quot;first side couple&quot;) is to the left of the &quot;first top couple&quot;. The couples facing the first top and first side are the &quot;second top couple&quot; and the &quot;second side couple&quot; respectively.

==Callers and calls==

Square dance movements are known as &quot;calls&quot;, and some forms of the dance, such as traditional and modern western square dancing, use a caller to direct the dancers through different calls. In some forms of traditional square dancing, the caller may be one of the dancers or musicians, but in modern western square dancing, the caller is on stage giving full attention to directing the dancers.

A square dance call may take a very short time or a very long time to execute. Most calls require between 4 and 32 counts, where a count is roughly one step. In traditional square dancing, the timing of a call is dictated by tradition; in some regional styles, particularly that of New England, the dance movements are closely fitted to the phrases of the music. In modern western square dancing, many calls have been given formally specified durations, based partly on direct observation of how long it takes an average dancer to execute them.

Traditional and modern western square dance differ in the number of calls and their levels of standardization. Traditional square dance uses between ten and thirty calls, depending on the region and the individual caller. Many traditional square dance calls are similar or identical to contra dance calls, and new dance moves are explained by the caller. In modern western square dance, the participants learn and become proficient in a particular defined set of calls known as a &quot;program&quot;. The Mainstream program, which is the default level of achievement, consists of close to 70 basic and mainstream calls. Rather than learning a complete routine, modern western square dancers learn basic movements and calls but do not know in what order they will be called. Unlike traditional square dance, two modern western dances are rarely alike. Most modern western square dancers participate only in the programs they have fully learned. Callerlab, the callers&#x27; international association, sets all programs and governs the training of callers.

Traditional and modern western square dancing have a number of calls in common, but there are usually small differences in the way they are performed. For example, the Allemande Left is traditionally performed by grasping left hands with the other dancer, pulling away from each other slightly, and walking halfway around a central axis then stepping through. In modern western square dance, the grip is modified so that each dancer grips the forearm of the other, and there is no pulling (that is, each dancer supports his or her own weight). These modifications make it easier to enter and exit the movement and thus easier to incorporate it into a long sequence of calls.

In many communities, including Scotland and Ireland, and also continental Europe, the dancers know the complete dance and there is no caller.

==Music==

Square dance music varies widely by type of dance.

Traditional square dance is primarily danced to live music. Since the 19th century, much of the square dance repertoire has been derived from jigs and reels from Scotland and Ireland, sometimes in relatively unaltered form, sometimes as played in the old-time music tradition or as adapted by other cultures, such as that of Quebec. This sort of music is played on acoustic instruments, such as the fiddle, banjo, guitar, and double bass; certain instruments, including the piano, accordion, concertina, and hammered dulcimer, are popular in specific regions. In some communities where square dancing has survived, the prevailing form of music has become popular songs from the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s, played on instruments such as saxophones, drums, and electric guitars. Tempos can vary from around 108 to more than 150 beats per minute, depending on the regional style.

Modern western square dance is danced to a variety of music types, including pop, traditional and contemporary country music, songs from Broadway musicals, rock, Motown, techno, and hip-hop. The music is usually played from recordings, and the tempo is more uniform than in traditional square dancing, ranging from 120-128 beats per minute. At this speed, dancers take one step per beat of the music.

Irish and Scottish dances are normally done to traditional tunes. English dances may be done to traditional tunes, though there is experimentation with many different musical styles, especially at cèilidhs.

==Clubs and attire==

Square dance events can be run in different ways. In North America, traditional square dances are organized by bands, callers, or small groups of dancers. Modern western square dances are arranged by square dance clubs. The clubs offer classes, socials, and dance evenings and arrange larger dances that are usually open to non-club members. In Britain, square dance clubs are affiliated with the British Association of American Square Dance Clubs, which also organizes the teaching of modern western square dance to Callerlab definitions. Most square dance events in Britain are run according to the Callerlab syllabus by a caller who is either a member of Callerlab or of the Square Dance Callers Club of Great Britain, and the level of dancing is indicated on the publicity material, as in &quot;Mainstream&quot; or &quot;Mainstream with Pre-Announced Plus&quot;. Céilidh and barn dance events are also often advertised as being square dance events.

Square dance attire varies by the type of dance and by region. Traditional square dance groups often have no particular dress code. In the United States, larger modern western square dance events sometimes request a strict western-style dress code, which originated in the late 1950s and early 1960s and is known as &quot;traditional square dance attire&quot;, although it was not traditional before that time. Some clubs require a less strict dress code, known as &quot;proper&quot;, or no dress code, called &quot;casual&quot;. Although many modern western square dancers in Britain wear traditional square dance attire, events often have a relaxed dress code. Where traditional square dancing exists as a community social dance, sometimes in the form of a barn dance or a cèilidh, people often dress up, though their clothing is not square-dance-specific.

In the United States, lines between the forms of square dancing have become blurred. Traditional-revival groups typically adopt very casual dress, and traditional-revival choreographers have begun to use basic movements that were invented for modern western square dance forms. A few modern western callers incorporate older dances from various traditions, such as New England or Appalachian, into their programs.

==Variations==

While the standard formation for a square dance is four couples in a square, there are many variations on the theme. These include:
* Ninepins: a square with one extra person in the middle.
* Winter Solstice: a square with one extra couple in the middle.
* Hexitation: a square with two couples in each of the head positions.
* Twelve Reel: a square with three people on each side, normally a man with a woman on either side of him.
* Hexagon dancing: six couples arranged in a hexagon. There are three head couples and three side couples. This variation is most commonly done by advanced and challenge-level dancers.
* Bigon: a square with four people who each dances their own part and that of their opposite. This variation is almost exclusively done by challenge-level dancers due to its difficulty.

Modern choreography also includes dances which morph from one form to another. There are contra dances and four-couple longways sets which turn into a square dance part of the way through the dance and then back to the original formation.

Grid squares are dances where the squares are arranged in a grid, with sets carefully aligned across the room and up and down the room. The calls move dancers from one square to another in intricate patterns.

==See also==
* Youth square dance
* Hoedown

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
*Square Your Dance, multimedia collection of resources about square dancing
* Square Dance History Project, a virtual museum with about 1,500 items, including video and audio clips, photographs, essays, and articles, documenting the origins and growth of traditional and modern square dancing
* Information &amp; Resources on Australia&#x27;s 1950s Square Dancing Boom
* History of Square and Contra Dance
* WheresTheDance.com, international database of Square Dance clubs and events
* Square and Round Dancing Australia/NZ - Square and Round Dancing &amp; Clogging in Australia and New Zealand
* Square Dance Resource Net - Square dance information including links to detailed explanations of calls, database of callers, and more
* US Associations
** Associated Square Dancers Association (ASqD) of SoCal area square dance clubs, calendar of dances, clubs, classes, and events
** Washington Area Square Dancers Cooperative Association
** Virginia Square And Round Dance Association
** Virginia Square Dancers Organization
** Northern New Jersey Square Dancers Association (NNJSDA)
** Western Star Dancers, a modern GLBT square dance and social club in San Francisco, California
** Square Dance Foundation of New England has an extensive collection of books, records, photographs and other materials relating to the history of both traditional and modern square dancing. On the site are interviews with many callers and recordings of dances from the early 1960s.
** Square Dance Federation of Minnesota, serving Minnesota, Northern Iowa, Western Wisconsin, and the Eastern Dakotas
** The State Council of Illinois Square Dance Associations, serving all of Illinois and including round dancing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1156994" start="2" end="14" title="Square dance" label="square dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="558" end="580" title="Country dance" label="English country dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="659" end="668" title="quadrille" label="quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998594" start="674" end="683" title="cotillion" label="cotillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201022" start="973" end="983" title="folk dance" label="folk dance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1122" end="1128" title="Cowboy#Popular image" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852098" start="1192" end="1212" title="List of U.S. state dances" label="official state dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447772" start="1269" end="1293" title="traditional square dance" label="traditional square dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405891" start="1298" end="1325" title="modern western square dance" label="modern western square dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="1477" end="1482" title="Ceili dance" label="ceili"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902510" start="1484" end="1499" title="Irish set dance" label="Irish set dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430164" start="1506" end="1528" title="Scottish country dance" label="Scottish country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027244" start="1845" end="1851" title="Caller (dance)" label="caller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582062" start="2175" end="2192" title="square dance club" label="square dance club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="2680" end="2692" title="Morris dance" label="Morris dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="2840" end="2861" title="English country dance" label="English country dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282455" start="2969" end="2982" title="John Playford" label="John Playford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411078" start="3022" end="3048" title="The Dancing Master" label="The English Dancing Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="3450" end="3459" title="quadrille" label="quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174345" start="4125" end="4135" title="Lloyd Shaw (educator)" label="Lloyd Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="4277" end="4304" title="American folk music revival" label="American folk music revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="4456" end="4467" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="4515" end="4525" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852098" start="4557" end="4568" title="List of U.S. state dances" label="state dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q808399" start="5111" end="5121" title="barn dance" label="barn dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="5507" end="5518" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="5530" end="5540" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="6090" end="6102" title="contra dance" label="contra dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="6501" end="6511" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="6549" end="6577" title="Antisemitism" label="Jews invented jazz as a plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q156460" start="6581" end="6596" title="Degenerate art" label="corrupt society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021907" start="7290" end="7299" title="Callerlab" label="Callerlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q55273250" start="7575" end="7586" title="Round dance (ballroom)" label="round dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378261" start="8882" end="8917" title="English Folk Dance and Song Society" label="English Folk Dance and Song Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171112" start="10619" end="10655" title="Royal Scottish Country Dance Society" label="Royal Scottish Country Dance Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494603" start="11082" end="11086" title="Sher (dance)" label="Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027244" start="13261" end="13267" title="Caller (dancing)" label="caller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177128" start="13636" end="13642" title="Counting (music)" label="counts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459435" start="13862" end="13869" title="phrase (music)" label="phrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165614" start="14353" end="14365" title="Contra dance choreography" label="contra dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582063" start="14547" end="14566" title="Square dance program" label="&amp;quot;program&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214305" start="15291" end="15300" title="Allemande" label="Allemande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="16147" end="16150" title="jig" label="jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120" start="16156" end="16161" title="reel (dance)" label="reels"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="16256" end="16270" title="old time music" label="old-time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="16404" end="16410" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="16412" end="16417" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="16419" end="16425" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="16431" end="16442" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="16479" end="16484" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="16486" end="16495" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q593050" start="16497" end="16507" title="concertina" label="concertina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588017" start="16513" end="16530" title="hammered dulcimer" label="hammered dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="16738" end="16747" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="16750" end="16754" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="16761" end="16776" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="16779" end="16784" title="Tempo" label="Tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="16957" end="16960" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="16991" end="17004" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="17017" end="17034" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="17036" end="17040" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="17042" end="17048" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="17050" end="17056" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="17062" end="17069" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582062" start="17712" end="17729" title="square dance club" label="square dance club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18782" end="18825" title="Modern western square dance#Dress code" label="&amp;quot;traditional square dance attire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059351" start="21027" end="21045" title="Youth square dance" label="Youth square dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876387" start="21048" end="21055" title="Hoedown" label="Hoedown"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52694" wikidata="Q1146185" url="?curid=52694" title="Irish dance">
<text>Irish dance refers to the traditional dance forms that originate in Ireland, including both solo and group dance forms, for social, competitive, and performance purposes. Irish dance has evolved over centuries and is believed to have its roots in ancient Celtic dance. In the 17th and 18th centuries, dance was taught by &quot;travelling dance masters&quot; across Ireland, and separate dance forms developed according to regional practice and differing purposes. Irish dance became a significant part of Irish culture, particularly for Irish nationalist movements. From the early 20th century, a number of organisations promoted and codified the various forms of dance, creating competitive structures and standardised styles. Irish dancers who compete for competitive reasons dance in a dance style that is more modern than traditional Irish dance. It is mainly done solo, but there is some team dancing in groups of 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 16 and even numbers onwards.

Solo Irish dance includes the most well-known form of Irish dance, Irish stepdance, which was popularised from 1994 onwards by shows such as &quot;Riverdance&quot;, and which is practised competitively across not only the Irish diaspora but by many people of disparate cultural backgrounds. Stepdance is characterised by the rigid upper body and intricate footwork of its performers. Other forms of solo Irish dance include sean-nós dance, a relaxed and social dance style involving improvised steps, and festival Irish dance, a style which separated from step dance in the mid-20th century.

Irish group dancing has some French influences, and was particularly influenced by the French quadrille in the late 18th century. Ceili dance, practised both competitively and socially, is performed by groups of two to sixteen people, and often uses traditional or codified dances and formations. Its footwork is simple, and emphasis is placed on the figures and formations of the dances. Set dance is primarily a social tradition, for groups of four dancers, and includes elements of the intricate footwork found in step dance.

==History==

There is very little documentary evidence of dance being practised in Ireland prior to the 7th century; this could be due to the destruction of written records in Ireland during Viking raids. Scholars have hypothesised this is from non-literate nature of the Irish cultural tradition. Indeed, the modern Irish words for &quot;dance&quot;, &quot;rince&quot; and &quot;damhsa&quot; did not develop until the 16th century. The scant evidence available is primarily that of visitors to Ireland, such as a fourteenth-century song written in the South of England, where the poet invites his listeners to &quot;come ant daunce wyt me in Irlaunde&quot;. The first native Irish documentary evidence of dancing is an account of a Mayor of Waterford&#x27;s visit to Baltimore, County Cork in 1413, where the attendees &quot;took to the floor&quot; to celebrate Christmas Eve. However, the Norman invasion of Ireland in the twelfth century may have brought with it the round dance tradition, as it was contemporaneously performed in British camps while every now and then being seen in a Norman stronghold.

Accounts of dancing in the 17th century means that dancing was by that time extremely widespread throughout Ireland. In 1674 Richard Head wrote in reference to Ireland, &#x27;In every field a fiddle, and the lasses footing till they all of a foam,&#x27; suggesting some type of Irish step dancing or dance with heavy foot movement. There is ample evidence of Irish jigs or Irish step dancing in the 16th century, in 1569 Sir Henry Sydney sent a letter to Queen Elizabeth in which he expresses his enthusiasm for the Irish jigs, or fiddle of Galway. A report from 1600 mentions that some forms of Irish dances were similar in form to English country dances, and later references mention the &quot;rinnce fada&quot;, also known as the &quot;long dance&quot; or &quot;fading&quot;. This dance, performed to a jig tune though not to any particular piece of music, became the customary conclusion to balls held in Ireland towards the end of the seventeenth century. At this time, dancing was commonly accompanied by musicians playing bagpipes or the Jew&#x27;s harp.
By the 1760s, the distinctive hornpipe rhythm of the Irish dance tradition had developed, and with the introduction of the fiddle to Ireland from the European continent, a new class of &quot;dancing master&quot; began to emerge. despite the fact that In 1674 Richard Head wrote in reference to Ireland ‘In every field a fiddle, and the girls footing until they foam up’. Reference to the Irish fiddle can also be found in John Dunton&#x27;s &quot;Teague Land: or A Merry Ramble to the Wild Irish&quot; (1698) he says “on Sundays and Holydays, all the people resorted with the piper and fiddler to the village green, suggesting the fiddle was introduced to Ireland much earlier then 1760.
The dancing traditions of Ireland probably grew in association with traditional Irish music. Although its origins are unclear, it was possibly later influenced by dance forms from the Continent, such as the &quot;Quadrille&quot;. Travelling dancing masters taught across Ireland as late as the 18th and early 19th centuries. Because local venues were usually small, dances were often demonstrated on tabletops, or even the tops of barrels. As a result, these early styles are characterised by the arms held rigidly at the sides, and a lack of lateral movement. As larger dance venues became available, styles grew to include more movement of the body and around the dance area.

==Irish stepdance==

Accounts of dancing in the 17th century suggest that dancing was by that time extremely widespread throughout Ireland. In 1674 Richard Head wrote in reference to Ireland, &#x27;In every field a fiddle, and the lasses footing till they all of a foam,&#x27; suggesting some type of Irish step dancing or dance with heavy foot movement. There is ample evidence of Irish jigs or Irish step dancing in the 16th century, in 1569 Sir Henry Sydney sent a letter to Queen Elizabeth in which he expresses his enthusiasm for the Irish jigs, or fiddle of Galway A variety of forms of solo Irish Dance have developed which are described as stepdance. These include the well-known &quot;modern&quot; stepdance performed competitively; old-style stepdance, which is closer in style to the dance practised by 19th-century travelling dance masters; and festival dance, which separated from modern stepdance over stylistic and administrative disputes in the mid-20th century.

===Modern stepdance===

The most predominant form of Irish stepdance is that popularised by the Broadway show Riverdance, and other Irish dancing stage shows since the late 20th century. Characterised by a rigid torso and dances performed high on the balls of the feet, this style became distinct from the late 19th century when the Gaelic League began efforts to preserve and promote Irish dance as part of a broader nationalist movement concerned with Irish culture. Although a rigid torso may be the initial characterisation of Irish dance, modern soft shoe Irish dancers commonly gracefully use their arms in flowing movements, abandoning the traditional form. It is not uncommon for hard shoe dancers to use their arms in strict hand formations other than arms at sides, though competition dance continues to require the arms be kept by the dancer&#x27;s sides. In 1929, the League formed &quot;An Coimisiún Le Rincí Gaelacha&quot; (CLRG, The Irish Dancing Commission) in order to codify and standardise stepdancing competition and education. Over the following decades, CLRG expanded globally, and promoted this particular form of stepdance by developing examinations and qualifications for teachers and competition adjudicators. Today, stepdance in the style codified by the Gaelic League is performed competitively in a number of countries, and under the auspices of a number of organisations which have at various times broken away from CLRG.

====Dances====

Irish solo stepdances fall into two broad categories based on the shoes worn: &#x27;hard shoe&#x27; (also known as jig shoe or heavy shoe) and &#x27;soft shoe&#x27; (or light shoe) dances.

There are four soft shoe dance styles: the reel, slip jig, light jig and &#x27;single jig&#x27; (also referred to as &#x27;hop jig&#x27;). Reels have a (or sometimes or ) time signature. Slip jigs are in time. Light and single jigs are in time, with different emphasis within the measure distinguishing the music.

Hard shoe dances include the hornpipe in syncopated or time, the treble jig (also called the &#x27;heavy jig&#x27; or &#x27;double jig&#x27;) in a slow , the treble reel (a short sixteen bar hard shoe dance done to reel music) and &#x27;traditional sets&#x27;, which are a group of dances with set music and steps. Many traditional sets have irregular musical phrasing. There are multiple traditional sets, including St. Patrick&#x27;s Day, Blackbird, Job of Journeywork, Three Sea Captains, Garden of Daisies, and King of the Fairies. While theoretically standardised, different organisations recognise different traditional sets and slight variations exist between teachers. There are also &quot;non-traditional sets&quot; done by advanced dancers. These have set music, but not steps; the steps are choreographed by individual dance schools.

Competitive dancers generally dance two or three steps at a time, depending on their dancing level. Each step lasts for sixteen bars of music for the treble jig and the reel. Dances such as the hornpipe and slip jig instead have eight bars of music for their third steps. The dances are each danced starting with the right foot for eight bars, then repeated with the left foot for the last eight bars, doing the same movements with the opposite feet. Set dances, however, have a different format. The dancer usually dances one step, which is limited to the length of the first part of the music that is repeated (often eight bars, though this varies depending on the specific set dance), and is then repeated, resembling the steps of other dances. Then the dancer usually dances a &quot;set&quot; which is not repeated. It is a highly sought after and competitive feat to recall to dance this &quot;third round&quot; — at regional, national, and world competitions, only a small percentage (typically the top half of dancers graded after the first two rounds) of dancers are invited back to perform.

The &quot;Céilí&quot; dances used in competitions are more precise versions of those danced in less formal settings. There is a list of 30 &quot;Céilí&quot; dances which have been standardised and published in &quot;An Coimisiún&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Ar Rinncidhe Foirne&quot; as examples of typical Irish folk dances; these are called the &quot;book&quot; dances by competitive stepdancers. Most Irish dancing competitions only ask for a short piece of any given dance, in the interests of time and the endurance of the dancers.

====Shoes and costume====

There are two types of shoes; soft shoes (also known as ghillies or pumps) and hard shoes. Hard shoes are similar to tap shoes, except that the tips and heels are made of fiberglass, instead of metal, and are significantly bulkier. Another aspect of the hard shoe that sets it apart from a tap shoe is its ability to go &quot;on block&quot; or en pointe. The first hard shoes had wooden or leather taps with metal nails. Later the taps and heels were made of resin or fiberglass to reduce the weight and to make the sounds louder. The soft shoes, which are called &quot;ghillies&quot;, are black leather lace-up shoes similar to ballet slippers. &quot;Ghillies&quot; are only worn by girls, while boys wear black leather shoes called &quot;reel shoes&quot;, which resemble black jazz shoes with a hard heel. Boy&#x27;s soft-shoe dancing features audible heel clicks and stomps. A new trend includes adding white laces to the soft shoes, and white tape to the straps of the hard shoes to blend in with the sock and give the illusion of elongating the legs.

Several generations ago, the appropriate dress for a competition was simply &quot;Sunday best&quot; (clothes one would wear to church). Irish Dance schools generally have school dresses, worn by lower-level competitors, in public performances, and in team competitions. As dancers advance in competition or are given starring roles in public performances, they may get a solo dress of their own design and colours or wear the team dress. In the 1970s and 1980s, ornately embroidered dresses became popular. Today even more ornamentation is used on girls&#x27; dresses, including rhinestones, sequins, and other bling. Solo dresses are unique to each dancer. Today most women and girls wear a wig, a bun or hairpiece for a competition, but some still curl their own hair. Costumes are heavily integrated into the Irish dance culture and feature traditional elements of classic peasant wear adorned with Celtic designs. Most men wear a shirt, vest or jacket, and tie paired with black trousers. The vest or jacket of the men&#x27;s costume is also commonly adorned with crystals, traditional knotwork, and embroidery. Each Irish dance school has its own distinctive full skirted dress, often featuring lace or an embroidered pattern copied from the medieval Irish Book of Kells.

====Competition structure====
An organised dance competition is referred to as a &quot;feis&quot; (plural &quot;feiseanna&quot;). The word &quot;feis&quot; means &quot;festival&quot; in Irish, and strictly speaking would also have competitions in music and crafts. &quot;Féile&quot; () is a more correct term for the dance competition, but the terms may be used interchangeably. Dance competitions are divided by age and level of expertise. The names of the levels and other organising rules vary between countries and regions. Dancers are scored based on technique (placement of the feet, turn out, off of their heels, etc.), style (grace, power, etc.) and other items such as timing, rhythm, carriage, choreography and sounds in their hard shoe dances.

&quot;An Coimisiún&quot; dancers take part in their annual regional Championship competition, which is known as an oireachtas (). An Coimisiún also holds various &quot;national&quot; championship competitions. These are qualifying events for Oireachtas Rince na Cruinne, or &quot;The World Championships&quot;. An Coimisiún&#x27;s World Championships are the largest of all Irish step dance organisations, with over 6,000 dancers competing from over 30 countries worldwide. The &quot;Aisling&quot; Award (pronounced &#x27;Ashling&#x27;, Gaelic for dream) is awarded to the highest placing dancer in each solo dancing category from outside of Ireland, the United Kingdom, the US and Canada to encourage them to continue their dream of dancing. Other smaller Irish step dance organisations host their own premier championship.

&quot;Oireachtas Rince na Cruinne&quot;, or &quot;The World Championships&quot; (for An Coimisiún dancers), first took place in Dublin in 1970 at &quot;Coláiste Mhuire&quot;, a school in Parnell Square. The &quot;Worlds&quot; outgrew its original location and moved around the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. In 2002, for the first time, the &quot;Worlds&quot; left Ireland for Glasgow. In 2009, for the first time, the World Championships were held in the United States, in Philadelphia. The 2010-2019 championships were held in Glasgow, Dublin, Belfast, Boston, London, Montréal, Glasgow, Dublin, Glasgow, and Greensboro, respectively, always taking place during the week leading up to Easter Sunday, when the championships end. The BBC documentary film &quot;Jig&quot; provided an insight into championship level dancers competing in the 2010 World Championships held in Glasgow. Oireachtas Rince Na Cruinne planned return to Dublin in 2020 for the 50 year anniversary of the championships was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2022, the competition was held in Belfast.

An Coimsiún also holds Oireachtas Rince na hÉireann, or &quot;The All Irelands&quot; which took place in Killarney in February 2019. It is the oldest Irish dancing competition in the world.

An Comhdhail&#x27;s World championships also take place each Easter week, with the competition being held in Dublin in 2018 and Killarney in 2019. WIDA (World Irish Dance Association), which mainly consists of dancers from European countries, also hold their own World and International Championships over the Easter week, with the competition being held in Maastricht in 2018, Eindhoven in 2019, digitally in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and in Moers in 2022.

===Old-style step dancing===
Old-style step dancing is a tradition related to, yet distinct from, sean-nós dancing, though it is sometimes called &quot;Munster-style sean-nós&quot;. Old-style step dancing evolved in the 17th-18th century from the dancing of travelling Irish dance masters. The dance masters slowly formalised and transformed both solo and social dances. Modern masters of old-style step dancing style can trace the lineage of their steps directly back to 18th century dancers.

The Irish Dance masters refined and codified indigenous Irish dance traditions. Rules emerged about proper upper body, arm, and foot placement. Also, dancers were instructed to dance a step twice—first with the right foot then with the left. Old-style step dancers dance with arms loosely (but not rigidly) at their sides. They dance in a limited space. There is an emphasis on making percussive sound with the toes. The Irish dance masters of this period also choreographed particular steps to particular tunes in traditional music creating the solo traditional set dances such as the Blackbird, St. Patrick&#x27;s Day, and the Job of Journey Work, which also persist in modern Irish stepdancing. In this context, &quot;set dance&quot; signifies a separate tradition from the social dance tradition also called set dance.

===Festival dance===

Following criticism of CLRG for its emphasis on certain regional forms of stepdance to the detriment of others, dance teacher Patricia Mulholland developed a new style of stepdance, beginning in the 1950s. It was described as a form of &quot;folk ballet&quot; which appealed to dancers of both Catholic and Protestant religious persuasions. Like other forms which share the heritage of modern stepdance but have departed from its codification, festival dance emphasises individuality and practises more relaxed style and posture.

==Sean-nós dance==

&quot;Sean-nós&quot;, or &quot;old style&quot; dance is a form of Irish dancing which originated from western regions of Ireland. It has been described variously as a regional style of stepdancing, and as an entirely separate style that was virtually unknown outside small areas until the late 20th century. It is distinguished by footwork which is percussive but low to the ground in comparison to step dancing, and by its more freeform nature. Performers use a more relaxed posture, and improvise steps to fit with music. Typically, sean-nós dances are performed in small spaces, traditionally doors laid flat and table tops.

==Irish céilí dances==
Irish social, or céilí (, ) dances vary widely throughout Ireland and the rest of the world. A céilí dance may be performed with as few as two people and as many as sixteen.

Céilí dances may also be danced with an unlimited number of couples in a long line or proceeding around in a circle (such as in &quot;The Walls of Limerick&quot;, &quot;The Waves of Tory&quot;, &quot;Haymakers Jig&quot;, &quot;An Rince Mor&quot; or &quot;Bonfire Dance&quot;). Céilí dances are often fast and some are quite complex (&quot;Antrim Reel&quot;, &quot;Morris Reel&quot;).

In a social setting, a céilí dance may be &quot;called&quot; – that is, the upcoming steps are announced during the dance for the benefit of newcomers. The céilí dances are typically danced to Irish instruments such as the Irish &quot;bodhrán&quot; or fiddle in addition to the concertina (and similar instruments), guitar, whistle or flute.

The term &quot;céilí dance&quot; was invented in the late 19th century by the Gaelic League. as a noun differs from the adjective . A céilí is a social gathering featuring Irish music and dance. Céilí dancing is a specific type of Irish dance. Some (plural of céilí) will only have céilí dancing, some only have set dancing, and some will have a mixture.

==Irish set dancing==
Irish set dancing (also referred to as &quot;country set dancing&quot;) are dances similar to English country dancing and later French quadrilles; later adapting and integrating forms of the dance with the Irish sean-nós steps and Irish music. Distinguishing characteristics of Irish set dancing include that it is danced in square sets of four couples (eight people), and consist of several &quot;figures,&quot; each of which has a number of parts, frequently repeated throughout the set. Each part of the set dance (figure) is danced to a music tempo, mostly reels, jigs, polkas and hornpipes. The sets come from various parts of Ireland and are often named for their place of origin; examples are the North Kerry Set, the Clare Set, the Corofin Plain Set, the South Galway Set and the Clare Lancers Set.

There are many solo set dances which can be performed in competition. These include both traditional sets and non-traditional sets. Some traditional sets include Blackbird (hornpipe), Job of the Journeywork (hornpipe), Garden of Daises (hornpipe), St. Patrick&#x27;s Day (treble jig), King of the Fairies (hornpipe). These dances are set in their choreography, which means that no teacher can vastly change the steps.

The organisation &quot;Comhaltas Ceoltóirí Éireann&quot; promotes and hosts many set and ceili dance events.

==See also==
* Céilidh
* European dances

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
===General information===
* Irish Dancing &amp; Culture Magazine
* Set Dancing News: portal for set dancing information
* Diddlyi.com: Irish Dance and Music Social Network 
* O&#x27;Keeffe &amp; O&#x27;Brien – A Handbook of Irish Dance (1902)
* Diochra.com: Discover Irish dance!
* Beginners Guide to Irish Dancing
* The History of Irish Dance
* Irish Step Dancing
* Set Dance
* World Irish Dancing
* Dance instruction database

===Irish Dance Organisations===

* An Coimisiún le Rincí Gaelacha The Irish Dancing Commission
* World Irish Dance Association (WIDA)
* An Comhdháil Múinteora Rince Gaelacha Congress of Irish Dance Teachers
* Cumann Rince Náisiúnta (CRN) National Dance Association
* Comhaltas Ceoltóirí Eireann Gathering of Musicians of Ireland
* Cumman Rince Dea Mheasa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1146185" start="0" end="11" title="Irish dance" label="Irish dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="38" end="43" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="68" end="75" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209069" start="124" end="130" title="Social dance" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415387" start="132" end="143" title="Competitive dance" label="competitive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="149" end="160" title="performative dance" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25543948" start="505" end="518" title="Irish culture" label="Irish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="537" end="554" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865501" start="1035" end="1050" title="Irish stepdance" label="Irish stepdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="1115" end="1125" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798339" start="1392" end="1406" title="sean-nós dance" label="sean-nós dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445715" start="1473" end="1493" title="festival Irish dance" label="festival Irish dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="1655" end="1664" title="quadrille" label="quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="1691" end="1702" title="Ceili dance" label="Ceili dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902510" start="1950" end="1959" title="Irish set dance" label="Set dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="2282" end="2288" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="2336" end="2348" title="Oral tradition" label="non-literate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134643" start="2644" end="2660" title="South of England" label="South of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254116" start="2824" end="2842" title="Mayor of Waterford" label="Mayor of Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q805740" start="2859" end="2868" title="Baltimore, County Cork" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="2870" end="2881" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="2954" end="2967" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="2982" end="3008" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="Norman invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55273250" start="3061" end="3072" title="Round dance (ballroom)" label="round dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149755" start="3325" end="3337" title="Richard Head" label="Richard Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="3833" end="3855" title="English country Dance" label="English country dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335073" start="3896" end="3907" title="Rinnce Fada" label="rinnce fada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="4229" end="4237" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185003" start="4245" end="4260" title="Jew&amp;#x27;s harp" label="Jew&amp;#x27;s harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149755" start="4521" end="4533" title="Richard Head" label="Richard Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691363" start="4709" end="4757" title="Teague Land" label="Teague Land: or A Merry Ramble to the Wild Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="5018" end="5041" title="Folk music of Ireland" label="traditional Irish music"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="5163" end="5172" title="Quadrille" label="Quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149755" start="5777" end="5789" title="Richard Head" label="Richard Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="6719" end="6729" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="6942" end="6955" title="Gaelic League" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="7027" end="7038" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455532" start="7509" end="7539" title="An Coimisiún Le Rincí Gaelacha" label="An Coimisiún Le Rincí Gaelacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120" start="8311" end="8315" title="Reel (dance)" label="reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604326" start="8317" end="8325" title="slip jig" label="slip jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="8333" end="8336" title="jig" label="jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="8439" end="8453" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547484" start="8612" end="8620" title="hornpipe" label="hornpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837396" start="8648" end="8658" title="treble jig" label="treble jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837397" start="8741" end="8752" title="treble reel" label="treble reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="8770" end="8773" title="Bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="9000" end="9022" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="9557" end="9560" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="9664" end="9667" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104852" start="11141" end="11149" title="Ghillies (dance)" label="ghillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244475" start="11202" end="11205" title="tap dance" label="tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="11256" end="11266" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302727" start="11432" end="11438" title="Pointe technique" label="pointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104852" start="11655" end="11663" title="ghillies (dance)" label="ghillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159724" start="11864" end="11873" title="jazz shoe" label="jazz shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="13404" end="13417" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402070" start="13507" end="13511" title="feis" label="feis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="13606" end="13611" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081526" start="14291" end="14301" title="Oireachtas (Irish dance)" label="oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783073" start="14418" end="14445" title="Oireachtas Rince na Cruinne" label="Oireachtas Rince na Cruinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783073" start="15008" end="15035" title="Oireachtas Rince na Cruinne" label="Oireachtas Rince na Cruinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="15130" end="15136" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15390" end="15397" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="15487" end="15499" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15542" end="15549" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="15551" end="15557" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="15559" end="15566" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="15568" end="15574" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="15576" end="15582" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="15584" end="15592" title="Montréal" label="Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15594" end="15601" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="15603" end="15609" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15611" end="15618" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="15624" end="15634" title="Greensboro" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="15700" end="15713" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="15747" end="15750" title="BBC (TV channel)" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15886" end="15893" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783073" start="15895" end="15922" title="Oireachtas Rince Na Cruinne" label="Oireachtas Rince Na Cruinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="15941" end="15947" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q623382" start="16201" end="16210" title="Killarney" label="Killarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="16396" end="16402" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q623382" start="16415" end="16424" title="Killarney" label="Killarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="16645" end="16655" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="16665" end="16674" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="16713" end="16730" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132" start="16739" end="16744" title="Moers" label="Moers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798339" start="16853" end="16869" title="Sean-nós dance" label="sean-nós dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="18062" end="18071" title="set dance" label="set dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18390" end="18398" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="18403" end="18413" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027244" start="19907" end="19913" title="caller (dancing)" label="called"/>
<link wikidata="Q244976" start="20094" end="20101" title="bodhrán" label="bodhrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070734" start="20111" end="20117" title="irish fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="20280" end="20293" title="Gaelic League" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="20674" end="20697" title="Country dance" label="English country dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="20715" end="20725" title="quadrilles" label="quadrilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798339" start="20792" end="20800" title="Sean-nós dance" label="sean-nós"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120" start="21141" end="21145" title="reel (dance)" label="reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="21148" end="21152" title="jigs" label="jigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547484" start="21165" end="21173" title="hornpipe" label="hornpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567327" start="21343" end="21359" title="South Galway Set" label="South Galway Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126194" start="21368" end="21385" title="Clare Lancers Set" label="Clare Lancers Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342901" start="21830" end="21857" title="Comhaltas Ceoltóirí Éireann" label="Comhaltas Ceoltóirí Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150334" start="21932" end="21939" title="Céilidh" label="Céilidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056599" start="21942" end="21957" title="European dances" label="European dances"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52699" wikidata="Q3855184" url="?curid=52699" title="Filet crochet">
<text>Filet crochet is a type of crocheted fabric that imitates filet lace. This type of crocheted lace is gridlike because it uses only two crochet stitches: the chain stitch and the double crochet stitch (U.S. terminology; known in some other countries as &quot;chain stitch&quot; and &quot;treble&quot;). Old filet patterns used a treble or triple stitch vertically but chained two between the vertical stitches. This was to prevent distortion of some patterns. Chain stitches use less yarn than double crochet stitches, which results in a visual difference in appearance between the two kinds of stitch. Filet crochet forms patterns by filling in parts of a mostly chain stitch mesh with double crochet stitches. Filet crochet is usually constructed from monotone crochet thread made of Mercerised cotton in white or ecru, and worked in rows. Filet crochet is often used for decorative applications, such as window curtains, tablecloths, and place settings, such as coasters and placemats, but can also be used to create clothing, including yokes, as well as accessories and small bags.

Filet crochet is most often worked from a graph or a symbol diagram. Patterns are created by combining solid and open meshes, usually working the design in solid meshes and the background in open meshes. The size of the space is determined by the number of chain stitches between each double stitch. Filet crochet may also be worked by alternating chain stitches with another type of crochet stitch such as (U.S. terminology) half double or triple crochet, and may be worked from yarn instead of thread.

==See also==
*List of crochet stitches

==Notes==
==References==

* Edie Eckman, &quot;The Crochet Answer Book&quot;, North Adams, Massachusetts: Storey Publishing, 2005.
* Kara Heun, Crochet Stitches: How to Filet Crochet, Prime Publishing LLC, 2017. http://www.allfreecrochet.com/Tutorials/Crochet-Stitches-How-to-Filet-Crochet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3855184" start="0" end="13" title="Filet crochet" label="Filet crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208386" start="27" end="34" title="crochet" label="crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412659" start="58" end="68" title="filet lace" label="filet lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182600" start="83" end="97" title="crocheted lace" label="crocheted lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187274" start="762" end="776" title="crochet thread" label="crochet thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896513" start="785" end="802" title="mercerized cotton" label="Mercerised cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q536168" start="923" end="933" title="tablecloth" label="tablecloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14973" start="964" end="971" title="Beverage coaster" label="coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757989" start="977" end="985" title="placemat" label="placemat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054544" start="1039" end="1044" title="Yoke (clothing)" label="yokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614683" start="1605" end="1629" title="List of crochet stitches" label="List of crochet stitches"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52701" wikidata="Q2705715" url="?curid=52701" title="Tunisian crochet">
<text>Tunisian crochet or Afghan crochet is a type of crochet that uses an elongated hook, often with a stopper on the handle end, called an Afghan hook. It is sometimes considered to be a mixture of crocheting and knitting. As such, some techniques used in knitting are also applicable in Tunisian crochet. One example is the intarsia method.

== Description ==
The work is begun with the traditional crochet starting chain, a series of chain stitches. Once the chain is completed, the first row is worked by inserting the hook back into the previous link of the chain, and a loop from the free end of the yarn is grabbed with the hook and pulled back through the link. Unlike traditional crochet, however, this new loop is not then pulled through the initial loop. Both remain on the hook and then the process is repeated, working from right to left if the artisan is right-handed, until each link in the chain has been worked. At the end, there will be as many loops on the hook as there are stitches required. This step is called forward pass, it is similar to casting on in knitting. This is the first of two parts for creating a row.

For the &quot;Tunisian simple stitch&quot; and most basic ones, the work is never turned. Once the correct number of loops is obtained, the process is reversed with each loop being worked off from the hook by pulling a fresh loop of yarn through each stitch, working from left to right, called the reverse or backward pass. It is both parts of the process which form a completed row. The tension of the yarn is much looser than in standard crochet or knitting.

Tunisian crochet can also be worked in the round as when making a seamless cap. To work in the round, a double-ended crochet hook and two balls of yarn are used. The first hook and ball of yarn are used to add loops (casting on). When the process is reversed (as described above), the loops are worked off using the second hook and second ball of yarn. When using a flexible cable to connect the two ends of the double-ended crochet hook, a single ball of yarn is sufficient.

There are a variety of stitches that can be created depending on how and where the hook is inserted and how the working yarn is held. Tunisian stitches include variations on knit, purl, post stitch, and entrelac.

The fabric created by Tunisian crochet is slightly less elastic than normal crochet and substantially thicker, particularly the knit stitch. This makes it most suitable for blankets and winter knits, but unsuitable for finer items like babywear and socks. The fabric also has a tendency to curl, and usually needs to be shaped by wetting or steaming the fabric (known as blocking) upon completion. It is slightly faster to create fabric by Tunisian than normal crochet, and approximately twice the speed of knitting. 

== Naming history ==
Tunisian crochet has gone by many names including Afghan crochet, Victorian crochet, tricot stitch, Scotch knitting, Princess Frederick William stitch, Princess Royal Crochet stitch, idiot&#x27;s crochet, fool&#x27;s crochet, and shepherd&#x27;s knitting. The first mention of knitting with Tunisian-style hooked needles appeared in what is now Germany around 1787−1800, then in France in 1817. The first use of Tunisian in relation to this form of crochet was found in 1857 in Sweden (, &quot;Tunisian simple stitch&quot;). The term &quot;Tunisian Crochet&quot; is first found in English in an American publication from 1862.

There is no definite link between Tunisia and the Tunisian crochet; it might have been made because similar crafts are practised in Tunisia, or because Tunisia was situated on the trading route from Egypt to Europe where hooked needles were sold. Another possibility is that the name was given to indicate that this is an &quot;exotic&quot; fiber craft.

==See also==
*Afghan blanket

==References==
==External links==
*Tunisian Intarsia
*53 Tunisian Crochet Stitches with Tutorials</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2705715" start="0" end="16" title="Tunisian crochet" label="Tunisian crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705715" start="20" end="34" title="Tunisian crochet" label="Afghan crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208386" start="48" end="55" title="crochet" label="crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090202" start="79" end="83" title="crochet hook" label="hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q193188" start="209" end="217" title="knitting" label="knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q81621419" start="321" end="329" title="Intarsia (knitting)" label="intarsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049956" start="1059" end="1069" title="Casting on (knitting)" label="casting on"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927289" start="2659" end="2667" title="Blocking (textile arts)" label="blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689050" start="3825" end="3839" title="Afghan blanket" label="Afghan blanket"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52707" wikidata="Q202765" url="?curid=52707" title="Kate Winslet">
<text>Kate Elizabeth Winslet (; born 5 October 1975) is an English actress. Primarily known for her roles as headstrong and complicated women in independent films, particularly period dramas, she has received numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a Grammy Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards, five BAFTA Awards and five Golden Globe Awards. &quot;Time&quot; magazine named Winslet one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2009 and 2021. She was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2012.

Winslet studied drama at the Redroofs Theatre School. Her first screen appearance, at age fifteen, was in the British television series &quot;Dark Season&quot; (1991). She made her film debut playing a teenage murderess in &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot; (1994), and went on to win a BAFTA Award for playing Marianne Dashwood in &quot;Sense and Sensibility&quot; (1995). Global stardom followed with her leading role in James Cameron&#x27;s epic romance &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), which was the highest-grossing film at the time. Winslet then eschewed parts in blockbusters in favour of critically acclaimed period pieces, including &quot;Quills&quot; (2000) and &quot;Iris&quot; (2001).

The science fiction romance &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; (2004), in which Winslet was cast against type in a contemporary setting, proved to be a turning point in her career, and she gained further recognition for her performances in &quot;Finding Neverland&quot; (2004), &quot;Little Children&quot; (2006), &quot;The Holiday&quot; (2006), &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot; (2008), and &quot;The Reader&quot; (2008). For playing a former Nazi camp guard in the last, she won the BAFTA Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress. Winslet&#x27;s portrayal of Joanna Hoffman in the biopic &quot;Steve Jobs&quot; (2015) won her another BAFTA Award, and she received two Primetime Emmy Awards for her performances in the HBO miniseries &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; (2011) and &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot; (2021). In 2022, she produced and starred in the single drama &quot;I Am Ruth&quot;, winning two BAFTA TV Awards, and played a supporting role through motion capture in Cameron&#x27;s top-grossing science fiction film &quot;&quot;.

For her narration of a short story in the audiobook &quot;Listen to the Storyteller&quot; (1999), Winslet won a Grammy Award. She performed the song &quot;What If&quot; for the soundtrack of her film, &quot;Christmas Carol: The Movie&quot; (2001). A co-founder of the charity Golden Hat Foundation, which aims to create autism awareness, Winslet has also written a book on the topic. Divorced from film directors Jim Threapleton and Sam Mendes, Winslet has been married to businessman Edward Abel Smith since 2012. She has a child from each marriage, one of whom is the actress Mia Threapleton.

==Early life==
Kate Elizabeth Winslet was born on 5 October 1975, in Reading, Berkshire, to Sally Ann (née Bridges) and Roger John Winslet. She is primarily of British descent, but also has Irish ancestry on her father&#x27;s side and Swedish ancestry on her mother&#x27;s side. Her mother worked as a nanny and waitress, and her father, a struggling actor, took labouring jobs to support the family. Her maternal grandparents were both actors and ran the Reading Repertory Theatre Company. Winslet has two sisters, Anna and Beth, both of whom are actresses, and a younger brother, Joss. The family had limited financial means; they lived on free meal benefits and were supported by a charity, the Actors&#x27; Charitable Trust. When Winslet was ten, her father severely injured his foot in a boating accident and found it harder to work, leading to more financial hardships for the family. Winslet has said her parents always made them feel cared for and that they were a supportive family.
Winslet attended St Mary and All Saints&#x27; Church of England primary school. Living in a family of actors inspired her to pursue acting from a young age. She and her sisters participated in amateur stage shows at school and at a local youth theatre, named Foundations. When she was five, Winslet made her first stage appearance as Mary in her school&#x27;s production of the Nativity play. She describes herself as an overweight child, and was called &quot;blubber&quot; by her schoolmates and was bullied for her appearance. She said she did not let this stop her. 

At eleven, Winslet was accepted into the Redroofs Theatre School, an independent school in Maidenhead. The school also functioned as an agency and took students to London to audition for acting jobs. She appeared in a Sugar Puffs commercial and dubbed for foreign films. At school, she was made head girl, took part in productions of &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; and &quot;The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe&quot;, and played the lead role of Wendy Darling in &quot;Peter Pan&quot;. She worked simultaneously with the Starmaker Theatre Company in Reading. She participated in over twenty of their stage productions, but was rarely selected as the lead due to her weight. Nonetheless, she played key roles as Miss Agatha Hannigan in &quot;Annie&quot;, the Mother Wolf in &quot;The Jungle Book&quot;, and Lena Marelli in &quot;Bugsy Malone&quot;.

In 1991, within two weeks of finishing her GCSE examinations, Winslet made her screen debut as one of the main cast members of the BBC science fiction television series &quot;Dark Season&quot; written by Russell T Davies. Her part was that of Reet, a schoolgirl who helps her classmates fight against a sinister man distributing free computers to her school. She did not earn much from the job and, at age sixteen, lack of funds forced Winslet to leave Redroofs. To support herself, she worked at a delicatessen. In 1992, she had a small part in the television film &quot;Anglo-Saxon Attitudes&quot;, an adaptation of Angus Wilson&#x27;s satirical novel. Winslet, who weighed at the time, played the daughter of an obese woman. During filming, after hearing an off-hand comment from the director Diarmuid Lawrence about the likeness between her and the actress who played her mother, Winslet became motivated to lose weight. She next took on the role of the young daughter of a bankrupt self-made man (played by Ray Winstone) in the television sitcom &quot;Get Back&quot; (1992–1993). She also had a guest role in a 1993 episode of the medical drama series &quot;Casualty&quot;.

==Career==
===Early work and breakthrough (1994–1996)===
Winslet was among 175 women to audition for Peter Jackson&#x27;s psychological drama &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot; (1994), and was cast after impressing Jackson with the intensity she brought to her part. The New Zealand-based production is based on the Parker–Hulme murder case of 1954, in which Winslet played Juliet Hulme, a teenager who assists her friend, Pauline Parker (played by Melanie Lynskey), in the murder of Pauline&#x27;s mother. She prepared for the part by reading the transcripts of the girls&#x27; murder trial, their letters and diaries, and interacted with their acquaintances. She has said she learnt tremendously from the job. Jackson filmed in the real murder locations, and the experience left Winslet traumatised. She found it difficult to detach herself from her character, and said that after returning home, she often cried. The film was a critical breakthrough for Winslet; Desson Thomson, a reviewer for &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, called her &quot;a bright-eyed ball of fire, lighting up every scene she&#x27;s in&quot;. Winslet recorded &quot;Juliet&#x27;s Aria&quot; for the film&#x27;s soundtrack. Also that year, she appeared as Geraldine Barclay, a prospective secretary, in the Royal Exchange Theatre production of Joe Orton&#x27;s farce &quot;What the Butler Saw&quot;.

While promoting &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot; in Los Angeles, Winslet auditioned for the minor part of Lucy Steele for a 1995 film adaptation of Jane Austen&#x27;s novel &quot;Sense and Sensibility&quot;, written by and starring Emma Thompson. Impressed by her reading, Thompson cast her in the much larger part of the recklessly romantic teenager Marianne Dashwood. The director Ang Lee wanted Winslet to play the part with grace and restraint—aspects that he felt were missing from her performance in &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot;—and thus asked her to practise tai chi, read gothic literature, and learn to play the piano. David Parkinson of &quot;Radio Times&quot; considered Winslet to be a standout among the cast, and Mick LaSalle of the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; took note of how well she portrayed her character&#x27;s growth and maturity. The film grossed over $134 million worldwide. She won the Screen Actors Guild and British Academy Film Award for Best Supporting Actress, and received an Academy Award nomination in the same category. Also in 1995, Winslet featured in the poorly received Disney film &quot;A Kid in King Arthur&#x27;s Court&quot;.

Winslet had roles in two period dramas of 1996—&quot;Jude&quot; and &quot;Hamlet&quot;. As with &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot;, her roles in these films were those of women with a &quot;mad edge&quot;. In Michael Winterbottom&#x27;s &quot;Jude&quot;, based on the novel &quot;Jude the Obscure&quot; by Thomas Hardy, she played Sue Bridehead, a young woman with suffragette leanings who falls in love with her cousin, Jude (played by Christopher Eccleston). The critic Roger Ebert believed the part allowed Winslet to display her acting range, and praised her for the defiance she brought to the role. After unsuccessfully auditioning for Kenneth Branagh&#x27;s 1994 film &quot;Mary Shelley&#x27;s Frankenstein&quot;, she was cast in the part of Ophelia, the doomed lover of the title character, in Branagh&#x27;s adaptation of the William Shakespeare tragedy &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Twenty-year-old Winslet was intimidated by the experience of performing Shakespeare with established actors such as Branagh and Julie Christie, saying the job required a level of intellect that she thought she did not possess. Mike Jeffries of &quot;Empire&quot; believed that she had played the part &quot;well beyond her years&quot;. Despite the acclaim, &quot;Jude&quot; and &quot;Hamlet&quot; earned little at the box office.

===Worldwide recognition and independent films (1997–2003)===
Winslet was keen on playing Rose DeWitt Bukater, a socialite aboard the ill-fated RMS &quot;Titanic&quot;, in James Cameron&#x27;s epic romance &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997). Cameron was initially reluctant to cast her, preferring the likes of Claire Danes and Gwyneth Paltrow, but she pleaded with him, &quot;You don&#x27;t understand! I am Rose! I don&#x27;t know why you&#x27;re even seeing anyone else!&quot; Her persistence led him to give her the part. Leonardo DiCaprio featured as her love interest, Jack. &quot;Titanic&quot; had a production budget of $200 million, and its arduous principal photography was held at Baja Studios where a replica of the ship was created. Filming proved taxing for Winslet; she almost drowned, caught influenza, experienced hypothermia, and had bruises on her arms and knees. The workload allowed her only four hours of sleep per day and she felt drained by the experience. Writing for &quot;Newsweek&quot;, David Ansen commended Winslet for capturing her character&#x27;s zeal with delicacy, and Mike Clark of &quot;USA Today&quot; considered her to be the film&#x27;s prime asset. Against expectations, &quot;Titanic&quot; went on to become the highest-grossing film to that point, earning over $2 billion in box office receipts worldwide, and established Winslet as a global star. The film won eleven Academy Awards—tied for most for a single film—including Best Picture, and earned the 22-year-old Winslet a nomination for Best Actress. She also received Golden Globe and SAG nominations for Best Actress.

Winslet did not view &quot;Titanic&quot; as a platform for larger salaries. She avoided parts in blockbuster films in favour of independent productions that were not widely seen, believing that she &quot;still had a lot to learn&quot; and was unprepared to be a star. She later said her decision ensured career longevity. &quot;Hideous Kinky&quot;, a low-budget drama shot before the release of &quot;Titanic&quot;, was Winslet&#x27;s sole film release of 1998. She turned down offers to star in &quot;Shakespeare in Love&quot; (1998) and &quot;Anna and the King&quot; (1999) to do the film. Based on the semi-autobiographical novel by Esther Freud, &quot;Hideous Kinky&quot; tells the story of a single British mother yearning for a new life in 1970s Morocco. Janet Maslin of &quot;The New York Times&quot; credited Winslet for her decision to follow-up &quot;Titanic&quot; with such an offbeat project and highlighted how well she captured her character&#x27;s &quot;obliviousness and optimism&quot;.

Jane Campion&#x27;s psychological drama &quot;Holy Smoke!&quot; (1999) featured Winslet as an Australian woman who joins an Indian religious cult. She found the script brave and was challenged by the idea of playing an unlikeable, manipulative woman. She learnt to speak with an Australian accent and worked closely with Campion to justify her character&#x27;s vileness. The film required her to perform explicit sex scenes with co-star Harvey Keitel, and featured a scene in which her character appears naked and urinates on herself. David Rooney of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote, &quot;Showing the kind of courage few young thesps would be capable of and an extraordinary range ... from animal cunning to unhinged desperation, [Winslet] holds nothing back.&quot; That same year, she voiced a fairy for the animated film &quot;Faeries&quot;, and won the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the short story &quot;The Face in the Lake&quot; for the children&#x27;s audiobook &quot;Listen to the Storyteller&quot;.

In &quot;Quills&quot; (2000), a biopic of the erratic Marquis de Sade, starring Geoffrey Rush and Joaquin Phoenix, Winslet played the supporting role of a sexually repressed laundress working in a mental asylum. Hailing her as the &quot;most daring actress working today&quot;, James Greenberg of &quot;Los Angeles&quot; magazine praised Winslet for &quot;continuing to explore the bounds of sexual liberation&quot;. She received a SAG Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. The following year, she played a fictitious mathematician involved in the cracking of the Enigma ciphers in Michael Apted&#x27;s espionage thriller &quot;Enigma&quot;. Winslet&#x27;s character was vastly expanded from a subsidiary love-interest in the novel it was based on to a prominent code-breaker in the film. She was pregnant while filming, and to prevent this from showing, she wore corsets under her costume.

The biopic &quot;Iris&quot; (2001) featured Winslet and Judi Dench as the novelist Iris Murdoch at different ages. The director Richard Eyre cast the two actresses after finding a &quot;correspondence of spirit between them&quot;. Winslet was drawn to the idea of playing an intellectual and zesty female lead, and in research, she read Murdoch&#x27;s novels, studied her husband&#x27;s memoir &quot;Elegy for Iris&quot;, and watched televised interviews of Murdoch. The project was filmed over four weeks and allowed Winslet to bring her daughter, who was six months old at the time, on set. Writing for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Martin Amis remarked that &quot;the seriousness and steadiness of [Winslet&#x27;s] gaze effectively suggest the dawning amplitude of the Murdoch imagination&quot;. She received her third Oscar nomination for &quot;Iris&quot;, in addition to BAFTA and Golden Globe nominations for Best Supporting Actress. 

Winslet&#x27;s third film release of 2001 was the animated film &quot;Christmas Carol: The Movie&quot;, based on Charles Dickens&#x27; novel. For the film&#x27;s soundtrack she recorded &quot;What If&quot;, which proved to be a commercial hit. After a year-long absence from the screen, Winslet starred as a headstrong journalist interviewing a professor on death row in the thriller &quot;The Life of David Gale&quot; (2003). She agreed to the project to work with the director Alan Parker, whom she admired, and believed the film raised pertinent questions about capital punishment. Mick LaSalle thought the film had muddled the subject and disliked both the film and Winslet&#x27;s performance.

===Career progression (2004–2007)===
To avoid typecasting in historical dramas, Winslet actively looked for roles in contemporary-set films. She found it in the science fiction romance &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; (2004), in which she played a neurotic and impetuous woman who decides to erase memories of her ex-boyfriend (played by Jim Carrey). Unlike her previous assignments, the role allowed her to display the quirky side to her personality. Gondry encouraged Winslet and Carrey to improvise on set, and to keep herself agile she practised kickboxing. &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; proved to be a modest financial success and several critics have regarded it as one of the best films of the 21st century. Peter Travers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; described it as a &quot;uniquely funny, unpredictably tender and unapologetically twisted romance&quot; and found Winslet to be &quot;electrifying and bruisingly vulnerable&quot; in it. A journalist for &quot;Premiere&quot; magazine commended her for abandoning her &quot;corseted English rose persona&quot;, and ranked it as the 81st greatest film performance of all-time. Winslet considers it to be a favourite among her roles, and she received Best Actress nominations at the Oscar and BAFTA award ceremonies. She has said the film marked a turning point in her career and prompted directors to offer her a wide variety of parts.

Her next release of the year was the drama &quot;Finding Neverland&quot;, about the relationship between J. M. Barrie (played by Johnny Depp) and the Llewelyn Davies boys, which inspired Barrie to write Peter Pan. Winslet was paid £6 million to play the boys&#x27; mother, Sylvia, and despite her reluctance to star in another period piece, she agreed to the project after empathising with Sylvia&#x27;s love for her children. Ella Taylor of &quot;LA Weekly&quot; found her to be &quot;radiant and earthy as ever&quot;, and CNN&#x27;s Paul Clinton thought she was &quot;exceptional in a delicate and finely tuned performance&quot;. She received a second Best Actress nomination at that year&#x27;s BAFTA Award ceremony. With a box office gross of $116 million, &quot;Finding Neverland&quot; became her most widely seen film since &quot;Titanic&quot;.

In 2005, Winslet took on a guest role in an episode of the British comedy sitcom &quot;Extras&quot;, starring Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant. She played a satirical version of herself in it—an actress, who in an effort to win an Oscar, takes the role of a nun in a Holocaust film. She received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series nomination. Within three months of giving birth to her second child, Winslet returned to work on &quot;Romance &amp; Cigarettes&quot;, a musical romantic comedy directed by John Turturro, in which she played Tula, a promiscuous and foul-mouthed woman. The part required her to sing and dance, and it helped her lose weight gained during the pregnancy. She twisted her ankle while filming one of the dance sequences. Derek Elley of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote that despite her limited screen time, Winslet had &quot;the showiest role and filthiest one-liners&quot;. She turned down an offer from Woody Allen to star in &quot;Match Point&quot; (2005) to spend more time with her children.

Winslet had four film releases in 2006. She first appeared in &quot;All the King&#x27;s Men&quot;, a political thriller set in 1940s Louisiana, featuring Sean Penn and Jude Law. She played the supporting part of the love interest to Law&#x27;s character. The film received negative reviews for its lack of political insight and narrative cohesiveness, and failed to recoup its $55 million investment. Her next release, the Todd Field drama &quot;Little Children&quot;, was better received. Based on the novel of the same name, the film tells the story of Sarah Pierce, an unhappy housewife who has an affair with a married neighbour (played by Patrick Wilson). Winslet was challenged by the role of an uncaring mother, as she did neither understand nor respect her character&#x27;s actions. Scenes requiring her to be hostile towards the child actress playing her daughter proved upsetting for her. Having borne two children, she was nervous about the sex scenes in which she had to be nude; she took on the challenge to present a positive image for women with, in her words, &quot;imperfect bodies&quot;. A. O. Scott of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that Winslet successfully &quot;registers every flicker of Sarah&#x27;s pride, self-doubt and desire, inspiring a mixture of recognition, pity and concern&quot;. Once again, she received BAFTA and Academy Award nominations for Best Actress; the latter making her, at 31, the youngest performer to accrue five Oscar nominations.

After &quot;Little Children&quot;, Winslet took on a part she found more sympathetic in Nancy Meyers&#x27;s romantic comedy &quot;The Holiday&quot;. She played a Briton who temporarily exchanges homes with an American (played by Cameron Diaz) during the Christmas holiday season. It became her biggest commercial success in nine years, grossing over $205 million worldwide. The critic Justin Chang found the film formulaic yet pleasing, and took note of Winslet&#x27;s radiance and charm. In her final release of the year, she voiced Rita, a scavenging sewer rat, in the animated film &quot;Flushed Away&quot;. Her sole project of 2007 was as the narrator for the English version of the French children&#x27;s film &quot;The Fox and the Child&quot;.

===Awards success (2008–2011)===
Winslet had two critically acclaimed roles in 2008. After reading Justin Haythe&#x27;s script for &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot;, an adaptation of Richard Yates&#x27;s debut novel, Winslet recommended the project to her then-husband, director Sam Mendes, and her &quot;Titanic&quot; co-star Leonardo DiCaprio. The film traces the tribulations of a young married couple in 1950s suburban America. Winslet was drawn to the idea of playing a woman whose aspirations had not been met, and she read &quot;The Feminine Mystique&quot; to understand the psychology of unhappy housewives from the era. Mendes encouraged Winslet and DiCaprio to spend time together, and she believed the small set they used helped them to develop their characters&#x27; strained relationship. Hailing her as &quot;the best English-speaking film actress of her generation&quot;, David Edelstein of &quot;New York&quot; magazine wrote that &quot;[t]here isn&#x27;t a banal moment in Winslet&#x27;s performance—not a gesture, not a word.&quot;

To avoid a scheduling conflict with &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot;, Winslet turned down an offer to star in &quot;The Reader&quot;. After her replacement Nicole Kidman left the project due to her pregnancy, Winslet was signed to it. Directed by Stephen Daldry, &quot;The Reader&quot; is based on Bernhard Schlink&#x27;s novel &quot;Der Vorleser&quot; and is about Hanna Schmitz, an illiterate Nazi concentration camp guard (Winslet), who has an affair with a teenage boy. Winslet researched the Holocaust and the SS guards. To educate herself on the stigma of illiteracy, she spent time with students at the Literacy Partners, an organisation that teaches adults to read and write. She was unable to sympathise with Schmitz and struggled to play the part honestly without humanising the character&#x27;s actions. Despite this, some historians criticised the film for making Schmitz an object of the audience&#x27;s sympathy and accused the filmmakers of Holocaust revisionism. Writing for &quot;Variety&quot;, Todd McCarthy commended Winslet for &quot;suppl[ying] a haunting shell to this internally decimated woman,&quot; and Sukhdev Sandhu of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; considered her to be &quot;absolutely fearless here, not just in her willingness to expose herself physically, but her refusal to expose her character psychologically.&quot;

Winslet received significant awards attention for her performances in &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot; and &quot;The Reader&quot;. She won a Golden Globe Award for each of these films, and for the latter, she was awarded the Academy Award and BAFTA Award for Best Actress. At age 33, she surpassed her own record as the youngest performer to accrue six Oscar nominations. She also became the third actress in history to win two Golden Globe Awards at the same ceremony. Exhausted by the media attention during this period, Winslet took two years off work until she was ready to creatively engage again.

Winslet returned to acting with the five-part HBO series &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; (2011), an adaptation of James M. Cain&#x27;s novel from the director Todd Haynes. It is about the titular heroine (Winslet), a divorcée during the Great Depression struggling to establish a restaurant business while yearning for the respect of her narcissistic daughter (played by Evan Rachel Wood). Winslet, who had recently divorced Mendes, believed certain aspects of her character&#x27;s life mirrored her own. She was intimidated by the scope of the production, as she featured in every scene of the 280-page script. She was disturbed and upset by the story, and was particularly fascinated by the complex relationship between the mother-daughter pair. She collaborated closely with the production and costume designers, and learnt to bake pies and prepare chickens. The broadcast received a limited audience but gained positive reviews. Matt Zoller Seitz of &quot;Salon&quot; called the series a &quot;quiet, heartbreaking masterpiece&quot; and described Winslet&#x27;s performance as &quot;terrific—intelligent, focused and seemingly devoid of ego&quot;. She won the Primetime Emmy Award, Golden Globe and SAG Award for Best Actress in a miniseries.

The ensemble thriller &quot;Contagion&quot; from Steven Soderbergh was Winslet&#x27;s first film release of 2011. She was cast as a disease detective for the CDC, and she modelled her role on Anne Schuchat, the director of the NCIRD. &quot;Contagion&quot; was a commercial success, and David Denby of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; credited Winslet for capturing the essence of an exasperated woman. Her next project was the Roman Polanski-directed &quot;Carnage&quot;, adapted from the play &quot;God of Carnage&quot; by Yasmina Reza. Set entirely inside an apartment, the black comedy follows two sets of parents feuding over their respective children. Jodie Foster, John C. Reilly, and Christoph Waltz co-starred. The cast rehearsed the script like a play for two weeks, and Winslet brought her children with her to Paris for the eight weeks of filming. Critics found the adaptation to be less compelling than the play, but praised the performances of Winslet and Foster. They both received Golden Globe nominations for it.

===Career fluctuations (2012–2019)===
Winslet said her workload in 2011 helped her overcome heartbreak from her divorce, and after completing work on &quot;Carnage&quot; she took a break from acting to focus on her children. A short part that she had filmed four years prior for the anthology film &quot;Movie 43&quot; was her sole screen appearance of 2012, and it received the worst reviews of her career. Winslet also performed an audiobook recording of Émile Zola&#x27;s novel &quot;Thérèse Raquin&quot;. She was reluctant to accept Jason Reitman&#x27;s offer to star in his 2013 film adaptation of Joyce Maynard&#x27;s novel &quot;Labor Day&quot;, but agreed after Reitman postponed the production for a year to accommodate Winslet&#x27;s commitment to her children. Set over a Labor Day weekend, it tells the story of Adele (Winslet), an agoraphobic single mother who falls in love with an escaped convict. Describing Adele&#x27;s characterisation as having &quot;more vulnerability than strength&quot;, Winslet found her a departure from the strong-willed women she typically played. A scene in the film required her to make a pie, for which she drew on her baking experience from &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot;. Reviews of the film were negative; Chris Nashawaty of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; dismissed it as &quot;mawkish and melodramatic&quot; but credited Winslet for adding layers to her passive role. She received her tenth Golden Globe nomination.

The novelty of playing a villain drew Winslet to the part of Jeanine Matthews in the science fiction film &quot;Divergent&quot; (2014). Set in a dystopian future, the adaptation of Veronica Roth&#x27;s young adult novel stars Shailene Woodley as a heroine fighting an oppressive regime headed by Winslet&#x27;s character. She was pregnant with her third child during production, and her tight-fitting costumes had to be altered to accommodate the pregnancy. To maintain her character&#x27;s intimidating persona, she remained aloof from her co-stars for much of the filming. Richard Lawson of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; compared the film unfavourably to the &quot;Hunger Games&quot; series, and found Winslet to be underutilised in it. The film grossed $288 million worldwide. &quot;A Little Chaos&quot; marked her return to the period film genre. Directed by Alan Rickman, it is about a rivalry among gardeners commissioned to create a fountain at the Palace of Versailles. Winslet&#x27;s role was that of fictional architect Sabine de Barra, a character she believed had overcome extreme grief and hardship like herself. Catherine Shoard of &quot;The Guardian&quot; took note of the &quot;emotional honesty&quot; Winslet brought to her part, but criticised the implausibility of her role. Also that year, she read audiobooks of Roald Dahl&#x27;s children&#x27;s novels &quot;Matilda&quot; and &quot;The Magic Finger&quot;.

In 2015, Winslet reprised the role of Jeanine Matthews in the second instalment of the &quot;Divergent&quot; series, subtitled &quot;Insurgent&quot;, which despite negative reviews grossed $297 million worldwide. Her next film, an adaptation of the Australian gothic novel &quot;The Dressmaker&quot;, was described by the director Jocelyn Moorhouse as being reminiscent of the western &quot;Unforgiven&quot; (1992). Winslet starred as the femme fatale Tilly Dunnage, a seamstress who returns to her hometown years after she was accused of murder. She learnt to sew for the part and designed some of her own costumes. The project was filmed in the Australian desert and she found it difficult to wear couture dresses in the harsh weather. Despite disliking the film, Robert Abele of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; credited Winslet for underplaying her over-the-top part. The film emerged as one of the highest-grossing Australian films of all time, but earned little elsewhere. Winslet won the AACTA Award for Best Actress.

While filming &quot;The Dressmaker&quot;, Winslet became aware of a forthcoming Steve Jobs biopic written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Danny Boyle. Keen to play Jobs&#x27;s marketing chief and confidante Joanna Hoffman, she sent a picture of herself dressed as Hoffman to the film&#x27;s producer. &quot;Steve Jobs&quot;, starring Michael Fassbender in the title role, is told in three acts, each depicting a key milestone in Jobs&#x27;s career. In preparation, Winslet spent time with Hoffman, and worked with a dialect coach to speak in Hoffman&#x27;s accent, a mixture of Armenian and Polish, which she considered to be the most difficult of her career. The cast rehearsed each act like a play and filmed it in sequence. Winslet collaborated closely with Fassbender, and their off-screen relationship mirrored the collegial dynamic between Jobs and Hoffman. The film earned her some of the best reviews of her career, though it was a box-office flop. Peter Howell of the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; commended Winslet for finding &quot;strength and grace&quot; in her part, and Gregory Ellwood of HitFix thought she improved on Hoffman&#x27;s characterisation. She won the Golden Globe and BAFTA Awards for Best Supporting Actress, and received her seventh Oscar nomination.

John Hillcoat&#x27;s ensemble crime-thriller &quot;Triple 9&quot; (2016) featured Winslet as Irina Vlaslov, a ruthless Russian-Israeli gangster. The critic Ann Hornaday of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; felt Winslet had failed to effectively portray her. Her next release of the year, &quot;Collateral Beauty&quot;, about a man (played by Will Smith) struggling with the death of his daughter, was panned by critics. Writing for &quot;Vulture&quot;, Emily Yoshida dismissed the film as a vacuous remake of &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; and added that Winslet had &quot;never looked more painted and tired&quot;. It was a modest earner at the box office. Winslet agreed to the romantic disaster film &quot;The Mountain Between Us&quot; (2017) to take on the challenge of a role requiring physical exertion. It featured her and Idris Elba as two strangers who crash land on an icy and isolated mountain range. They filmed in the mountains of Western Canada at above sea level where the temperature was well below freezing. Winslet performed her own stunts and described it as the most physically gruelling experience of her career. Moira Macdonald of &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; opined that the duo&#x27;s charisma and chemistry enhanced a mediocre film.

Woody Allen&#x27;s &quot;Wonder Wheel&quot;, a drama set in 1950s Coney Island, was Winslet&#x27;s final release of 2017. She played Ginny, a temperamental housewife having an affair with a lifeguard (played by Justin Timberlake). She described Ginny as permanently dissatisfied and uneasy, and playing her proved difficult for Winslet, who experienced anxiety. Manohla Dargis of &quot;The New York Times&quot; disliked Allen&#x27;s writing but credited Winslet for filling her &quot;shabby character with feverish life&quot;. When asked during the film&#x27;s promotion about her decision to work with Allen despite an allegation of child sexual abuse against him, Winslet chose not to comment on the filmmaker&#x27;s personal life but said she was pleased with the collaboration. She would later go on to express regret over working with both Allen and Roman Polanski. In 2019, Winslet provided her voice to &quot;Moominvalley&quot;, an animated television series about the Moomins, and took on a leading role alongside Susan Sarandon and Mia Wasikowska in &quot;Blackbird&quot;, a remake of the Danish film &quot;Silent Heart&quot; (2014). Benjamin Lee of &quot;The Guardian&quot; dismissed it as &quot;less of a film and more of an actors&#x27; workshop&quot; and found Winslet miscast.

===Resurgence (2020–present)===
Winslet portrayed palaeontologist Mary Anning in &quot;Ammonite&quot; (2020), a period drama about a romance between Anning and Charlotte Murchison (played by Saoirse Ronan) set in 1840s England. She dropped out of Wes Anderson&#x27;s &quot;The French Dispatch&quot; to have more preparation time for the project. She collaborated closely with Ronan, and they choreographed their own sex scenes. For much of the filming, she lived in isolation in a rented cottage in Dorset, where the film was shot, to get into her character&#x27;s headspace. Caryn James of the BBC credited Winslet for portraying Anning as &quot;stern and brittle but immensely sympathetic&quot; and considered her &quot;contained, potent performance&quot; to be one of the best of her career, and Manuel Betancourt of &quot;New York&quot; magazine welcomed it as a &quot;return to form&quot;. She next voiced the titular horse in a film adaptation of the novel &quot;Black Beauty&quot;, which was released on Disney+.

In 2021, Winslet executive produced and starred in &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot;, an HBO miniseries about a troubled police detective solving a murder case. Set in Delaware County, Winslet insisted on using the &quot;Delco accent&quot;, a version of Philadelphia English used in the county; she considered it to be one of the hardest accents she has had to learn. To play Mare, a woman who has lost a child to suicide, she created a backstory for her character and collaborated closely with a grief counsellor. The series and Winslet&#x27;s performance received critical acclaim; Richard Roeper wrote that she &quot;adds to a long list of magnificent, disappear-into-the-character performances&quot; and Lucy Mangan of &quot;The Guardian&quot; opined, &quot;If you can have a defining performance this late in a career, this is surely Winslet&#x27;s.&quot; &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot; proved to be a ratings hit for HBO, and Winslet once again won the Primetime Emmy, Golden Globe, and SAG Awards for Best Actress in a miniseries.

Following &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot;, Winslet took a year off work to spend time with her family. She narrated the documentary &quot;Eleven Days in May&quot; (2022), about the 2021 bombing of Gaza by Israel. She starred with her daughter Mia Threapleton in an improvised feature-length episode of the Channel 4 anthology series &quot;I Am...&quot;, titled &quot;I Am Ruth&quot;, about the negative effects of social media. She won two BAFTA TV Awards for Best Actress and Best Single Drama (as producer). In her acceptance speech, she urged lawmakers to criminalise harmful digital content. In 2017 and 2018, Winslet concurrently filmed two sequels to James Cameron&#x27;s science fiction film &quot;Avatar&quot; (2009) using motion capture technology. She learnt freediving for her role and was able to hold her breath underwater for seven minutes, setting a new record for any film scene shot underwater. Released in 2022, &quot;&quot; earned over $2 billion to rank as the third highest-grossing film of all time and Winslet&#x27;s second film after &quot;Titanic&quot; to cross the $2 billion mark.

After being attached to a biopic of model and war photographer Lee Miller for eight years, Winslet produced and starred in &quot;Lee&quot; (2023). She hired cinematographer Ellen Kuras (who had filmed her in &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot;) to make her feature directorial debut with the project. Winslet slipped and fell while filming, leading to three haematomas on her spine; she continued working despite the pain. Reviewers for &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; and &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; noted how much Winslet&#x27;s performance helped elevate a conventional biopic. Winslet next executive produced and starred in the HBO miniseries &quot;The Regime&quot; (2024), a satire about a fictional authoritarian country. To play a megalomaniac dictator, she consulted a neuroscientist and a psychotherapist to create a backstory for her character. Critics deemed her performance superior to the series. She earned Golden Globe nominations for her performances in both &quot;Lee&quot; and &quot;The Regime&quot;, in addition to a BAFTA nomination for Outstanding British Film as a producer on &quot;Lee&quot;.

Winslet will next reprise her role in the sequel &quot;&quot;.

==Reception and acting style==
Journalists consider Winslet to be among the finest actresses of her generation. Despite achieving stardom early in her career with the blockbuster &quot;Titanic&quot;, she has rarely acted in commerce-driven films. A journalist for &quot;Elle&quot; believes that her choices reflect the &quot;soul and attitude of a jobbing actress, trapped in the body of a movie star&quot;. Winslet was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time in a 2022 readers&#x27; poll by &quot;Empire&quot;; the magazine termed her &quot;a dramatic force, turning her hand to all kinds of periods and genres with an inimitable sense of dignity and strength&quot;.

Winslet belongs to a group of esteemed British actresses who are typically showing &quot;restraint, rendering emotions through intellect rather than feelings, and a sense of irony, which demonstrates the heroine&#x27;s superior understanding&quot;. Tom Perrotta, the author of &quot;Little Children&quot;, has said that Winslet &quot;gravitates toward troubling roles in smaller films&quot;, typically those of &quot;thorny, potentially unsympathetic&quot; women. The journalist Mark Harris writes that she specialises in &quot;unsentimentalized, restless, troubled, discontented, disconcerted, difficult women&quot; and John Hiscock of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; has identified a theme of characters who are free-spirited with a sexual edge to them. Anthony Lane of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; associates Winslet with stubbornness, writing that &quot;the set of her jaw and the blaze of her glance suggest a self-freeing spirit who knows the path ahead and is determined to take it&quot;. Stephen Whitty of NJ.com associates Winslet with &quot;serious, almost despairing material&quot;, although he finds it hard to pigeonhole her as an actress. Josephine Livingstone of &quot;The New Republic&quot;, however, finds Winslet unconvincing in roles where she has &quot;no real emotional vulnerability&quot;, believing she is most compelling when she has &quot;the opportunity to get hysterical&quot;. 
Leonardo DiCaprio, her co-star in &quot;Titanic&quot; and &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot;, considers Winslet to be &quot;the most prepared and well-researched actor on set&quot;, and Jude Law, her co-star in &quot;The Holiday&quot;, believes that despite her seriousness she remains &quot;very calm and good-natured&quot;. Her &quot;Steve Jobs&quot; director Danny Boyle has identified a willingness in Winslet to avoid typecasting and said that she takes an effort &quot;to reposition directors&#x27; and producers&#x27; perspective on her&quot; to allow herself to be challenged as an artist.

Winslet has said she is interested in playing &quot;angst-ridden women&quot; with strong dispositions masking flaws and insecurities, and that she connects with &quot;women who are either finding their way out of a situation, looking for love, having some struggle within love, or questioning the big things in life&quot;. Drawn to parts that are in tandem with her personal struggles at certain points in her life, she finds it difficult to detach herself from her roles, saying that &quot;you have to confront your true feelings every single day. And that&#x27;s pretty exhausting. Then you have to go home and make dinner&quot;. Even so, she finds it therapeutic to perform. Winslet is known for her willingness to perform nude scenes, having done so in over a dozen of her films, although she considers its contribution to the narrative before agreeing to it. She believes that such scenes promote a positive body image amongst women.

==Personal life==
While filming &quot;Dark Season&quot;, a fifteen-year-old Winslet began a romantic relationship with actor-writer Stephen Tredre, who was twelve years her senior. She considered him a major influence in her life and they lived together in London from 1991. They broke up in 1995, but remained close until Tredre died of bone cancer two years later. Winslet decided not to attend the premiere of &quot;Titanic&quot; to attend his funeral. In 2008, she said that she had not overcome his death.
A year after Tredre&#x27;s death, Winslet met Jim Threapleton on the set of &quot;Hideous Kinky&quot;, on which he served as an assistant director. They married in November 1998 at her family&#x27;s local church, and their daughter, Mia, was born in 2000. Describing her marriage to Threapleton as a &quot;mess&quot;, Winslet later said that she lost control of her instincts during this period. They divorced in 2001.

Soon after separating from Threapleton, she met director Sam Mendes when he offered her a part in a play; she turned down the offer but began dating him. Dismayed at how the British tabloids portrayed her personal life, Winslet relocated to New York City. She married Mendes in May 2003 on the island of Anguilla, and their son, Joe, was born later that year. The family divided their time in New York with frequent visits to their estate in the Cotswolds, England. Amid intense media speculation of an affair between Mendes and actress Rebecca Hall, he and Winslet announced their separation in 2010 and were divorced a year later. She reported being heartbroken by the split, but affirmed her determination to look after her children in spite of her marital break-ups.

While holidaying at Richard Branson&#x27;s estate on Necker Island in 2011, Winslet met his nephew Edward Abel Smith (legally known as Ned Rocknroll from 2008 to 2019) during a house fire. They married in December 2012 in New York, and their son, Bear, was born the following year. After moving back to England, Winslet purchased a property worth £3.25 million by the sea in West Wittering, Sussex, where she lives with Smith and her children . In a 2015 interview, she commented on how much she enjoyed living in the countryside.

Winslet has stated that despite three marriages and a family structure that might be perceived by some as &quot;unconventional&quot;, she does not consider it to be any &quot;less of a family&quot;. She turns down offers of work that otherwise would take her away from her children for too long, and likes to schedule her filming commitments around their school holidays. Discussing her parenting style, she said she enjoys packing lunches and doing the school run.

==Activism and charity ==
Winslet has lent her support to several charities and causes, along with financial donations and items for auctions. In 2006, she became a patron of a Gloucester-based charity, the Family Haven, which provides counselling services to vulnerable families. The same year, hand-made envelopes designed by Winslet were auctioned for the &quot;Pushing the Envelope&quot; campaign created by the National Literacy Trust. Winslet was one of the celebrities to participate in a 2007 auction to raise funds for the Afghanistan Relief Organization. In 2009, she contributed to the Butterfly Book, a compilation of doodles made by several celebrities, to raise money for leukaemia research. Also in 2009, Winslet participated in a joint effort with &quot;Titanic&quot; co-star Leonardo DiCaprio, James Cameron, and Celine Dion, financially to help Millvina Dean, the then last living survivor of the sinking of the &quot;Titanic&quot;. The donation amounted to $30,000 which was used to pay the fees of the nursing home in the United Kingdom where Dean was living.

In 2009, Winslet narrated the English version of an Icelandic documentary named &quot;A Mother&#x27;s Courage: Talking Back to Autism&quot;, about Margret Ericsdottir, whose child Keli Thorsteinsson has non-verbal autism. Inspired by the story, she teamed with Ericsdottir in 2010 to form an NGO named the Golden Hat Foundation. The organisation aims to create autism awareness and was named after a poem written by Thorsteinsson. As the ambassador for the luxury brands Lancôme and Longines, Winslet partnered with these companies to raise awareness and funds for the foundation. She created a make-up collection for Lancôme in 2011 and, in 2017, she designed a new watch for Longines.

In 2012, Winslet wrote a book about autism, entitled &quot;The Golden Hat: Talking Back to Autism&quot;, which was published by Simon &amp; Schuster. It contains correspondence between Winslet and Ericsdottir, personal statements from various celebrities, and contributions from Thorsteinsson. A reviewer for &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot; praised the book for its &quot;warmth and sincerity&quot;. The United Nations featured the book during a ceremony on the World Autism Awareness Day of 2012. For her work with the Golden Hat Foundation, Winslet received Spain&#x27;s Yo Dona award for Best Humanitarian Work.

Winslet narrated a video for PETA in 2010 that showed animal cruelty in the production of foie gras. She encouraged chefs to remove the item from their menu and urged consumers to boycott it. In 2015, she lent her support to the UNICEF campaign World&#x27;s Largest Lesson, which creates awareness among children about sustainable development and global citizenship. Teased as a child for her weight, Winslet takes a stand against body-shaming and bullying. She narrated an Australian animated short film named &quot;Daisy Chain&quot; (2015), about a victim of cyberbullying. In 2017, Winslet teamed with Leonardo DiCaprio&#x27;s environmental foundation for a fundraiser on global warming. Also that year, she and DiCaprio auctioned a private dinner with themselves to raise money for a British woman&#x27;s cancer treatment. Winslet teamed with Lancôme and the National Literacy Trust in 2018 to launch a programme that aims to educate underprivileged women in the UK. In 2020, Winslet read a bedtime story as part of &quot;Save with Stories&quot; to raise funds for Save the Children&#x27;s Emergency Coronavirus Appeal. In 2021, Winslet commented on homophobia in Hollywood, saying that she knew actors &quot;who are terrified their sexuality will be revealed and that it will stand in the way of their being cast in straight roles&quot;.

==Public image==
In a 2015 article for &quot;Elle&quot;, Sally Holmes described Winslet&#x27;s ability to establish rapport with her manner. Jo Ellison of &quot;Vogue&quot; writes that she has an &quot;authoritative, almost ambassadorial aura&quot;, and Kira Cochrane of &quot;The Guardian&quot; considers her to be &quot;articulate, sophisticated, [with] a definite hint of grandeur&quot;. Describing Winslet as plain-spoken, Krista Smith of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; believes that despite her stardom she is unpretentious.

Winslet&#x27;s weight fluctuations over the years have been well-documented by the media. She has been outspoken in her refusal to allow Hollywood to dictate her weight. In 2003, the British edition of &quot;GQ&quot; magazine published photographs of Winslet which had been digitally altered to make her look thinner and taller. She said the alterations were made without her consent, and &quot;GQ&quot; subsequently issued an apology. In 2007, Winslet won a libel case against &quot;Grazia&quot; magazine after it claimed she had visited a dietitian. She claimed £10,000 in damages, and donated the amount to an eating disorder charity. She won another case in 2009 against the British tabloid &quot;Daily Mail&quot; after it claimed she had lied about her exercise regimen. She received an apology and a payout of £25,000.

Winslet was included on &quot;People&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;Most Beautiful People&quot; listing in 2005. Her beauty and sex appeal have been picked up by several other publications, including &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, &quot;Who&quot;, and &quot;Empire&quot; magazines. She has said she does not subscribe to the beauty ideal of Hollywood, and uses her celebrity to empower women to accept their appearance with pride. She has spoken against Botox and plastic surgery. In an effort to encourage natural ageing, she formed the British Anti-Cosmetic Surgery League, alongside fellow actresses Emma Thompson and Rachel Weisz. She instructs magazines and brands not to digitally smooth her wrinkles in photographs. Winslet is reluctant to discuss the gender pay gap in the film industry, as she dislikes speaking publicly about her salary. She has expressed an aversion to elaborate press junkets and red carpet events, terming them a waste of money.

In 2009, &quot;Forbes&quot; reported her annual salary to be $2 million, a majority of that stemming from her endorsement deals. Also that year, the UK Film Council calculated that she had earned £20 million from her acting roles since 1995. She was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by &quot;Time&quot; magazine in 2009 and 2021. Madame Tussauds in London unveiled a wax statue of Winslet in 2011. The following year, she received the Honorary César award, and in 2014, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Winslet was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2012 Birthday Honours for her services to drama.

==Acting credits and awards==

Prolific in film since 1994, Winslet&#x27;s most acclaimed and highest-grossing films, according to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot; (1994), &quot;Sense and Sensibility&quot; (1995), &quot;Hamlet&quot; (1996), &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; (2004), &quot;Finding Neverland&quot; (2004), &quot;The Holiday&quot; (2006), &quot;Contagion&quot; (2011), &quot;Divergent&quot; (2014), &quot;Insurgent&quot; (2015), &quot;Steve Jobs&quot; (2015), and &quot;&quot; (2022). Her television projects include the miniseries &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; (2011) and &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot; (2021).

Winslet has been recognised by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:
* 68th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for &quot;Sense and Sensibility&quot; (1995)
* 70th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997)
* 74th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for &quot;Iris&quot; (2001)
* 77th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for &quot;Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind&quot; (2004)
* 79th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for &quot;Little Children&quot; (2006)
* 81st Academy Awards: Best Actress, win, for &quot;The Reader&quot; (2008)
* 88th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for &quot;Steve Jobs&quot; (2015)

Winslet has won five BAFTA Awards: Best Actress in a Leading Role for &quot;The Reader&quot; (2008); Best Actress in a Supporting Role for &quot;Sense and Sensibility&quot; (1995) and &quot;Steve Jobs&quot; (2016); Best Leading Actress and Best Single Drama for &quot;I Am Ruth.&quot; She has also won two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Actress in a Leading Role in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie for &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; (2011), and &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot; (2021) as well as the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the children&#x27;s audiobook &quot;Listen to the Storyteller&quot; (1999). Winslet is the recipient of five Golden Globe Awards from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, winning Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture for &quot;The Reader&quot; and &quot;Steve Jobs&quot;, Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama for &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot;, and Best Actress in a Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television for &quot;Mildred Pierce&quot; and &quot;Mare of Easttown&quot;. She is among the few actresses to have won three of the four major American entertainment awards.

==See also==
* &quot;Agra katewinsletae&quot;
* List of youngest Academy Award nominees
* List of EGOT winners – People who have won Emmy, Grammy and Academy Awards

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Kate Winslet at BAFTA
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="0" end="22" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Elizabeth Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545692" start="90" end="99" title="List of Kate Winslet performances" label="her roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="139" end="156" title="independent films" label="independent films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="171" end="184" title="Historical drama" label="period dramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057069" start="203" end="221" title="List of awards and nominations received by Kate Winslet" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="236" end="249" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="253" end="265" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="271" end="292" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="299" end="311" title="BAFTA Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="321" end="340" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="348" end="352" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="393" end="433" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="470" end="514" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306229" start="560" end="583" title="Redroofs Theatre School" label="Redroofs Theatre School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223388" start="673" end="684" title="Dark Season" label="Dark Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q322206" start="760" end="778" title="Heavenly Creatures" label="Heavenly Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q787123" start="814" end="825" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052944" start="838" end="855" title="Marianne Dashwood" label="Marianne Dashwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q643263" start="865" end="886" title="Sense and Sensibility (film)" label="Sense and Sensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="950" end="963" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="990" end="997" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="1026" end="1047" title="List of highest-grossing films" label="highest-grossing film"/>
<link wikidata="Q761302" start="1170" end="1176" title="Quills (film)" label="Quills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364697" start="1200" end="1204" title="Iris (2001 film)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q208269" start="1254" end="1291" title="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" label="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="1340" end="1344" title="Typecasting" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q208204" start="1481" end="1498" title="Finding Neverland (film)" label="Finding Neverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841203" start="1519" end="1534" title="Little Children (film)" label="Little Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q478748" start="1555" end="1566" title="The Holiday" label="The Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q276299" start="1587" end="1605" title="Revolutionary Road (film)" label="Revolutionary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q159063" start="1630" end="1640" title="The Reader (2008 film)" label="The Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q687123" start="1717" end="1728" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="1737" end="1767" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179652" start="1797" end="1811" title="Joanna Hoffman" label="Joanna Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754959" start="1832" end="1842" title="Steve Jobs (film)" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="1906" end="1927" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1956" end="1959" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152351" start="1977" end="1991" title="Mildred Pierce (miniseries)" label="Mildred Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q61040213" start="2015" end="2031" title="Mare of Easttown" label="Mare of Easttown"/>
<link wikidata="Q108167082" start="2106" end="2115" title="I Am Ruth" label="I Am Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="2135" end="2150" title="BAFTA TV Awards" label="BAFTA TV Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="2189" end="2203" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113382" start="2383" end="2395" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562280" start="2426" end="2433" title="What If (Kate Winslet song)" label="What If"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2478" end="2504" title="Christmas Carol: The Movie" label="Christmas Carol: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110067" start="2547" end="2568" title="Golden Hat Foundation" label="Golden Hat Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826011" start="2591" end="2607" title="autism awareness" label="autism awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807424" start="2684" end="2699" title="Jim Threapleton" label="Jim Threapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="2704" end="2714" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76211470" start="2849" end="2864" title="Mia Threapleton" label="Mia Threapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="2936" end="2943" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677739" start="3565" end="3594" title="Actors Orphanage" label="Actors&amp;#x27; Charitable Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="4193" end="4197" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425683" start="4237" end="4250" title="Nativity play" label="Nativity play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306229" start="4471" end="4494" title="Redroofs Theatre School" label="Redroofs Theatre School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418495" start="4499" end="4517" title="Private schools in the United Kingdom" label="independent school"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="4521" end="4531" title="Maidenhead" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140959" start="4648" end="4659" title="Sugar Puffs" label="Sugar Puffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689310" start="4725" end="4734" title="head girl" label="head girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="4770" end="4807" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q485093" start="4824" end="4860" title="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" label="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749247" start="4896" end="4909" title="Wendy Darling" label="Wendy Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376796" start="4919" end="4928" title="Peter Pan (1954 musical)" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q566892" start="5191" end="5196" title="Annie (musical)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790180" start="5208" end="5219" title="Raksha (The Jungle Book)" label="Mother Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q189509" start="5229" end="5244" title="The Jungle Book" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q851611" start="5278" end="5290" title="Bugsy Malone" label="Bugsy Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501560" start="5342" end="5346" title="GCSE" label="GCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5430" end="5433" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223388" start="5474" end="5485" title="Dark Season" label="Dark Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q361981" start="5503" end="5519" title="Russell T Davies" label="Russell T Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921585" start="5917" end="5952" title="Anglo-Saxon Attitudes" label="Angus Wilson&amp;#x27;s satirical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026346" start="6095" end="6112" title="Diarmuid Lawrence" label="Diarmuid Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="6311" end="6323" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553807" start="6356" end="6364" title="Get Back (TV series)" label="Get Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316316" start="6462" end="6470" title="Casualty (TV series)" label="Casualty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="6580" end="6593" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q322206" start="6627" end="6645" title="Heavenly Creatures" label="Heavenly Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q323168" start="6791" end="6815" title="Parker–Hulme murder case" label="Parker–Hulme murder case"/>
<link wikidata="Q288627" start="6849" end="6861" title="Anne Perry" label="Juliet Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q235905" start="6924" end="6939" title="Melanie Lynskey" label="Melanie Lynskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024639" start="7441" end="7455" title="Desson Thomson" label="Desson Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="7478" end="7497" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="7754" end="7780" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="the Royal Exchange Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q368866" start="7795" end="7804" title="Joe Orton" label="Joe Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991602" start="7824" end="7843" title="What the Butler Saw (play)" label="What the Butler Saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q643263" start="7974" end="7994" title="Sense and Sensibility (film)" label="1995 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="7998" end="8009" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q274744" start="8029" end="8050" title="Sense and Sensibility" label="Sense and Sensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="8082" end="8095" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052944" start="8201" end="8218" title="Marianne Dashwood" label="Marianne Dashwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q160726" start="8233" end="8240" title="Ang Lee" label="Ang Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="8418" end="8425" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="8432" end="8449" title="gothic literature" label="gothic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="8505" end="8516" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11882399" start="8579" end="8591" title="Mick LaSalle" label="Mick LaSalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="8605" end="8628" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320315" start="8771" end="8790" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role" label="Screen Actors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q787123" start="8795" end="8821" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role" label="British Academy Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="8867" end="8880" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="8968" end="8974" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q947262" start="8986" end="9019" title="A Kid in King Arthur&amp;#x27;s Court" label="A Kid in King Arthur&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q523767" start="9081" end="9085" title="Jude (film)" label="Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q898721" start="9102" end="9108" title="Hamlet (1996 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q380237" start="9233" end="9253" title="Michael Winterbottom" label="Michael Winterbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248773" start="9304" end="9320" title="Jude the Obscure" label="Jude the Obscure"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="9330" end="9342" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="9389" end="9400" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q312380" start="9461" end="9482" title="Christopher Eccleston" label="Christopher Eccleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="9496" end="9507" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="9666" end="9681" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q833180" start="9705" end="9737" title="Mary Shelley&amp;#x27;s Frankenstein (film)" label="Mary Shelley&amp;#x27;s Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800888" start="9773" end="9780" title="Ophelia" label="Ophelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447542" start="9806" end="9821" title="Prince Hamlet" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q898721" start="9826" end="9851" title="Hamlet (1996 film)" label="Branagh&amp;#x27;s adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="9859" end="9878" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="9893" end="9899" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181413" start="10035" end="10049" title="Julie Christie" label="Julie Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="10157" end="10163" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="10482" end="10505" title="Titanic" label="RMS &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="10510" end="10523" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="10550" end="10557" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q867813" start="10641" end="10653" title="Claire Danes" label="Claire Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="10658" end="10673" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="10856" end="10873" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48972968" start="11022" end="11034" title="Baja Studios" label="Baja Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="11329" end="11337" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148780" start="11345" end="11356" title="David Ansen" label="David Ansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104370655" start="11434" end="11444" title="Mike Clark (critic)" label="Mike Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="11454" end="11463" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="11584" end="11605" title="List of highest-grossing films" label="highest-grossing film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="11741" end="11755" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="11798" end="11810" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="11864" end="11876" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="11896" end="11908" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129487" start="11913" end="11916" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role" label="SAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q948633" start="12276" end="12289" title="Hideous Kinky (film)" label="Hideous Kinky"/>
<link wikidata="Q182944" start="12450" end="12469" title="Shakespeare in Love" label="Shakespeare in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q563743" start="12493" end="12510" title="Anna and the King" label="Anna and the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491076" start="12553" end="12580" title="Hideous Kinky" label="semi-autobiographical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q441726" start="12584" end="12596" title="Esther Freud" label="Esther Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="12709" end="12721" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12731" end="12749" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q230448" start="12952" end="12964" title="Jane Campion" label="Jane Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q143835" start="12998" end="13009" title="Holy Smoke!" label="Holy Smoke!"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="13389" end="13402" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="13509" end="13516" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429331" start="13776" end="13783" title="Faeries (1999 film)" label="Faeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113382" start="13803" end="13855" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children" label="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q761302" start="14002" end="14008" title="Quills (film)" label="Quills"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="14047" end="14062" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="14073" end="14086" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="14091" end="14106" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681932" start="14296" end="14307" title="Los Angeles (magazine)" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665859" start="14565" end="14579" title="Cryptanalysis of the Enigma" label="Enigma ciphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q350717" start="14583" end="14596" title="Michael Apted" label="Michael Apted"/>
<link wikidata="Q705387" start="14629" end="14635" title="Enigma (2001 film)" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q314266" start="14727" end="14732" title="Enigma (novel)" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364697" start="14910" end="14914" title="Iris (2001 film)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="14949" end="14959" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q217495" start="14976" end="14988" title="Iris Murdoch" label="Iris Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q657354" start="15021" end="15033" title="Richard Eyre" label="Richard Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221180" start="15261" end="15272" title="John Bayley (writer)" label="her husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358708" start="15293" end="15307" title="Elegy for Iris" label="Elegy for Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="15504" end="15516" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310176" start="15524" end="15535" title="Martin Amis" label="Martin Amis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15901" end="15927" title="Christmas Carol: The Movie" label="Christmas Carol: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="15944" end="15959" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="15966" end="15971" title="A Christmas Carol" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562280" start="16023" end="16030" title="What If (Kate Winslet song)" label="What If"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083686" start="16189" end="16198" title="death row" label="death row"/>
<link wikidata="Q591175" start="16221" end="16243" title="The Life of David Gale" label="The Life of David Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q271284" start="16310" end="16321" title="Alan Parker" label="Alan Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="16576" end="16587" title="typecasting" label="typecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q208269" start="16721" end="16758" title="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" label="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="16885" end="16895" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="17282" end="17295" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="17305" end="17318" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q130706" start="17534" end="17542" title="Premiere (magazine)" label="Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160108" start="17606" end="17618" title="English rose (epithet)" label="English rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q208204" start="18008" end="18025" title="Finding Neverland (film)" label="Finding Neverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="18064" end="18076" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="18088" end="18099" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172035" start="18109" end="18129" title="Llewelyn Davies boys" label="Llewelyn Davies boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="18162" end="18171" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749101" start="18232" end="18238" title="Sylvia Llewelyn Davies" label="Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364574" start="18386" end="18397" title="Ella Taylor" label="Ella Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q952554" start="18407" end="18416" title="LA Weekly" label="LA Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="18483" end="18486" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059160" start="18494" end="18506" title="Paul Clinton" label="Paul Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23826" start="18898" end="18904" title="Extras (TV series)" label="Extras"/>
<link wikidata="Q23517" start="18921" end="18934" title="Ricky Gervais" label="Ricky Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q23814" start="18939" end="18955" title="Stephen Merchant" label="Stephen Merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="19080" end="19089" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981152" start="19111" end="19180" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092126" start="19284" end="19308" title="Romance &amp;amp; Cigarettes" label="Romance &amp;amp; Cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q244234" start="19354" end="19367" title="John Turturro" label="John Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685696" start="19597" end="19608" title="Derek Elley" label="Derek Elley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="19774" end="19785" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q733677" start="19803" end="19814" title="Match Point" label="Match Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q581964" start="19935" end="19958" title="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men (2006 film)" label="All the King&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="20000" end="20009" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="20021" end="20030" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="20035" end="20043" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q670296" start="20290" end="20300" title="Todd Field" label="Todd Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q841203" start="20313" end="20328" title="Little Children (film)" label="Little Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386714" start="20370" end="20392" title="Little Children (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q351290" start="20511" end="20525" title="Patrick Wilson" label="Patrick Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="20973" end="20984" title="A. O. Scott" label="A. O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q235555" start="21442" end="21454" title="Nancy Meyers" label="Nancy Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q478748" start="21484" end="21495" title="The Holiday" label="The Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591345" start="21539" end="21554" title="Home exchange" label="exchanges homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44380" start="21583" end="21595" title="Cameron Diaz" label="Cameron Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687995" start="21739" end="21751" title="Justin Chang" label="Justin Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q752301" start="21945" end="21957" title="Flushed Away" label="Flushed Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193633" start="22075" end="22096" title="The Fox and the Child" label="The Fox and the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317671" start="22204" end="22217" title="Justin Haythe" label="Justin Haythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q276299" start="22242" end="22260" title="Revolutionary Road (film)" label="Revolutionary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q544611" start="22285" end="22298" title="Richard Yates (novelist)" label="Richard Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393977" start="22306" end="22317" title="Revolutionary Road" label="debut novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="22381" end="22391" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438791" start="22638" end="22659" title="The Feminine Mystique" label="The Feminine Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233259" start="22989" end="23004" title="David Edelstein" label="David Edelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="23014" end="23022" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q159063" start="23267" end="23277" title="The Reader (2008 film)" label="The Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="23307" end="23320" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313506" start="23398" end="23412" title="Stephen Daldry" label="Stephen Daldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76699" start="23449" end="23465" title="Bernhard Schlink" label="Bernhard Schlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q311449" start="23485" end="23497" title="Der Vorleser" label="Der Vorleser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="23546" end="23550" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="23551" end="23569" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="23666" end="23668" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="24107" end="24128" title="Holocaust revisionism" label="Holocaust revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="24163" end="24176" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="24304" end="24323" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q687123" start="24746" end="24774" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="25153" end="25156" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152351" start="25170" end="25184" title="Mildred Pierce (miniseries)" label="Mildred Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q981052" start="25216" end="25242" title="Mildred Pierce" label="James M. Cain&amp;#x27;s novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q446580" start="25261" end="25272" title="Todd Haynes" label="Todd Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="25339" end="25355" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q229230" start="25473" end="25489" title="Evan Rachel Wood" label="Evan Rachel Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226322" start="26035" end="26052" title="Matt Zoller Seitz" label="Matt Zoller Seitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="26062" end="26067" title="Salon.com" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="26266" end="26286" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q673229" start="26288" end="26300" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462064" start="26305" end="26314" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie" label="SAG Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q730888" start="26378" end="26387" title="Contagion (2011 film)" label="Contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="26399" end="26416" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="26508" end="26511" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768787" start="26542" end="26555" title="Anne Schuchat" label="Anne Schuchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082548" start="26577" end="26582" title="National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases" label="NCIRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174197" start="26636" end="26647" title="David Denby" label="David Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="26657" end="26671" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="26771" end="26785" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q169564" start="26801" end="26808" title="Carnage (2011 film)" label="Carnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193969" start="26844" end="26858" title="God of Carnage" label="God of Carnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q297794" start="26868" end="26880" title="Yasmina Reza" label="Yasmina Reza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="27001" end="27013" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="27015" end="27029" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q76819" start="27035" end="27050" title="Christoph Waltz" label="Christoph Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q548978" start="27678" end="27686" title="Movie 43" label="Movie 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="27831" end="27841" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q268545" start="27861" end="27875" title="Thérèse Raquin" label="Thérèse Raquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314502" start="27911" end="27924" title="Jason Reitman" label="Jason Reitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026942" start="27958" end="27973" title="Labor Day (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187233" start="27977" end="27990" title="Joyce Maynard" label="Joyce Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467163" start="28010" end="28019" title="Labor Day (novel)" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q174589" start="28218" end="28229" title="Agoraphobia" label="agoraphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128863023" start="28625" end="28640" title="Chris Nashawaty" label="Chris Nashawaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="28650" end="28670" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561227" start="28951" end="28960" title="Divergent (film)" label="Divergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q328212" start="29020" end="29033" title="Veronica Roth" label="Veronica Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q627192" start="29053" end="29058" title="Divergent (novel)" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q231058" start="29065" end="29081" title="Shailene Woodley" label="Shailene Woodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029911" start="29414" end="29428" title="Richard Lawson (writer)" label="Richard Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="29438" end="29449" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885031" start="29494" end="29525" title="The Hunger Games (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Hunger Games&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953721" start="29619" end="29633" title="A Little Chaos" label="A Little Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q106481" start="29696" end="29708" title="Alan Rickman" label="Alan Rickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="29789" end="29809" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="30166" end="30176" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426188" start="30213" end="30220" title="Matilda (novel)" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504499" start="30237" end="30253" title="The Magic Finger" label="The Magic Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512668" start="30349" end="30377" title="The Divergent Series" label="&amp;quot;Divergent&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30395" end="30404" title="The Divergent Series: Insurgent" label="Insurgent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389586" start="30493" end="30503" title="The Dressmaker (2015 film)" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165567" start="30541" end="30555" title="The Dressmaker (Ham novel)" label="The Dressmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808611" start="30593" end="30610" title="Jocelyn Moorhouse" label="Jocelyn Moorhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q104137" start="30653" end="30663" title="Unforgiven" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="30701" end="30713" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="31054" end="31071" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31166" end="31199" title="Cinema of Australia#Highest-grossing Australian films" label="highest-grossing Australian films"/>
<link wikidata="Q286069" start="31258" end="31269" title="AACTA Award" label="AACTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649800" start="31274" end="31286" title="AACTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="31369" end="31379" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q299194" start="31398" end="31410" title="Aaron Sorkin" label="Aaron Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="31427" end="31438" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179652" start="31496" end="31510" title="Joanna Hoffman" label="Joanna Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754959" start="31596" end="31606" title="Steve Jobs (film)" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="31623" end="31641" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="32272" end="32284" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871279" start="32388" end="32394" title="HitFix" label="HitFix"/>
<link wikidata="Q552814" start="32567" end="32580" title="John Hillcoat" label="John Hillcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144452" start="32618" end="32626" title="Triple 9" label="Triple 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q51641814" start="32723" end="32735" title="Ann Hornaday" label="Ann Hornaday"/>
<link wikidata="Q22977777" start="32859" end="32876" title="Collateral Beauty" label="Collateral Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="32907" end="32917" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881700" start="33003" end="33010" title="Vulture (website)" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964596" start="33273" end="33296" title="The Mountain Between Us (film)" label="The Mountain Between Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q342604" start="33394" end="33404" title="Idris Elba" label="Idris Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="33723" end="33740" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27703144" start="33849" end="33861" title="Wonder Wheel (film)" label="Wonder Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="33890" end="33902" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="34035" end="34052" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q441327" start="34186" end="34200" title="Manohla Dargis" label="Manohla Dargis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48813401" start="34444" end="34476" title="Woody Allen sexual abuse allegation" label="allegation of child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44319298" start="34740" end="34752" title="Moominvalley (TV series)" label="Moominvalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q200344" start="34800" end="34807" title="Moomins" label="Moomins"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="34846" end="34860" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q228865" start="34865" end="34879" title="Mia Wasikowska" label="Mia Wasikowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q60737526" start="34889" end="34898" title="Blackbird (2019 film)" label="Blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q19383310" start="34940" end="34952" title="Silent Heart" label="Silent Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q230491" start="35182" end="35193" title="Mary Anning" label="Mary Anning"/>
<link wikidata="Q60836025" start="35203" end="35211" title="Ammonite (film)" label="Ammonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994653" start="35276" end="35295" title="Charlotte Murchison" label="Charlotte Murchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q228603" start="35307" end="35320" title="Saoirse Ronan" label="Saoirse Ronan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="35363" end="35375" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q59551547" start="35389" end="35408" title="The French Dispatch" label="The French Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="35615" end="35621" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046243" start="35692" end="35703" title="Caryn James" label="Caryn James"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747484" start="36050" end="36065" title="Black Beauty (2020 film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q880092" start="36085" end="36097" title="Black Beauty" label="Black Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="36127" end="36134" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q61040213" start="36194" end="36210" title="Mare of Easttown" label="Mare of Easttown"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="36300" end="36315" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932710" start="36386" end="36406" title="Philadelphia English" label="Philadelphia English"/>
<link wikidata="Q201882" start="36716" end="36730" title="Richard Roeper" label="Richard Roeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23663964" start="36840" end="36851" title="Lucy Mangan" label="Lucy Mangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q112072549" start="37304" end="37322" title="Eleven Days in May" label="Eleven Days in May"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37347" end="37377" title="2021 Israel–Palestine crisis#Gaza" label="2021 bombing of Gaza by Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q76211470" start="37409" end="37424" title="Mia Threapleton" label="Mia Threapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="37472" end="37481" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q108167082" start="37505" end="37512" title="I Am... (TV series)" label="I Am..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="37606" end="37621" title="BAFTA TV Awards" label="BAFTA TV Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925697" start="37626" end="37638" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834594" start="37643" end="37660" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Single Drama" label="Best Single Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q73966879" start="37808" end="37819" title="Avatar (franchise)" label="two sequels"/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="37871" end="37877" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="37897" end="37911" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="37935" end="37945" title="freediving" label="freediving"/>
<link wikidata="Q265131" start="38338" end="38348" title="Lee Miller" label="Lee Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q111705663" start="38404" end="38407" title="Lee (2023 film)" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q439911" start="38448" end="38459" title="Ellen Kuras" label="Ellen Kuras"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="38647" end="38657" title="haematomas" label="haematomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="38732" end="38754" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="38771" end="38786" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q114607759" start="38945" end="38955" title="The Regime (miniseries)" label="The Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663714" start="39349" end="39373" title="BAFTA Award for Outstanding British Film" label="Outstanding British Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="39743" end="39747" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055564" start="40399" end="40411" title="Tom Perrotta" label="Tom Perrotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386714" start="40433" end="40448" title="Little Children (novel)" label="Little Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954805" start="40629" end="40640" title="Mark Harris (journalist)" label="Mark Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="40793" end="40812" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138789" start="40906" end="40918" title="Anthony Lane" label="Anthony Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="40928" end="40942" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930465" start="41162" end="41168" title="NJ.com" label="NJ.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="41332" end="41348" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013977" start="43221" end="43235" title="Stephen Tredre" label="Stephen Tredre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="43427" end="43438" title="bone cancer" label="bone cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807424" start="43646" end="43661" title="Jim Threapleton" label="Jim Threapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76211470" start="43833" end="43836" title="Mia Threapleton" label="Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="44077" end="44087" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="44324" end="44332" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="44466" end="44475" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q230534" start="44557" end="44569" title="Rebecca Hall" label="Rebecca Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="44812" end="44827" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q747129" start="44845" end="44858" title="Necker Island (British Virgin Islands)" label="Necker Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q659095" start="45167" end="45181" title="West Wittering" label="West Wittering"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="45968" end="45978" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974196" start="46207" end="46230" title="National Literacy Trust" label="National Literacy Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689161" start="46323" end="46354" title="Afghanistan Relief Organization" label="Afghanistan Relief Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="46621" end="46632" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q234588" start="46654" end="46667" title="Millvina Dean" label="Millvina Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577588" start="46706" end="46740" title="Sinking of the Titanic" label="sinking of the &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="47086" end="47092" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110067" start="47178" end="47199" title="Golden Hat Foundation" label="Golden Hat Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826011" start="47233" end="47249" title="autism awareness" label="autism awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541268" start="47343" end="47350" title="Lancôme" label="Lancôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q603698" start="47355" end="47363" title="Longines" label="Longines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="47688" end="47708" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="47875" end="47892" title="Publishers Weekly" label="Publishers Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q736974" start="48020" end="48046" title="World Autism Awareness Day" label="World Autism Awareness Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="48203" end="48207" title="People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34807" start="48264" end="48273" title="foie gras" label="foie gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="48403" end="48409" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="48493" end="48516" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785021" start="48521" end="48539" title="global citizenship" label="global citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q215934" start="49243" end="49260" title="Save the Children" label="Save the Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="49278" end="49289" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="Coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="49328" end="49338" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414745" start="49772" end="49785" title="Kira Cochrane" label="Kira Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="50250" end="50252" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544126" start="50526" end="50532" title="Grazia" label="Grazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="50743" end="50753" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="50898" end="50904" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="51071" end="51091" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997134" start="51105" end="51108" title="Who (magazine)" label="Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259252" start="51193" end="51205" title="Feminine beauty ideal" label="beauty ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="51322" end="51327" title="Botox" label="Botox"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="51471" end="51484" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134077" start="51489" end="51501" title="Rachel Weisz" label="Rachel Weisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531013" start="51627" end="51641" title="gender pay gap" label="gender pay gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="51843" end="51849" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q922857" start="51977" end="51992" title="UK Film Council" label="UK Film Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="52095" end="52135" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="52145" end="52149" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="52183" end="52198" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q727282" start="52288" end="52302" title="Honorary César" label="Honorary César"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="52350" end="52372" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="52396" end="52440" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624915" start="52454" end="52475" title="2012 Birthday Honours" label="2012 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q223142" start="52653" end="52668" title="Box Office Mojo" label="Box Office Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="52699" end="52714" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q322206" start="52730" end="52748" title="Heavenly Creatures" label="Heavenly Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q643263" start="52769" end="52790" title="Sense and Sensibility (film)" label="Sense and Sensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q898721" start="52811" end="52817" title="Hamlet (1996 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="52838" end="52845" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208269" start="52866" end="52903" title="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" label="Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q208204" start="52924" end="52941" title="Finding Neverland (film)" label="Finding Neverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q478748" start="52962" end="52973" title="The Holiday" label="The Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q730888" start="52994" end="53003" title="Contagion (2011 film)" label="Contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561227" start="53024" end="53033" title="Divergent (film)" label="Divergent"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53054" end="53063" title="The Divergent Series: Insurgent" label="Insurgent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754959" start="53084" end="53094" title="Steve Jobs (film)" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152351" start="53187" end="53201" title="Mildred Pierce (miniseries)" label="Mildred Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q61040213" start="53225" end="53241" title="Mare of Easttown" label="Mare of Easttown"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="53292" end="53335" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q903494" start="53370" end="53389" title="68th Academy Awards" label="68th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="53391" end="53414" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q536749" start="53475" end="53494" title="70th Academy Awards" label="70th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="53496" end="53508" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q753167" start="53555" end="53574" title="74th Academy Awards" label="74th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364697" start="53623" end="53627" title="Iris (2001 film)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q504962" start="53643" end="53662" title="77th Academy Awards" label="77th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q213699" start="53753" end="53772" title="79th Academy Awards" label="79th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q841203" start="53810" end="53825" title="Little Children (film)" label="Little Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q190441" start="53841" end="53860" title="81st Academy Awards" label="81st Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q159063" start="53891" end="53901" title="The Reader (2008 film)" label="The Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q20022969" start="53917" end="53936" title="88th Academy Awards" label="88th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="54031" end="54043" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q687123" start="54045" end="54075" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="Best Actress in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q787123" start="54111" end="54144" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role" label="Best Actress in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925697" start="54225" end="54245" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actress" label="Best Leading Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834594" start="54250" end="54267" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Single Drama" label="Best Single Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="54316" end="54421" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Actress in a Leading Role in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113382" start="54516" end="54568" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children" label="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347340" start="54721" end="54756" title="Hollywood Foreign Press Association" label="Hollywood Foreign Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55124" end="55164" title="List_of_EGOT_winners#Without_a_Tony" label="four major American entertainment awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693688" start="55188" end="55206" title="Agra katewinsletae" label="Agra katewinsletae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55215" end="55254" title="List of oldest and youngest Academy Award winners and nominees#Youngest nominees 3" label="List of youngest Academy Award nominees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55257" end="55331" title="List of EGOT winners#Missing a Tony Award" label="List of EGOT winners – People who have won Emmy, Grammy and Academy Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52710" wikidata="Q3844" url="?curid=52710" title="Brazzaville">
<text>Brazzaville (, ; Teke: &quot;M&#x27;fa&quot;, &quot;Mfaa&quot;, &quot;Mfa&quot;, &quot;Mfoa&quot;) is the capital and largest city of the Republic of the Congo (Congo Republic). Administratively, it is a department and a commune. Constituting the financial and administrative centre of the country, it is located on the north side of the Congo River, opposite Kinshasa, the capital city of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo).

The population of the capital is estimated to exceed 2.1 million residents, comprising more than a third of the national populace. Some 40% are employed in non-agricultural professions. During World War II, Brazzaville served as the de facto capital of Free France between 1940 and 1942.

In 2013, Brazzaville was designated a City of Music by UNESCO; since then it has also been a member of the Creative Cities Network.

==Geography==
Brazzaville covers a large area to the north of the Congo River, just below the Pool Malebo. Mbamu, a large island within the Pool, is part of the Republic of Congo&#x27;s territory.

Brazzaville is inland from the Atlantic Ocean and approximately south of the equator. Around the city are large plains. The town is relatively flat, and situated at an altitude of . Downriver the Congo has numerous rapids, known as Livingston Falls, preventing navigation upriver to this point from its mouth at the Atlantic.

Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is located on the southern bank of the Congo, directly across from Brazzaville. To distinguish between the two African countries that have &quot;Congo&quot; in their names, the Republic of the Congo is sometimes called Congo-Brazzaville, as opposed to Congo-Kinshasa. Kinshasa is more than five times larger than Brazzaville in population. This is the only place in the world where two national capital cities developed on opposite banks of a river, within sight of each other.

In March 2018, the &quot;Brazzaville Declaration&quot; was signed to promote better management and conservation of the Cuvette Centrale, a region in Congo Basin and primarily in DRC. It is the world&#x27;s largest tropical peatland, made up of swamp forests. Conservation of this area is important for the survival of megafauna, and also critical to the world&#x27;s climate. Burning the peat would release too much carbon and raise the Earth&#x27;s temperature. The declaration to save peatlands as the world&#x27;s largest terrestrial organic carbon stock was signed by Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo, and Indonesia, which also has peatlands.

==History==


Brazzaville was founded by the French colonial empire upon an existing indigenous Bateke settlement called Ncuna, during the Scramble for Africa when European nations established spheres of influence on the continent. The Italian-born explorer Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza, who was granted French citizenship in 1874, officially founded the settlement on 10 September 1880; it commemorates his name.

The local King, Makoko of the Téké, signed a treaty of protection with Brazza, which subjugated his lands to the French Empire. From October 1880 until May 1882, a small squad of troops led by Senegalese Sergeant Malamine Camara occupied the site, in order to prevent the land from falling into Belgian hands. Their forces were active on the south side of the river, where King Leopold II ruled the Belgian Congo for a period as a private holding. The first large-scale building work of the city began four years later, as the French competed with Léopoldville (now Kinshasa) which Belgian colonists were developing on the south side of the river.

The Berlin Conference of 1884 placed French control over this area on an official footing. The city became the capital of the French Congo in 1904. It continued as capital when French Equatorial Africa was founded in 1910, as a federation of French colonial states: it included Gabon, the Central African Republic, and Chad until 1960. From 1910 to 1915 the major municipal buildings were constructed, including a courthouse and headquarters for the Banque de l&#x27;AEF and Institut Pasteur.

In 1934, the Congo–Ocean Railway opened, linking Brazzaville with the Atlantic port of Pointe-Noire and bypassing the rapids on the Congo River. Construction of the railway resulted in the deaths of more than 17,000 Africans, and the people revolted against the French in 1928.

During World War II, Brazzaville and the rest of French Equatorial Africa remained beyond the control of Vichy France, which served the Nazi occupation. The city served as the capital of Free France from 1940 to 1943. In 1944, Brazzaville hosted a meeting of the French resistance forces and representatives of France&#x27;s African colonies. The resulting Brazzaville Declaration represented an attempt to redefine the relationship between France and its African colonies.

Until the 1960s, the city was divided into European (the centre of the city) and African sections (Poto-Poto, Bacongo, and Makélékélé). In 1980, it became a &quot;commune&quot; separated from the surrounding Pool Department and divided into nine &quot;arrondissements&quot; along the French model of administration.

Since the late 20th century, the city has frequently been a staging ground for wars, including internal conflicts between rebel and government forces. It has been a base of conflicts between forces of the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and Angola. During the 1990s, civil wars resulted in thousands of civilian deaths here and forced hundreds of thousands of refugees to flee the city.

More recently thousands of people leaving the DRC have made their way to Brazzaville; the local United Nations force and the DRC government have accused the city of deporting thousands of these refugees.

In April 2016 fighting occurred between police and local militia units, with at least 18 people killed.

==Demographics==
As of the 2023 census, the city had a population of 2.15 million.

The National Institute of Statistics for 2014 is 1.73 million. Kinshasa, DRC, had more than 10 million inhabitants in 2014.

Together with Kinshasa, the combined conurbation of Kinshasa-Brazzaville has about 12 million inhabitants. Significant political and infrastructure challenges prevent the two cities from functioning with any meaningful connection. 
Since the mid-19th century, the two cities have been rivals in trade, sports and power. There have been proposals to connect the two capitals by a Brazzaville–Kinshasa Bridge. In 2018, with relative peace re-established in the region, the African Development Bank and Africa50 signed a deal with both governments to develop the project.

==Government==
Brazzaville, like Pointe-Noire, is a commune (municipality) and a department but not with the same area. It is governed by a municipal council and a departmental council. The mayor is the president of the municipal council.

The commune is divided into nine &quot;arrondissements&quot; (boroughs), each with an official number:
#Makélékélé 
#Bacongo 
#Poto-Poto 
#Moungali 
#Ouenzé
#Talangaï
#Mfilou
#Madibou
#Djiri

The department includes the area of the commune and, since 2011, the new district of Ile Mbamou.

==Economy==

The location of Brazzaville near the pool of the Congo River enabled it to grow as an industrial, trading and port settlement. It was connected through trade by ships and boats traveling upriver to inland areas, which produced raw materials from the beginning of the colonial period. Construction of the railway connecting to Pointe-Noire increased the ability of city businessmen to get their products to the port for export. Industries present in Brazzaville include machine shops, textiles, tanning, and manufacturing. As a key port on the Congo River, Brazzaville still takes deliveries of raw materials, such as rubber, wood, and agricultural products. From here they are generally sent onward to Pointe-Noire for export.

Many companies, government organizations and NGOs have regional offices in the capital city, where they can work with government officials. The World Health Organization has its regional office for Africa located in Brazzaville. Companies headquartered in Brazzaville include Equatorial Congo Airlinesand the mobile operator Warid Congo.

==Culture==
Roger Erell, a highly regarded architect, designed a house in the city for Charles de Gaulle when he was the leader of Free France here. Other buildings include the Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza Mausoleum, the Nabemba Tower, and the Congressional Palace (Brazzaville).

The Marien Ngouabi Mausoleum, Brazzaville Zoo, and the Poto-Poto School of Painting are also destinations for visitors and city residents.

==Places of worship==

Many Congolese converted to Catholicism during the French colonial period. Christian churches are most prevalent in the city, where the Roman Catholic Church has an archdiocese. Since then, churches have been established by new immigrants and by local adoption of evangelical Protestantism. Examples include the Basilica of Sainte-Anne-du-Congo in Brazzaville, Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Brazzaville and Gabon (Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa), Evangelical Church of Congo (World Communion of Reformed Churches), and Assemblies of God.

==Education==

The Marien Ngouabi University is a public university in Brazzaville, named after a former leader. The university was founded in December 1971 after independence. Today it has approximately 26,000 students.

International schools:
*Lycée Français Saint-Exupéry de Brazzaville (French)
*American International School of Brazzaville

==Climate==
Brazzaville features a tropical wet and dry climate. Its wet season, which runs from October–May, is longer than its dry season, which covers the remaining months. Brazzaville&#x27;s driest months, July and August, on average have no significant precipitation. Since Brazzaville is south of the equator, its dry season begins at around its &quot;winter&quot; solstice, which is the month of June. The city has relatively consistent temperatures throughout the course of the year.


==Transport==

The city is home to Maya-Maya Airport, which lies in the centre of the city and which has regular flights to Pointe-Noire as well as international destinations in Africa, Europe and the Middle East. A flight operates twice weekly between Brazzaville and Kinshasa, but the flight time is only five minutes.

The Congo-Ocean Railway has a station in the city and in 2014 was operating the &quot;La Gazelle&quot; train service every other day to Pointe-Noire and intermediate destinations.
The city is an important river port, with ferries sailing to Kinshasa and to Bangui via Impfondo. Ferries and fast private boats serve as the primary means of connection between Kinshasa and Brazzaville. The Livingstone Falls lie on the outskirts of the city, where the Djoué River meets the Congo, rendering river transport to the coast impossible, qualifying the railway as a portage railway.

Although there is no organised public transport system, privately owned buses are available in the capital.

Taxis are available on every street and are easily recognized, being painted with a green body and white top, and the fare for a short trip is CF700. About twenty percent of the vehicles in Brazzaville are taxis. There are also collective taxis that drive certain routes and charge CF150.

A road-rail bridge is proposed to connect Brazzaville with Kinshasa. The rail gauge on both sides is the same at 1067mm.

==Notable people==
:&quot;See :Category:People from Brazzaville&quot;
* Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza (1852–1905), eponymous founder.
*Prosper Philippe Augouard, (1852–1921) French Catholic priest, missionary and explorer, settled Brazzaville in 1887.
*Ambroise Noumazalaye (1933–2007) Prime Minister of Congo-Brazzaville, 1966 to 1968
*Jean Serge Essous (1935-2009) a Congolese saxophonist &amp; clarinetist
*Emmanuel Dongala (born 1941) a Congolese chemist and novelist.
*Patience Dabany (born 1941) singer, musician and First Lady of Gabon, 1967 to 1987.
*Antoinette Sassou Nguesso (born 1945) First Lady of the Republic of the Congo since 1997
*Aurlus Mabélé (1953–2020) a Congolese singer and composer.
*Charles Richard Mondjo (born 1954) Chief of Staff of the Congo Armed Forces, 2002 to 2012.
*Dominique Ntsiété (1940-2012), senator
*Ali Bongo Ondimba (born 1959), Gabonese politician, 3rd President of Gabon since 2009.
*Alain Akouala Atipault (born 1959) politician and government Minister.
*Frédéric Bintsamou (born 1964) a Protestant clergyman and leader of the &quot;semi-religious&quot; rebel group The Ninjas
*Bill Kouélany (born 1965) a Congolese artist, writer and set designer.
*Alain Mabanckou (born 1966) novelist, journalist, poet and academic
*Cyril Kongo (born 1969), a French painter and graffiti artist, lived in Brazzaville in the 80s.
*Dominique Tchimbakala (born 1977) journalist and TV presenter, news anchor for TV5Monde.
*Gaitana (born 1979), Ukrainian singer who lived in Brazzaville for five years.
*Scholastique Dianzinga, professor and specialist in women&#x27;s history
*Sardoine Mia (born 1998), artist
=== Sport ===
* André Merlin (1911–1960) a French tennis player.
* François M&#x27;Pelé (born 1947) a former footballer with 521 club caps and 9 for Congo
* Rolf-Christel Guié-Mien (born 1977) former footballer with 338 club caps and 26 for Congo
*Oscar Ewolo (born 1978) former footballer with 374 club caps and 38 for Congo
*Lorène Bazolo (born 1983) track and field athlete, Congolese flag bearer at the 2012 Summer Olympics
*Ladislas Douniama (born 1986) former footballer with over 250 club caps and 28 for Congo
* Pamela Mouele-Mboussi (born 1988) long and triple jumper, national flag carrier at the 2008 Summer Olympics
*Serge Ibaka (born 1989), professional basketball player
*Férébory Doré (born 1989) footballer with over 200 club caps and 37 for Congo

==Twin towns and sister cities==
* &quot;Dresden&quot;, Germany
* &quot;Weihai&quot;, China
* &quot;Kinshasa&quot;, Democratic Republic of the Congo
==See also==

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Ziavoula, Robert Edmond, ed. (2006). &quot;Brazzaville, une ville à reconstruire&quot;. Paris: Karthala. .

==Notes==
*Chavannes, Charles de. (1929) &quot;Le Sergent Sénégalais Malamine.&quot; &quot;Annales de l&#x27;Académie des Sciences Coloniales&quot;, vol. 3:159–187.
*Petringa, Maria. (2006) &quot;Brazza, A Life for Africa&quot; (2006) 
*Tiepolo, M. (1996) &quot;City Profile: Brazzaville&quot; in &quot;Cities&quot; v. 13, pp. 117–124
*Brisset-Guibert, Hervé (2007) &quot;Brazzaville petit guide historique&quot;, in the site www.presidence.cg (&quot;palais presidentiel&quot;)
*Cultural reference: In the final scene of the 1942 film, Casablanca, it is to Brazzaville that Captain Renault (Claude Rains) suggests he and Rick (Humphrey Bogart) might escape to together for &quot;vacation&quot; and, as Rick counters, &quot;the beginning of a beautiful friendship.&quot;

==External links==
*Fusion Cities, consolidation of movement, urban analysis seminar with vectorised maps of the agglomeration. TU Darmstadt, 2009
*Maria Petringa&#x27;s biographical article on Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza, describing events leading to the founding of Brazzaville, 1997</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="0" end="11" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36528" start="17" end="21" title="Teke languages" label="Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="106" end="113" title="capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="138" end="159" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q868893" start="204" end="214" title="Departments of the Republic of the Congo" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154054" start="221" end="228" title="Communes of the Republic of the Congo" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="338" end="349" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="360" end="368" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="394" end="426" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="633" end="645" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="693" end="704" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275700" start="767" end="780" title="City of Music (UNESCO)" label="City of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="784" end="790" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139352" start="836" end="859" title="Creative Cities Network" label="Creative Cities Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="928" end="939" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q750025" start="956" end="967" title="Pool Malebo" label="Pool Malebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188562" start="969" end="974" title="Mbamu" label="Mbamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="1137" end="1144" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="1387" end="1395" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="1845" end="1859" title="capital city" label="capital cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007968" start="2048" end="2064" title="Cuvette Centrale" label="Cuvette Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q932289" start="2078" end="2089" title="Congo Basin" label="Congo Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="2152" end="2160" title="peatland" label="peatland"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="2501" end="2533" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="2539" end="2560" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="2566" end="2575" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="2649" end="2671" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q811078" start="2700" end="2706" title="Bateke" label="Bateke"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="2743" end="2762" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q319834" start="2862" end="2888" title="Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza" label="Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="3027" end="3031" title="King" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="3130" end="3143" title="French colonial empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741224" start="3230" end="3245" title="Malamine Camara" label="Malamine Camara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="3565" end="3577" title="Léopoldville" label="Léopoldville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="3583" end="3591" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="3670" end="3687" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q265319" start="3792" end="3804" title="French Congo" label="French Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="3843" end="3867" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="3944" end="3949" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="3955" end="3979" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="3985" end="3989" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069319" start="4173" end="4192" title="Congo–Ocean Railway" label="Congo–Ocean Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="4247" end="4259" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="4488" end="4512" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="4544" end="4556" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="4626" end="4637" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="4702" end="4719" title="French resistance" label="French resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781371" start="4796" end="4819" title="Brazzaville Conference of 1944" label="Brazzaville Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="4995" end="5002" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400075" start="5013" end="5022" title="Poto-Poto" label="Poto-Poto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154054" start="5077" end="5084" title="Communes of the Republic of the Congo" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q864647" start="5122" end="5137" title="Pool Department" label="Pool Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q30059" start="5166" end="5181" title="arrondissements" label="arrondissements"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="5463" end="5495" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="5507" end="5513" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="5744" end="5770" title="MONUSCO" label="local United Nations force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="6111" end="6119" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="6210" end="6221" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397525" start="6552" end="6579" title="Brazzaville–Kinshasa Bridge" label="Brazzaville–Kinshasa Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="6644" end="6668" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001084" start="6673" end="6681" title="Africa50" label="Africa50"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154054" start="6795" end="6802" title="Communes of the Republic of the Congo" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q868893" start="6824" end="6834" title="Departments of the Republic of the Congo" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q30059" start="7022" end="7036" title="arrondissement" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281047" start="7087" end="7097" title="Makélékélé" label="Makélékélé"/>
<link wikidata="Q642751" start="7100" end="7107" title="Bacongo (Brazzaville)" label="Bacongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400075" start="7110" end="7119" title="Poto-Poto" label="Poto-Poto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325969" start="7122" end="7130" title="Moungali" label="Moungali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358071" start="7133" end="7139" title="Ouenzé" label="Ouenzé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514431" start="7141" end="7149" title="Talangaï" label="Talangaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307802" start="7151" end="7157" title="Mfilou" label="Mfilou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276055" start="7159" end="7166" title="Madibou" label="Madibou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033029" start="7168" end="7173" title="Djiri (Brazzaville)" label="Djiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q121789149" start="7260" end="7270" title="Ile Mbamou" label="Ile Mbamou"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="7612" end="7624" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192047" start="7755" end="7768" title="machining" label="machine shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="7770" end="7777" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="7780" end="7787" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="7793" end="7806" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="7829" end="7840" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="7880" end="7892" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="7903" end="7909" title="natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="7911" end="7915" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="7921" end="7941" title="agriculture" label="agricultural product"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="7988" end="8000" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="8059" end="8062" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="8158" end="8183" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347795" start="8290" end="8315" title="Equatorial Congo Airlines" label="Equatorial Congo Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739794" start="8339" end="8350" title="Warid Congo" label="Warid Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438934" start="8365" end="8376" title="Roger Erell" label="Roger Erell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="8440" end="8457" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="8484" end="8495" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q302517" start="8572" end="8585" title="Nabemba Tower" label="Nabemba Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q454025" start="8636" end="8650" title="Marien Ngouabi" label="Marien Ngouabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959034" start="8662" end="8677" title="Brazzaville Zoo" label="Brazzaville Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="8870" end="8879" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364195" start="8960" end="8971" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Brazzaville" label="archdiocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887058" start="9107" end="9154" title="Basilica of Sainte-Anne-du-Congo in Brazzaville" label="Basilica of Sainte-Anne-du-Congo in Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q251268" start="9209" end="9250" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586163" start="9253" end="9280" title="Evangelical Church of Congo" label="Evangelical Church of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246720" start="9282" end="9318" title="World Communion of Reformed Churches" label="World Communion of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="9325" end="9342" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551438" start="9364" end="9389" title="Marien Ngouabi University" label="Marien Ngouabi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="9402" end="9412" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052150" start="9591" end="9634" title="Lycée Français Saint-Exupéry de Brazzaville" label="Lycée Français Saint-Exupéry de Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="9726" end="9754" title="tropical wet and dry climate" label="tropical wet and dry climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q644963" start="10220" end="10237" title="Maya-Maya Airport" label="Maya-Maya Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="10309" end="10321" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069319" start="10511" end="10530" title="Congo-Ocean Railway" label="Congo-Ocean Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093136" start="10587" end="10609" title="La Gazelle train" label="&amp;quot;La Gazelle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="10643" end="10655" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="10712" end="10722" title="river port" label="river port"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="10729" end="10736" title="ferry" label="ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="10748" end="10756" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832" start="10764" end="10770" title="Bangui" label="Bangui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142926" start="10775" end="10783" title="Impfondo" label="Impfondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q559340" start="10895" end="10912" title="Livingstone Falls" label="Livingstone Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q22636927" start="10957" end="10968" title="Djoué River" label="Djoué River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231460" start="11065" end="11080" title="portage railway" label="portage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397525" start="11482" end="11500" title="Brazzaville–Kinshasa Bridge" label="A road-rail bridge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11634" end="11667" title=":Category:People from Brazzaville" label=":Category:People from Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q319834" start="11676" end="11702" title="Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza" label="Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331271" start="11736" end="11761" title="Prosper Philippe Augouard" label="Prosper Philippe Augouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287521" start="11854" end="11874" title="Ambroise Noumazalaye" label="Ambroise Noumazalaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q932245" start="11887" end="11922" title="List of prime ministers of the Republic of the Congo" label="Prime Minister of Congo-Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832226" start="11938" end="11955" title="Jean Serge Essous" label="Jean Serge Essous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707390" start="12011" end="12027" title="Emmanuel Dongala" label="Emmanuel Dongala"/>
<link wikidata="Q443143" start="12075" end="12090" title="Patience Dabany" label="Patience Dabany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255694" start="12124" end="12143" title="First Ladies and Gentlemen of Gabon" label="First Lady of Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58491100" start="12160" end="12185" title="Antoinette Sassou Nguesso" label="Antoinette Sassou Nguesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q59606953" start="12198" end="12237" title="First Lady of the Republic of the Congo" label="First Lady of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871915" start="12250" end="12263" title="Aurlus Mabélé" label="Aurlus Mabélé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082018" start="12310" end="12332" title="Charles Richard Mondjo" label="Charles Richard Mondjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q458231" start="12367" end="12385" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of the Congo" label="Congo Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291160" start="12402" end="12419" title="Dominique Ntsiété" label="Dominique Ntsiété"/>
<link wikidata="Q57521" start="12442" end="12459" title="Ali Bongo Ondimba" label="Ali Bongo Ondimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q19109718" start="12498" end="12516" title="President of Gabon" label="President of Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705620" start="12530" end="12552" title="Alain Akouala Atipault" label="Alain Akouala Atipault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368464" start="12602" end="12620" title="Frédéric Bintsamou" label="Frédéric Bintsamou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376614" start="12713" end="12723" title="Ninja (militia)" label="The Ninjas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507056" start="12725" end="12738" title="Bill Kouélany" label="Bill Kouélany"/>
<link wikidata="Q268522" start="12797" end="12812" title="Alain Mabanckou" label="Alain Mabanckou"/>
<link wikidata="Q29488625" start="12866" end="12877" title="Cyril Kongo" label="Cyril Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q64157845" start="12963" end="12984" title="Dominique Tchimbakala" label="Dominique Tchimbakala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138163" start="13042" end="13050" title="TV5Monde" label="TV5Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q209845" start="13053" end="13060" title="Gaitana (singer)" label="Gaitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201076" start="13074" end="13083" title="List of famous Ukrainian people" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q127813158" start="13133" end="13155" title="Scholastique Dianzinga" label="Scholastique Dianzinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q109043954" start="13207" end="13219" title="Sardoine Mia" label="Sardoine Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848299" start="13256" end="13268" title="André Merlin" label="André Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q963790" start="13307" end="13327" title="François M&amp;#x27;Pelé" label="François M&amp;#x27;Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q330056" start="13389" end="13394" title="Congo national football team" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q706382" start="13397" end="13420" title="Rolf-Christel Guié-Mien" label="Rolf-Christel Guié-Mien"/>
<link wikidata="Q330056" start="13481" end="13486" title="Congo national football team" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549681" start="13488" end="13499" title="Oscar Ewolo" label="Oscar Ewolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q330056" start="13560" end="13565" title="Congo national football team" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837220" start="13567" end="13580" title="Lorène Bazolo" label="Lorène Bazolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="13647" end="13667" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q773877" start="13669" end="13686" title="Ladislas Douniama" label="Ladislas Douniama"/>
<link wikidata="Q330056" start="13752" end="13757" title="Congo national football team" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211319" start="13760" end="13781" title="Pamela Mouele-Mboussi" label="Pamela Mouele-Mboussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="13847" end="13867" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q313389" start="13869" end="13880" title="Serge Ibaka" label="Serge Ibaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092708" start="13926" end="13939" title="Férébory Doré" label="Férébory Doré"/>
<link wikidata="Q330056" start="13998" end="14003" title="Congo national football team" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="14046" end="14053" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q373023" start="14077" end="14083" title="Weihai" label="Weihai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="14105" end="14113" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52711" wikidata="Q38111" url="?curid=52711" title="Leonardo DiCaprio">
<text>Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio (; ; born November 11, 1974) is an American actor and film producer. Known for his work in biographical and period films, he is the recipient of numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, and three Golden Globe Awards. his films have grossed over $7.2 billion worldwide, and he has been placed eight times in annual rankings of the world&#x27;s highest-paid actors.

Born in Los Angeles, DiCaprio began his career in the late 1980s by appearing in television commercials. He had a recurring role in the sitcom &quot;Parenthood&quot; (1990–1991), and had his first major film part as author Tobias Wolff in &quot;This Boy&#x27;s Life&quot; (1993). He received critical acclaim and his first Academy Award nomination for playing a developmentally disabled boy in &quot;What&#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape&quot; (1993). DiCaprio achieved international stardom with the star-crossed romances &quot;Romeo + Juliet&quot; (1996) and &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997). After the latter became the highest-grossing film in the world at the time, he reduced his workload for a few years. In an attempt to shed his image of a romantic hero, DiCaprio sought roles in other genres, including the 2002 crime dramas &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot; and &quot;Gangs of New York&quot;; the latter marked the first of his many successful collaborations with director Martin Scorsese.

DiCaprio continued to gain acclaim for his performances in the biopic &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004), the political thriller &quot;Blood Diamond&quot; (2006), the crime drama &quot;The Departed&quot; (2006) and the romantic drama &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot; (2008). He later made environmental documentaries and starred in several high-profile directors&#x27; successful projects, including the action thriller &quot;Inception&quot; (2010), the western &quot;Django Unchained&quot; (2012), the biopic &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; (2013), the survival drama &quot;The Revenant&quot; (2015)—for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor—the comedy-dramas &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot; (2019) and &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Up&quot; (2021), and the crime drama &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot; (2023).

DiCaprio is the founder of Appian Way Productions—a production company that has made some of his films and the documentary series &quot;Greensburg&quot; (2008–2010)—and Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation, a nonprofit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. A United Nations Messenger of Peace, he regularly supports charitable causes. In 2005, he was named a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters for his contributions to the arts, and in 2016, he appeared in &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s 100 most influential people in the world. DiCaprio was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time in a 2022 readers&#x27; poll by &quot;Empire&quot;.

==Early life and acting background==
DiCaprio was born on November 11, 1974, in Los Angeles, California. He is the only child of Irmelin Indenbirken, a legal secretary, and George DiCaprio, an underground comix artist and distributor. They met while attending college and moved to Los Angeles after graduating. Irmelin is German, and George is of Italian and German descent. Irmelin&#x27;s father, Wilhelm Indenbirken, was German, and her mother, Helene Indenbirken, was a Russian immigrant living in Germany. Sources have falsely claimed that DiCaprio&#x27;s maternal grandmother was born in Odesa, Ukraine; there is no evidence that he has any relatives of Ukrainian birth or heritage.

DiCaprio&#x27;s parents named him Leonardo because his pregnant mother first felt him kick while she was looking at a Leonardo da Vinci painting in the Uffizi museum in Florence, Italy. When he was one year old, DiCaprio&#x27;s parents divorced after George fell in love with another woman and moved out. To raise him together, DiCaprio&#x27;s parents moved into twin cottages with a shared garden in Echo Park, Los Angeles. George lived with his girlfriend and her son, Adam Farrar, with whom DiCaprio developed a close bond. DiCaprio and his mother later moved to other neighborhoods, such as Los Feliz. He has described his parents as &quot;bohemian in every sense of the word&quot; and as &quot;the people I trust the most in the world&quot;. DiCaprio has mentioned growing up poor in a neighborhood plagued with prostitution, crime and violence. He was raised Catholic.

Attending the Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies for four years and later the Seeds Elementary School, he later enrolled at the John Marshall High School. DiCaprio disliked public school and wanted to audition for acting jobs instead. He dropped out of high school later, eventually earning a general equivalency diploma.

As a child, DiCaprio wanted to become either a marine biologist or an actor. He eventually favored the latter; he liked impersonating characters and imitating people, and enjoyed seeing their reactions to his acting. According to DiCaprio, his interest in performing began at the age of two when he went onto the stage at a performance festival and danced spontaneously to a positive response from the crowd. He was also motivated to learn acting when Farrar&#x27;s appearance in a television commercial earned him $50,000. DiCaprio has said in interviews that his first television appearance was in the children&#x27;s series &quot;Romper Room&quot;, and that he was dismissed from the show for being disruptive. The show&#x27;s host has denied that any children were removed from the show in this way. When he was 11, he almost quit acting in order to pursue breakdancing, having gotten second place in a competition in his mother&#x27;s native Germany. At 14, he began appearing in several commercials for Matchbox cars, which he calls his first role. DiCaprio later appeared in commercials for Kraft Singles, Bubble Yum and Apple Jacks. In 1989, he played the role of Glen in two episodes of the television show &quot;The New Lassie&quot;.

At the beginning of his career, DiCaprio had difficulty finding an agent. When he found one, the agent suggested DiCaprio change his name to Lenny Williams to appeal to American audiences, which he declined to do. DiCaprio remained jobless for a year and a half, although he had 100auditions. Following this lack of success, DiCaprio was going to give up acting but his father persuaded him to persevere. Motivated by his father and by the prospect of financial security, he continued to audition. After a talent agent, who knew his mother&#x27;s friend, recommended him to casting directors, DiCaprio secured roles in about 20commercials.

By the early1990s, DiCaprio began acting regularly on television, starting with a role in the pilot of &quot;The Outsiders&quot; (1990) and one episode of the soap opera &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; (1990), in which he played a teenage alcoholic. DiCaprio&#x27;s career prospects improved when he was cast in &quot;Parenthood&quot;, a series based on the 1989 comedy film of the same name. To prepare for the role of Garry Buckman, a troubled teenager, he analyzed Joaquin Phoenix&#x27;s performance in the original film. His work that year earned him two nominations at the 12th Youth in Film Awards—Best Young Actor in a Daytime Series for &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; and Best Young Actor Starring in a New Television Series for &quot;Parenthood&quot;. Around this time, he was a contestant on the children&#x27;s game show &quot;Fun House&quot;, on which he performed several stunts, including catching the fish inside a small pool using only his teeth.

== Career ==

===1991–1996: Early work and breakthrough===
DiCaprio made his film debut in 1991 as the stepson of an unscrupulous landlord in the low-budget horror sequel &quot;Critters 3&quot;—a part he later described as &quot;your average, no-depth, standard kid with blond hair&quot;. DiCaprio has stated that he prefers not to remember &quot;Critters 3&quot;, viewing it as &quot;possibly one of the worst films of all time&quot; and the kind of role he wanted to avoid in the future. Later in 1991, he became a recurring cast member on the sitcom &quot;Growing Pains&quot;, playing Luke Brower, a homeless boy who is taken in by the show&#x27;s central family. Co-star Joanna Kerns recalls DiCaprio being &quot;especially intelligent and disarming for his age&quot; but she noted that he was also mischievous and jocular on set, and often made fun of his co-stars. DiCaprio was cast by the producers to appeal to young female audience, but his arrival did not improve the show&#x27;s ratings and he left before the end of its run. He was nominated for a Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor Co-starring in a Television Series. DiCaprio also had an uncredited role in 1991 in one episode of &quot;Roseanne&quot;.

In 1992, DiCaprio had a brief role in the first installment of the &quot;Poison Ivy&quot; film series, and was handpicked by Robert De Niro from a shortlist of 400 young actors to co-star with him in &quot;This Boy&#x27;s Life.&quot; Adapted from the memoir by Tobias Wolff, the film focuses on the relationship between a rebellious teenager, Toby (DiCaprio), and his mother (Ellen Barkin) and abusive stepfather (De Niro). Director Michael Caton-Jones said that DiCaprio did not know how to behave on set; accordingly, Caton-Jones used a strict mentoring style, after which DiCaprio&#x27;s behavior began to improve. Bilge Ebiri of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; found that the powerful bond between Barkin and DiCaprio elevated the film, praising DiCaprio&#x27;s portrayal of his character&#x27;s complex growth from a rebellious teen to an independent young man. &quot;This Boy&#x27;s Life&quot; was the first film that gained him recognition.

DiCaprio played the developmentally disabled brother of Johnny Depp&#x27;s character in &quot;What&#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape&quot; (1993), a comedy-drama about a dysfunctional Iowa family. Caton-Jones recommended DiCaprio to director Lasse Hallström who was initially skeptical, as he considered DiCaprio too good-looking for the part. Hallström cast DiCaprio after he emerged as &quot;the most observant&quot; auditionee. To ensure authenticity in his portrayal, DiCaprio studied similarly impaired children and their mannerisms, and Hallström allowed him to create the character using his own researched attributes. The film became a critical success. At 19, DiCaprio earned a National Board of Review Award, as well as nominations for a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, making him the seventh-youngest Oscar nominee in the category. &quot;The film&#x27;s real show-stopping turn comes from Mr. DiCaprio,&quot; wrote &quot;New York Times&quot; critic Janet Maslin, &quot;who makes Arnie&#x27;s many tics so startling and vivid that at first he is difficult to watch. The performance has a sharp, desperate intensity from beginning to end.&quot; Caryn James, also writing for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, said of his performances in &quot;This Boy&#x27;s Life&quot; and &quot;What&#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape&quot;: &quot;He made the raw, emotional neediness of those boys completely natural and powerful.&quot;

DiCaprio&#x27;s first role of 1995 was in Sam Raimi&#x27;s Western &quot;The Quick and the Dead&quot;. When Sony Pictures became dubious over DiCaprio&#x27;s casting, co-star Sharon Stone paid his salary herself. The film was released to dismal box office performance and mixed reviews from critics. DiCaprio next starred as a teenage Jim Carroll, a drug-addicted high school basketball player and budding writer, in the biopic &quot;The Basketball Diaries&quot;. He starred in the erotic drama &quot;Total Eclipse&quot; (1995), driven by the desire to showcase an exceptional performance, which would focus on his acting talent rather than his much-discussed physical appeal. Directed by Agnieszka Holland, it is a fictionalized account of the same-sex relationship between Arthur Rimbaud (DiCaprio) and Paul Verlaine (David Thewlis). DiCaprio was cast when River Phoenix died before filming began. Although the film failed commercially, it has been included in the catalog of the Warner Archive Collection, which releases classic and cult films from Warner Bros.&#x27; library on home video. A review in the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; called DiCaprio &quot;his generation&#x27;s great acting promise&quot; but criticized the mismatch between Thewlis&#x27;s &quot;cultivated&quot; British accent and DiCaprio&#x27;s &quot;Southern California twang&quot;.

DiCaprio next starred opposite Claire Danes in Baz Luhrmann&#x27;s &quot;Romeo + Juliet&quot; (1996), an abridged modernization of William Shakespeare&#x27;s romantic tragedy, which retained the original Shakespearean dialogue. DiCaprio was initially unsure about another Romeo and Juliet adaptation, but at his father&#x27;s suggestion, he agreed to examine Luhrmann&#x27;s work more closely. DiCaprio and Luhrmann then spent a two-week workshop exchanging ideas, which led to the collaboration. &quot;Romeo + Juliet&quot; established DiCaprio as a leading Hollywood actor; according to film scholar Murray Pomerance, DiCaprio&#x27;s newfound popularity helped the film become profitable only days after its release. Reviewing DiCaprio&#x27;s early works, David Thomson of &quot;The Guardian&quot; called DiCaprio &quot;a revelation&quot; in &quot;What&#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape&quot;, &quot;very moving&quot; in &quot;This Boy&#x27;s Life&quot;, &quot;suitably desperate&quot; in &quot;The Basketball Diaries&quot; and &quot;a vital spark&quot; in &quot;Romeo + Juliet&quot;. The latter earned DiCaprio a Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 1997 Berlin International Film Festival. He then portrayed a young man who has been committed to a mental asylum in &quot;Marvin&#x27;s Room&quot; (1996), a family drama about two estranged sisters, played by Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton, who are reunited through tragedy. He played Hank, the troubled son of Streep&#x27;s character. Lisa Schwarzbaum of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; praised &quot;the deeply gifted DiCaprio&quot; for holding his own against veteran actresses Keaton and Streep, describing the three as &quot;full-bodied and so powerfully affecting that you&#x27;re carried along on the pleasure of being in the presence of their extraordinary talent&quot;.

===1997–2001: &quot;Titanic&quot; and worldwide recognition===

DiCaprio rejected a role in &quot;Boogie Nights&quot; (1997) to star opposite Kate Winslet in James Cameron&#x27;s &quot;Titanic&quot; as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard RMS &quot;Titanic&quot; during its ill-fated maiden voyage. DiCaprio initially had doubts, but was eventually encouraged by Cameron to pursue the part. With a production budget of more than $200 million, the film was the most expensive in history at the time, and was shot at Rosarito, Baja California where a replica of the ship was created. &quot;Titanic&quot; became the highest-grossing film at the time, eventually earning more than $2.1 billion in box-office receipts worldwide. The role of Jack Dawson transformed DiCaprio into a superstar, resulting in intense adoration among teenage girls and young women that became known as &quot;Leo-mania&quot;. The film won 11 Academy Awards—the most wins for any film—including Best Picture, but DiCaprio&#x27;s failure to gain a nomination led to a protest against the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) by more than 200fans. He was nominated for other high-profile awards, including a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor.

DiCaprio stated in 2000: &quot;I have no connection with me during that whole &quot;Titanic&quot; phenomenon and what my face became around the world[...] I&#x27;ll never reach that state of popularity again, and I don&#x27;t expect to[...] It&#x27;s not something I&#x27;m going to try to achieve either.&quot; In his 2015 &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; article, Ebiri called the role DiCaprio&#x27;s best, writing that he and Winslet &quot;infuse their earnest back-and-forth with so much genuine emotion that it&#x27;s hard not to get swept up in their doomed love affair.&quot; A writer for &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; in 2008 similarly labeled them &quot;Hollywood&#x27;s most iconic screen couple&quot; since Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman. Essaying her first viewing of the film in 2017, &quot;Vox&quot; contributor Alissa Wilkinson took note of DiCaprio&#x27;s &quot;boyish charm&quot; and found his performance &quot;natural and unaffected&quot;. The success of &quot;Titanic&quot; intensified DiCaprio&#x27;s standing as a teen idol and romantic lead, an image from which he sought to dissociate himself. He reduced his workload &quot;to learn to hear [his] own voice in choosing the roles&quot; that he wanted to pursue.

DiCaprio had a brief featured role in Woody Allen&#x27;s 1998 satire of fame, &quot;Celebrity&quot;. Ebiri labeled DiCaprio &quot;the best thing in the film&quot;. That year, he also took on the dual roles of villainous King Louis XIV and his secret, sympathetic twin brother Philippe in Randall Wallace&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the Iron Mask&quot;, with common elements from the 1939 film of the same name and a 1929 film with Douglas Fairbanks. It received mixed to negative reviews, but grossed $180 million against a budget of $35 million. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; critic Owen Gleiberman wrote that DiCaprio did not look old enough to play the part, but praised him as &quot;a fluid and instinctive actor, with the face of a mischievous angel&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot; Alex von Tunzelmann was similarly impressed with the actor&#x27;s performance but found his talent wasted in the film. DiCaprio won a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple for the dual roles in 1999.

Also in 1998, DiCaprio was cast to star in &quot;American Psycho&quot; (2000) for a reported salary of $20 million; after disagreements with Oliver Stone on the film&#x27;s direction, DiCaprio left the project, taking the lead role in &quot;The Beach&quot; instead. Adapted from Alex Garland&#x27;s 1996 novel, the film saw him play a backpacking American tourist who ends up in a secret island commune in the Gulf of Thailand. Budgeted at $50 million, the film earned almost three times that at the box office, but was negatively reviewed by critics, and earned him a nomination for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor. Todd McCarthy of &quot;Variety&quot; thought DiCaprio gave a compelling performance but his character lacked defining qualities. The film received criticism for damaging the filming location in Thailand, after which DiCaprio worked to restore the area.

In the mid-1990s, DiCaprio agreed to be in the mostly improvised black-and-white short film &quot;Don&#x27;s Plum&quot; as a favor to aspiring director R. D. Robb. When Robb expanded it to a full-length film, DiCaprio and co-star Tobey Maguire had its release blocked in the US and Canada by court order, arguing they never intended to make a feature film. The film premiered at the 2001 Berlin International Film Festival but remains obscure.

===2002–2009: Venture into film production===


DiCaprio turned down the role of Anakin Skywalker in &quot;Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones&quot; (2002), feeling unprepared to &quot;take that dive&quot; at the time. His first film that year was the biopic &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot;, based on the life of Frank Abagnale Jr., who before his 19th birthday committed check fraud to make millions in the 1960s. Directed by Steven Spielberg, the film was shot across 147 different locations in 52 days, making it &quot;the most adventurous, super-charged movie-making&quot; DiCaprio had experienced yet. The film received critical acclaim and grossed $355 million against a budget of $52 million, becoming his second highest-grossing release after &quot;Titanic&quot;. Roger Ebert praised his departure from dark and troubled characters, and two &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; critics in 2018 called it DiCaprio&#x27;s best role, labeling him &quot;delightfully persuasive, deceptive, flirtatious, and sometimes tragic—and we dare you to find a better role, if you can&quot;. DiCaprio received his third Golden Globe nomination for his performance in the film.

Also in 2002, DiCaprio starred in Martin Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;Gangs of New York&quot;, a historical drama set in the mid-19th century in the Five Points district of New York City. Scorsese initially struggled selling his idea of realizing the film until DiCaprio became interested in starring in the film, and thus Miramax Films got involved with financing the project. Nonetheless, production on the film was plagued by overshooting of budgets and producer-director disagreements, resulting in an eight-month shoot. With a budget of $103 million, the film was the most expensive Scorsese had ever made. DiCaprio was drawn to playing Amsterdam Vallon, the young leader of an Irish-American street gang, as it marked a shift from &quot;boyish&quot; roles to a mature leading man. &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; earned $193 million worldwide and received positive critical response. Anne Thompson of &quot;The Observer&quot; took note of DiCaprio&#x27;s &quot;low-key, sturdy performance&quot;, but felt that co-star Daniel Day-Lewis overshadowed him.

In 2004, DiCaprio founded the production company Appian Way Productions, a namesake of the Italian road. He was interested in finding unique source material and preserving its essence during development, citing previous experiences where the involvement of too many people influenced the final product in a negative way. DiCaprio first executive-produced &quot;The Assassination of Richard Nixon&quot;, which starred Sean Penn as Samuel Byck, and was screened at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival. DiCaprio and Scorsese reunited for a biopic of Howard Hughes, an American film director and aviation pioneer suffering from obsessive–compulsive disorder, in &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004), which DiCaprio also co-produced under Appian Way. He initially developed the project with Michael Mann who was eventually replaced by Scorsese. &quot;The Aviator&quot; became a critical and financial success, grossing $213million against its budget of $110million. Simond Braund of &quot;Empire&quot; thought DiCaprio convincingly played a complex role and highlighted the scenes depicting Hughes&#x27;s paranoia and obsession. He received his first Golden Globe Award for Best Actor — Motion Picture Drama and nominations for an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award.

In 2006, DiCaprio starred in the crime film &quot;The Departed&quot; and the political war thriller &quot;Blood Diamond&quot;. In Scorsese&#x27;s &quot;The Departed&quot;, DiCaprio played the role of Billy Costigan, a state trooper working undercover in the Irish Mob in Boston, someone he characterizes as being in a &quot;constant 24-hour panic attack&quot;. DiCaprio especially liked the experience of working with co-star Jack Nicholson, describing a scene with him as &quot;one of the most memorable moments&quot; of his life as an actor. In preparation, he visited Boston to interact with people associated with the Irish Mob and gained of muscle. Critically acclaimed, the film grossed $291 million against a budget of $90 million, becoming DiCaprio and Scorsese&#x27;s highest-grossing collaboration to that point. Peter Travers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; praised DiCaprio&#x27;s and co-star Matt Damon&#x27;s performances as &quot;explosive, emotionally complex&quot;, but felt that Nicholson overshadowed the two. Despite DiCaprio&#x27;s leading role in &quot;The Departed&quot;, the film&#x27;s distributor Warner Bros. Pictures submitted his performance for a Best Supporting Actor nomination at the AMPAS to avoid internal conflict with his part in &quot;Blood Diamond&quot;. Instead, his co-star Mark Wahlberg was nominated, though DiCaprio earned other accolades for &quot;The Departed&quot;, including a Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor and Best Actor nominations at the Golden Globes and BAFTA Awards.

In &quot;Blood Diamond&quot;, DiCaprio starred as a diamond smuggler from Rhodesia who is involved in the Sierra Leone Civil War. While filming, he worked with 24 orphaned children from the SOS Children&#x27;s Village in Maputo, Mozambique, and said he was touched by his interactions with them. To prepare, he spent six months in Africa, learned about camouflage from people in South African military and interviewed and recorded people in the country to improve his accent. The film received generally favorable reviews, and DiCaprio was noted for his South African accent, which is generally known as difficult to imitate. Claudia Puig of the &quot;USA Today&quot; approvingly highlighted DiCaprio&#x27;s transition from a boy to a man on screen, and Ann Hornaday of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; similarly noted his growth as an actor since &quot;The Departed&quot;. DiCaprio received nominations for an Academy Award and a Golden Globe for &quot;Blood Diamond&quot;.

In 2007, DiCaprio produced the comedy drama &quot;Gardener of Eden&quot;, which according to &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;″s Frank Scheck &quot;lack[ed] the necessary dramatic urgency or black humor to connect with audiences&quot;. Later that year, he produced, co-wrote and narrated &quot;The 11th Hour&quot;, a documentary on the state of the natural environment that won the Earthwatch Environmental Film Award in 2008. DiCaprio&#x27;s Appian Way produced Planet Green&#x27;s &quot;Greensburg&quot; (2008–2010), which ran for three seasons. Set in Greensburg, Kansas, it is about rebuilding the town in a sustainable way after being hit by the 2007 Greensburg tornado. Also in 2008, DiCaprio starred in &quot;Body of Lies&quot;, a spy film based on the novel of the same name. He played one of three agents battling a terrorist organization in the Middle East. Considering the film to be a throwback to political features of the 1970s like &quot;The Parallax View&quot; (1974) and &quot;Three Days of the Condor&quot; (1975), DiCaprio dyed his hair brown and wore brown contacts for the role. The film received mixed reviews from critics, and grossed $118 million against a budget of $67.5 million.

Later in 2008, DiCaprio collaborated with Kate Winslet for the drama &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot;, directed by her then-husband Sam Mendes. As both actors had been reluctant to make romantic films similar to &quot;Titanic&quot;, it was Winslet who suggested that they both work with her on a film adaptation of the 1961 eponymous novel by Richard Yates. She found that the script, by Justin Haythe, had little in common with the 1997 blockbuster. Playing a couple in a failing marriage in the 1950s, DiCaprio and Winslet spent some time together in preparation, and DiCaprio felt claustrophobic on the small set they used. He saw his character as &quot;unheroic&quot;, &quot;slightly cowardly&quot; and someone &quot;willing to be just a product of his environment&quot;. Peter Travers liked DiCaprio&#x27;s pairing with Winslet and his multi-layered portrayal of an overwhelmed character, and Marshall Sella of &quot;GQ&quot; called it the &quot;most mature and memorable performance of his lifetime&quot;. DiCaprio earned his seventh Golden Globes nomination for the film. &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot; grossed $75.9million against its budget of $35million. He ended the 2000s by producing director Jaume Collet-Serra&#x27;s psychological horror thriller film &quot;Orphan&quot; (2009), starring Vera Farmiga, Peter Sarsgaard and Isabelle Fuhrman. Although the film received mixed reviews, it was a commercial success.

===2010–2013: Films with high-profile directors===

DiCaprio continued to collaborate with Scorsese in the 2010 psychological thriller film &quot;Shutter Island&quot;, based on the 2003 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane. He played Edward &quot;Teddy&quot; Daniels, a U.S. Marshal investigating a psychiatric facility located on an island, who comes to question his own sanity. DiCaprio and Scorsese became interested in the project in 2007, and the former co-produced the film under Appian Way with Phoenix Pictures. Because of the film&#x27;s disturbing scenes, DiCaprio had nightmares of mass murder during production and considered relaxing with his friends a form of therapy. The film was released to mixed reviews; Peter Bradshaw of &quot;The Guardian&quot; praised Scorsese&#x27;s direction and the acting but criticized its twist ending. Peter Travers called it DiCaprio&#x27;s &quot;most haunting and emotionally complex performance yet&quot;, and particularly liked his cave scene with co-star Patricia Clarkson. The film was a commercial success, grossing $294 million worldwide against a budget of $80 million.
DiCaprio&#x27;s second role in 2010 was in Christopher Nolan&#x27;s critically acclaimed ensemble science-fiction film &quot;Inception&quot;. Inspired by the experience of lucid dreaming and dream incubation, the film features Dom Cobb (DiCaprio), an &quot;extractor&quot; who enters the dreams of others to obtain information that is otherwise inaccessible. Cobb is promised a chance to regain his old life in exchange for planting an idea in a corporate target&#x27;s mind. DiCaprio was fascinated with the idea of a &quot;dream-heist&quot; and the potential for his character to manipulate his dreamworld and impact his real life. Made on a budget of $160 million, the film grossed $836 million worldwide to become DiCaprio&#x27;s second highest-grossing film. To star in this film, DiCaprio agreed to a pay cut from his $20 million fee and opted for a share in first-dollar gross points, which entitled him to a percentage of the cinema ticket sales. The risk proved fruitful, as DiCaprio earned $50 million from the film, becoming his highest payday yet.

DiCaprio starred as J. Edgar Hoover in Clint Eastwood&#x27;s &quot;J. Edgar&quot; (2011). A biopic about Hoover, the film focuses on his career as an FBI director, including an examination of his private life as an alleged closeted homosexual. Critics felt that the film lacked coherence overall but commended DiCaprio&#x27;s performance. Roger Ebert praised DiCaprio&#x27;s ability to bring depth and nuance to the character, suggesting that his performance conveyed aspects of Hoover&#x27;s personality that were possibly even unknown to the man himself. Also in 2011, he produced Catherine Hardwicke&#x27;s romantic horror film &quot;Red Riding Hood&quot;. Though it was named one of the ten worst films of 2011 by &quot;Time&quot; magazine, it had moderate box-office returns. Also that year, DiCaprio&#x27;s Appian Way produced George Clooney&#x27;s political drama &quot;The Ides of March&quot;, an adaptation of Beau Willimon&#x27;s 2008 play &quot;Farragut North&quot;.

In 2012, DiCaprio starred as plantation owner Calvin Candie in Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s Spaghetti Western, &quot;Django Unchained&quot;. After reading the script, DiCaprio felt uncomfortable with the extent of racism portrayed in the film, but his co-stars and Tarantino convinced him not to sugarcoat it. While filming, DiCaprio accidentally cut his hand on glass, but continued filming, and Tarantino elected to use the take in the final product. The film received critical acclaim; a writer for &quot;Wired&quot; magazine commended him for playing a villainous role and found his performance &quot;blood-chilling&quot;. The film earned DiCaprio a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. &quot;Django Unchained&quot; grossed $425 million worldwide on a production budget of $100 million.

In January 2013, DiCaprio said he would take a long break from acting to &quot;fly around the world doing good for the environment&quot;. That year, he had four releases as an actor and a producer. His first was in the role of millionaire Jay Gatsby in Baz Luhrmann&#x27;s &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot;, an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald&#x27;s 1925 novel of the same name, co-starring Carey Mulligan and Tobey Maguire. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but DiCaprio&#x27;s performance was praised and earned him the AACTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. Critic Rafer Guzman of &quot;Newsday&quot; wrote that DiCaprio was not only &quot;tough[...] but also vulnerable, touching, funny, a faker, a human. It&#x27;s a tremendous, hard-won performance.&quot; Matt Zoller Seitz of Roger Ebert&#x27;s website described his performance as &quot;the movie&#x27;s greatest and simplest special effect&quot;, and &quot;iconic—maybe his career best&quot;. The film grossed $353 million worldwide, more than three times its budget. Three films were produced by DiCaprio under Appian Way in 2013—the ensemble crime thriller &quot;Runner Runner&quot;, which &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s Xan Brooks described as &quot;a lazy, trashy film that barely goes through the motions&quot;; the commercially failed thriller &quot;Out of the Furnace&quot;; and the black comedy-drama &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot;.

DiCaprio reunited with Scorsese for the fifth time in &quot;The Wolf of the Wall Street&quot;, a film based on the life of stockbroker Jordan Belfort (played by DiCaprio), who was arrested in the late 1990s for securities fraud and money laundering. DiCaprio wanted to play Belfort ever since he had read his autobiography and won a bidding war with Warner Bros. against Brad Pitt and Paramount Pictures for the rights to Belfort&#x27;s memoir in 2007. He was fond of Belfort&#x27;s honest and unapologetic portrayal of his actual experiences in the book, and was inspired by the financial crisis of 2007–2008 to make the film. &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; received positive reviews for Scorsese&#x27;s and DiCaprio&#x27;s work together. &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; Todd McCarthy lauded DiCaprio for fully realizing his character&#x27;s potential with a carefree performance. Jonathan Romney of &quot;Film Comment&quot; wrote that DiCaprio displays a great deal of comedic talent, excelling in &quot;rubber-limbed slapstick&quot; humor. The film earned him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and nominations for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, as well as Academy Awards for Best Actor and Best Picture.

===2014–present: Environmental documentaries and awards success===
DiCaprio was an executive producer on &quot;Virunga&quot;, a 2014 British documentary film about four people fighting to protect the world&#x27;s last mountain gorillas from war and poaching. The film premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival in April2014, and DiCaprio was nominated for the 2015 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special. &quot;&quot; was another documentary film that year for which he was an executive producer—he took part in the new cut released exclusively on Netflix that September. It explores the impact of animal agriculture on the environment.

In 2015, DiCaprio produced and played fur trapper Hugh Glass in Alejandro G. Iñárritu&#x27;s survival drama &quot;The Revenant&quot;. DiCaprio found his role in the film difficult; he had to eat a raw slab of bison&#x27;s liver and sleep in animal carcasses. He also learned to shoot a musket, build a fire, speak two Native American languages (Pawnee and Arikara) and apply ancient healing techniques. Built on a budget of $135 million, the film earned $533 million worldwide. The film received positive reviews with particular praise for DiCaprio&#x27;s acting. Mark Kermode of &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote that DiCaprio shone with a performance that prioritizes physicality over speech, and Nick De Semlyen of &quot;Empire&quot; noted that he uplifted the film. The film earned him numerous awards, including the Academy Award, BAFTA, Critics&#x27; Choice, Golden Globe and SAG Award for Best Actor. For the next three years, DiCaprio narrated documentaries and served as a producer for films. In 2016, he was an executive producer for &quot;The Ivory Game&quot; and &quot;Catching the Sun&quot;; he also produced, hosted and narrated the documentary &quot;Before the Flood&quot; about climate change. He produced the crime drama &quot;Live by Night&quot; (2016), which received unenthusiastic reviews and failed to recoup its $65 million production budget. His next production ventures were in 2018—the psychological horror &quot;Delirium&quot; and the commercially failed action–adventure &quot;Robin Hood&quot;.

After producing and narrating the 2019 global warming documentary &quot;Ice on Fire&quot;, DiCaprio returned to acting following a four-year break in Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s comedy-drama &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot;, which traces the relationship between Rick Dalton (DiCaprio), an aging television actor and his stuntman, Cliff Booth (Brad Pitt). To help the film&#x27;s financing, DiCaprio and Pitt agreed to take a pay cut, and they each received $10 million. DiCaprio liked working with Pitt, and Tarantino described the pair as the most exciting since Robert Redford and Paul Newman. DiCaprio was fascinated with the film&#x27;s homage to Hollywood and focus on the friendship between his and Pitt&#x27;s characters. He drew from real-life experience of witnessing the struggles and rejections of his actor friends in the industry. The film premiered at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival, where critics praised his and Pitt&#x27;s performances. A writer for &quot;Business Insider&quot; called it one of the best performances of DiCaprio&#x27;s career, and Ian Sandwell of Digital Spy particularly liked the duo&#x27;s chemistry, believing their scenes together to be some of the film&#x27;s strongest parts. DiCaprio received nominations for an Oscar, a Golden Globe, a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor. The film earned $374 million against a budget of $90 million.

In 2020, DiCaprio served as an executive producer for &quot;The Right Stuff&quot;, a television series adaption of the 1973 namesake book. After being in development at National Geographic, it was released on Disney+. That May, DiCaprio briefly featured in the finale of the miniseries &quot;The Last Dance&quot;. In 2021, DiCaprio appeared in Adam McKay&#x27;s satirical comedy &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Up&quot;. He spent five months changing the film&#x27;s script with McKay before agreeing to the part. Starring alongside Jennifer Lawrence as two astronomers attempting to warn humanity about an extinction-level comet, DiCaprio saw this film as an analogy of the world&#x27;s indifference to the climate crisis. As a frequent supporter of environmentalism, DiCaprio said he has often looked to star in and make films tackling issues related to it, something he found hard due to people&#x27;s inability to listen. He praised McKay for envisioning a project on how humans would react to a serious issue from a political, social and scientific standpoint. While reviews for the film were mixed, most critics praised DiCaprio&#x27;s and Lawrence&#x27;s performances; journalists from Digital Spy and NDTV lauded their pairing. DiCaprio earned nominations for a Golden Globe and a BAFTA Award for the film. It broke the record for the most views (152 million hours) in a single week in Netflix history.

DiCaprio next starred in Scorsese&#x27;s crime drama &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot; (2023) based on the book of the same name by David Grann, for which he was paid $30 million. Initially signed for the heroic part of FBI agent Thomas Bruce White Sr., DiCaprio insisted on playing the morally complex role of murderer Ernest Burkhart, leading to extensive script rewrites. Declaring it the best performance of DiCaprio&#x27;s career, IndieWire&#x27;s David Ehrlich wrote that &quot;his nuanced and uncompromising turn as the cretinous Ernest Burkhart mines new wonders from the actor&#x27;s long-standing lack of vanity&quot;. He received another Golden Globe nomination for his performance. DiCaprio will next star in Paul Thomas Anderson&#x27;s upcoming film &quot;One Battle After Another&quot;, co-starring Sean Penn and Regina Hall.
==Reception and acting style==
Early in his career, DiCaprio gained a reputation for his reckless behavior and intense partying with a group of male celebrities dubbed &quot;the Pussy Posse&quot; in the 1990s. In an infamous article published by &quot;New York Magazine&quot; in 1998, journalist Nancy Jo Sales criticized the group as men whose pursuit was to &quot;chase girls, pick fights and not tip the waitress&quot;. During an unknown activity, DiCaprio got himself and friend Justin Herwick almost killed when his parachute failed to open, after which his instructor released an emergency core. In response, DiCaprio said he is fond of doing things that scare him. John McCain, who was a United States Senator for Arizona, called him &quot;an androgynous wimp&quot;. DiCaprio found people&#x27;s perception of him exaggerated, adding, &quot;They want you miserable, just like them. They don&#x27;t want heroes; what they want is to see you fall.&quot; Steven Spielberg, who directed him in &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot;, defended DiCaprio&#x27;s reputation as a &quot;party boy&quot;, believing it is a common behavior for young people and describing him as a family-oriented person during the film&#x27;s production. Considering DiCaprio to be conscious of his public reputation, &quot;The New York Times&quot;″ Caryn James credited him as one of the few actors to use his stardom to further social causes. Carole Cadwalladr of &quot;The Guardian&quot; said DiCaprio is &quot;polite, charming, makes jokes, engages eye contact. And manages[...] to give almost no hint whatsoever of his actual personality.&quot;
DiCaprio is regarded as one of the finest actors of his generation. In a 2022 readers&#x27; poll by &quot;Empire&quot;, he was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time. The magazine praised his willingness to &quot;go to the ends of the earth (often literally) to get under his characters&#x27; skin&quot;. Colin Covert of &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; similarly believed DiCaprio &quot;redefines film stardom&quot; through his willingness to take on challenging roles that few of his contemporaries are capable of performing.

Since his international stardom with &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), he has admitted feeling nervous about starring in big-budget studio films because of their hype and marketing campaigns. As an actor, he views film as a &quot;relevant art form, like a painting or sculpture. A hundred years from now, people will still be watching that movie.&quot; He often plays roles based on real-life people and stories told in specific periods. According to Caryn James, DiCaprio is unafraid of working with established directors on unconventional projects; taking such risks has led him to star in failed films like &quot;The Beach&quot; (2000), but also his successful collaborations with Martin Scorsese. DiCaprio has described his relationship with Scorsese as dreamlike and admires his knowledge of film, crediting the director with having taught him its history and importance. Scorsese has commented on DiCaprio&#x27;s ability to repeatedly demonstrate emotion on screen. Jesse Hassenger of &quot;The A.V. Club&quot; considers the duo&#x27;s collaborations—which earned them the 2013 National Board of Review (Spotlight Award)—to be career-defining moments for both of them and as vital as Scorsese&#x27;s acclaimed collaborations with Robert De Niro.

Author Michael K. Hammond wrote that DiCaprio built his star reputation by demonstrating his acting ability, and praised him for &quot;revealing a character while concealing the actor&quot; and &quot;disappearing into [his] roles&quot;. According to Agnieszka Holland, who directed DiCaprio in &quot;Total Eclipse&quot; (1995), DiCaprio is &quot;one of the most mature actors&quot; she has worked with and is &quot;courageous&quot; in his choice of roles. Holland remarked that he does not rely on method acting but rather on a trick that allows him to truly &quot;become the character&quot;. Meryl Streep, who co-starred with DiCaprio in &quot;Marvin&#x27;s Room&quot;, said he possesses the kind of unpredictability that makes his career difficult to classify, his life precarious and his work thrilling. Writing for &quot;The Observer&quot;, film critic Philip French has asserted that many characters portrayed by DiCaprio are in the process of becoming men. He wrote that DiCaprio&#x27;s inclination toward films about dysfunctional families and characters seeking father figures may allude to his own troubled childhood. DiCaprio often plays characters who themselves are playing roles, which Caryn James says looks simple on screen but requires sophisticated acting. He tends to play antiheroes and characters who lose their mental stability as the narrative progresses. Derek Thompson of &quot;The Atlantic&quot; argued that DiCaprio gives his best performances when playing &quot;frauds and cheats and double-crossing liars and mercenaries&quot;.

Several media publications, such as &quot;People&quot;, &quot;Empire&quot; and &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, have included DiCaprio in their listings of the most attractive actors. In 1998, he sued &quot;Playgirl&quot; magazine over plans to publish a fully nude picture of him. He has said he does not believe in focusing on appearanceas this is only temporary and can negatively affect one&#x27;s profession in the industryand looks for career longevity instead. In 2005, DiCaprio was made a commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Minister of Culture for his contributions to the arts. In 2016, he was named one of the 100most influential people in the world by &quot;Time&quot; magazine. He was included on &quot;Forbes&quot;″ annual list of the world&#x27;s highest-paid actors in 2008 and from 2010 to 2016 with respective earnings of $45 million, $28 million, $77 million, $37 million, $39 million, $39 million, $29 million and $27 million, topping the list in 2011. The magazine has commended DiCaprio&#x27;s ability to star in risky, R-rated films that become box office successes. &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; listed him as one of the 100 most powerful people in entertainment from 2016 to 2019. A writer for the same magazine credits DiCaprio as the rare actor to have a successful career &quot;without ever having made a comic book movie, family film or pre-branded franchise. Leo is the franchise.&quot; Stacey Wilson Hunt, analyzing his career in &quot;New York Magazine&quot; in 2016, opined DiCaprio, unlike most of his contemporaries, had not starred in a bad film in the previous ten years. Of his success, DiCaprio says, &quot;My attitude is the same as when I started. I feel very connected to that fifteen-year-old kid who got his first movie.&quot;

DiCaprio has named Robert De Niro and James Dean as two of his favorite and most influential actors, stating &quot;There were a lot of great actors I really fell in love with, but if I were to pick two, from different generations, it would be De Niro and James Dean&quot;. When asked about a performance that stayed with him the most, DiCaprio responded, &quot;I remember being incredibly moved by Jimmy Dean, in &quot;East of Eden&quot;. There was something so raw and powerful about that performance. His vulnerability [...] his confusion about his entire history, his identity, his desperation to be loved. That performance just broke my heart.&quot;

==Other ventures==
===Activism===
An active celebrity in the climate change movement, DiCaprio believes global warming is the world&#x27;s &quot;number-one environmental challenge&quot;. Eager to learn about ecology from an early age, he would watch documentaries on rainforest depletion and the loss of species and habitats. In 1998, he established the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation, a non-profit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. It supports organizations and campaigns committed to ensuring a viable future for planet Earth, and produced the short web documentaries &quot;Water Planet&quot; and &quot;Global Warning.&quot; The foundation has also funded debt-for-nature swaps. By 2018, the foundation had funded more than 200 projects, providing $100 million in support. He has been an active supporter of numerous environmental organizations and sat on the board of the World Wildlife Fund and International Fund for Animal Welfare.

DiCaprio has owned environment-friendly electric-hybrid vehicles. His use of private jets and large yachts have been criticized as hypocritical due to their large carbon footprints. DiCaprio chaired the national Earth Day celebration in 2000 where he interviewed Bill Clinton and they discussed plans to deal with global warming and the environment. He presented at the 2007 American leg of Live Earth. DiCaprio donated $1 million to the Wildlife Conservation Society at Russia&#x27;s Tiger Summit. DiCaprio&#x27;s persistence in reaching the event after encountering two plane delays caused then Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to describe him as a &quot;muzhik&quot; or &quot;real man&quot;. In 2013, he organized a benefit fine art auction, &quot;11th Hour&quot;, which raised nearly $38.8 million for his foundation. In September 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon designated DiCaprio as a United Nations Messenger of Peace with a focus on climate change. Later that month, he made an opening statement to members of the UN Climate Summit; his speech reached an estimated one billion people worldwide. In 2015, he announced his intention to divest from fossil fuels. He again spoke at the UN in April 2016 prior to the signing of the Paris Climate Change Agreement.
At a 2016 meeting with Pope Francis, DiCaprio donated to charity and discussed environmental issues with him. A few days later, possibly influenced by this meeting, the Pope said he would act in a charity film. DiCaprio traveled to Indonesia in early 2016 where he criticized the government&#x27;s palm oil industry&#x27;s slash-and-burn forest clearing methods. In July 2016, his foundation donated $15.6 million to help protect wildlife and the rights of Native Americans, along with mitigating climate change. That October, DiCaprio joined Mark Ruffalo in support of the Standing Rock tribe&#x27;s opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline.

In April 2017, DiCaprio protested against President Donald Trump&#x27;s inaction on climate change by attending the People&#x27;s Climate March. In July, a charity auction and celebrity concert arranged by DiCaprio&#x27;s foundation had raised over $30 million in one night. The DiCaprio foundation donated $100 million in December 2018 to fight climate change. In May 2021, DiCaprio pledged $43million to enact conservation operations across the Galápagos Islands.

===Political views===
DiCaprio endorsed Hillary Clinton for the 2016 presidential election. In March 2020, DiCaprio attended a fundraiser for Joe Biden at the home of Paramount Pictures executive Sherry Lansing. Prior to the 2020 election, DiCaprio narrated a Netflix documentary series about voting rights, stating, &quot;All of us may have been created equal. But we&#x27;ll never actually be equal until we all vote. So don&#x27;t wait.&quot; On social media, DiCaprio urged voters to make a plan to cast their ballots and to draw attention to voter suppression and restrictive voter ID laws, citing VoteRiders as a source of information and assistance. In 2023, DiCaprio testified during the trial against Prakazrel Michel, who is being accused of participating in a foreign influence campaign that was aimed at the Obama and Trump administrations.

In October 2024, DiCaprio formally endorsed Democratic nominee Kamala Harris for president, citing her policies on climate change mitigation, while criticizing her Republican opponent Donald Trump.

===Philanthropy===
In 1998, DiCaprio and his mother donated $35,000 for a &quot;Leonardo DiCaprio Computer Center&quot; at a library in Los Feliz. In May 2009, DiCaprio joined Kate Winslet, director James Cameron and Canadian singer Celine Dion, in a campaign to raise money to financially support the fees of the nursing home where Millvina Dean, a survivor of the RMS &quot;Titanic&quot;, was residing. DiCaprio and Winslet donated $20,000 to support Dean. In 2010, he donated $1 million to relief efforts in Haiti after the earthquake. In 2011, DiCaprio joined the Animal Legal Defense Fund&#x27;s campaign to release Tony, a tiger that had spent the last decade at a truck stop in Grosse Tête, Louisiana. DiCaprio donated $61,000 to the gay rights group GLAAD in 2013.

In 2016, DiCaprio donated $65,000 to the annual fundraising gala for the Children of Armenia Fund, where he was a special guest of his friend and honorary chair, Tony Shafrazi. Supporting Hurricane Harvey (2017) relief efforts, DiCaprio provided $1 million through his foundation. In 2020, DiCaprio&#x27;s foundation donated $3 million to Australia bushfire relief efforts. Amidst the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the media announced DiCaprio donated $10million to support Ukraine, although the news agency Associated Press suggested this amount was inaccurate.

==Personal life==
DiCaprio is agnostic but does not identify as an atheist. His personal life is the subject of widespread media attention. He rarely grants interviews and is reluctant to discuss his private life.

Throughout his 40s, DiCaprio had been the focus of various reports detailing his involvement with women aged 25 or younger, and had faced criticism for the age disparity of those relationships. In 1999, DiCaprio met Brazilian model Gisele Bündchen, whom he dated until 2005. He was romantically involved with Israeli model Bar Refaeli from 2005 to 2011. He later dated German fashion model Toni Garrn from 2013 to 2014 and later in 2017. DiCaprio was briefly romantically linked with Barbadian singer Rihanna, with the pair attending Coachella together in 2016. DiCaprio successfully sued French tabloid after it made claims that DiCaprio had gotten Rihanna pregnant. DiCaprio was in a relationship with American model and actress Camila Morrone from 2017 until 2022. He has been dating Italian model Vittoria Ceretti since August 2023.

DiCaprio owns houses in Los Angeles and apartments in New York City. In 2009, he bought an island, Blackadore Caye, off mainland Belize—on which he is set to open an environment-friendly resort—and in 2014, he purchased the original Dinah Shore residence designed by architect Donald Wexler in Palm Springs, California.

In 2005, DiCaprio&#x27;s face was severely injured when model Aretha Wilson hit him over the head with a broken bottle at a Hollywood party. As a result, he required seventeen stitches to his face and neck. Wilson pleaded guilty to the assault and was sentenced in 2010 to two years in prison.

In 2017, when &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; producer Red Granite Pictures was involved in the 1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal, DiCaprio turned over the gifts he received from business associates at the production company, including from fugitive businessman Jho Low, to the US government. These included a Best Actor Oscar trophy won by Marlon Brando, a $3.2 million Pablo Picasso painting, and a $9 million Jean-Michel Basquiat collage.

On February 27, 2025, it was confirmed that DiCaprio had been one of the people who had traveled on Jeffrey Epstein&#x27;s private plane to his private island in the Virgin Islands.

==Filmography and accolades==

According to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, DiCaprio&#x27;s most critically and commercially successful films include &quot;What&#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape&quot; (1993), &quot;Romeo + Juliet&quot; (1996), &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot; (2002), &quot;Gangs of New York&quot; (2002), &quot;The Aviator&quot; (2004), &quot;The Departed&quot; (2006), &quot;Blood Diamond&quot; (2006), &quot;Shutter Island&quot; (2010), &quot;Inception&quot; (2010), &quot;Django Unchained&quot; (2012), &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; (2013), &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; (2013), &quot;The Revenant&quot; (2015), &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot; (2019), &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Up&quot; (2021), and &quot;Killers of the Flower Moon&quot; (2023). His films have grossed $7.2 billion worldwide. 

DiCaprio has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following:
* 66th Academy Awards (1994): Best Supporting Actor, nomination, for &quot;What&#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape&quot;
* 77th Academy Awards (2005): Best Actor, nomination, for &quot;The Aviator&quot;
* 79th Academy Awards (2007): Best Actor, nomination, for &quot;Blood Diamond&quot;
* 86th Academy Awards (2014): Best Picture and Best Actor, nominations, for &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot;
* 88th Academy Awards (2016): Best Actor, win, for &quot;The Revenant&quot;
* 92nd Academy Awards (2020): Best Actor, nomination, for &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot;

DiCaprio has won three Golden Globe Awards: Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for &quot;The Aviator&quot; and &quot;The Revenant&quot; and Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot;, as well as a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor for &quot;The Revenant&quot;.

==See also==
* List of oldest and youngest Academy Award winners and nominees – Youngest nominees for Best Actor in a Supporting Role
* List of actors with Academy Award nominations
* List of actors with two or more Academy Awards nominations in acting categories
* List of Golden Globe winners
* &quot;Grouvellinus leonardodicaprioi&quot;, a beetle named after DiCaprio
* &quot;Spintharus leonardodicaprioi&quot;, a spider named after DiCaprio

==Notes==
==References==
==Cited sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="0" end="25" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525967" start="105" end="113" title="Leonardo DiCaprio filmography" label="his work"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606737" start="171" end="189" title="List of awards and nominations received by Leonardo DiCaprio" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="204" end="217" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="221" end="247" title="British Academy Film Award" label="British Academy Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="259" end="278" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622431" start="389" end="425" title="List of highest-paid film actors" label="the world&amp;#x27;s highest-paid actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="436" end="447" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749200" start="577" end="587" title="Parenthood (1990 TV series)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q495754" start="651" end="663" title="Tobias Wolff" label="Tobias Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q956250" start="673" end="693" title="This Boy&amp;#x27;s Life" label="This Boy&amp;#x27;s Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="751" end="764" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q660894" start="828" end="860" title="What&amp;#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape" label="What&amp;#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600519" start="924" end="936" title="star-crossed" label="star-crossed"/>
<link wikidata="Q463313" start="952" end="966" title="Romeo + Juliet" label="Romeo + Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="990" end="997" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="1040" end="1061" title="List of highest-grossing films" label="highest-grossing film"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="1258" end="1277" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q154581" start="1294" end="1311" title="Gangs of New York" label="Gangs of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349951" start="1354" end="1384" title="Martin Scorsese and Leonardo DiCaprio" label="many successful collaborations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="1399" end="1414" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="1493" end="1504" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q74958" start="1548" end="1561" title="Blood Diamond" label="Blood Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="1598" end="1610" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q276299" start="1653" end="1671" title="Revolutionary Road (film)" label="Revolutionary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="1837" end="1846" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q571032" start="1879" end="1895" title="Django Unchained" label="Django Unchained"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="1927" end="1950" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q18002795" start="1990" end="2002" title="The Revenant (2015 film)" label="The Revenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="2037" end="2065" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="2090" end="2119" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q100361490" start="2143" end="2161" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Up" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q66316924" start="2202" end="2228" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (film)" label="Killers of the Flower Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858710" start="2271" end="2293" title="Appian Way Productions" label="Appian Way Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604486" start="2380" end="2390" title="Greensburg (TV series)" label="Greensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q939566" start="2516" end="2549" title="United Nations Messenger of Peace" label="United Nations Messenger of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="2633" end="2658" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Order of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2728" end="2732" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="2755" end="2795" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="2896" end="2902" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2991" end="3002" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538516" start="3084" end="3099" title="George DiCaprio" label="George DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121742" start="3104" end="3121" title="underground comix" label="underground comix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="3504" end="3509" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="3718" end="3735" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q51252" start="3752" end="3758" title="Uffizi" label="Uffizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3769" end="3777" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047014" start="4001" end="4023" title="Echo Park, Los Angeles" label="Echo Park, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682727" start="4195" end="4204" title="Los Feliz, Los Angeles" label="Los Feliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="4244" end="4252" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4465" end="4473" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681997" start="4490" end="4529" title="Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies" label="Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246887" start="4609" end="4634" title="John Marshall High School (Los Angeles)" label="John Marshall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q947286" start="4774" end="4801" title="General Educational Development" label="general equivalency diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="4851" end="4867" title="marine biologist" label="marine biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11350860" start="5437" end="5448" title="Romper Room" label="Romper Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q169737" start="5665" end="5677" title="breakdancing" label="breakdancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050690" start="5813" end="5821" title="Matchbox (brand)" label="Matchbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965203" start="5902" end="5915" title="Kraft Singles" label="Kraft Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982218" start="5917" end="5927" title="Bubble Yum" label="Bubble Yum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781194" start="5932" end="5943" title="Apple Jacks" label="Apple Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827386" start="6026" end="6040" title="The New Lassie" label="The New Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644775" start="6799" end="6812" title="The Outsiders (American TV series)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q22272" start="6866" end="6879" title="Santa Barbara (TV series)" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749200" start="7002" end="7012" title="Parenthood (1990 TV series)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137831" start="7042" end="7075" title="Parenthood (1989 film)" label="1989 comedy film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="7152" end="7167" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548953" start="7262" end="7287" title="12th Youth in Film Awards" label="12th Youth in Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508661" start="7517" end="7526" title="Fun House (American game show)" label="Fun House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140559" start="7820" end="7830" title="Critters 3" label="Critters 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061246" start="8202" end="8215" title="Growing Pains" label="Growing Pains"/>
<link wikidata="Q63689" start="8318" end="8330" title="Joanna Kerns" label="Joanna Kerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="8703" end="8721" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="8848" end="8856" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100881" start="8903" end="8924" title="Poison Ivy (1992 film)" label="the first installment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641465" start="8932" end="8966" title="Poison Ivy (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Poison Ivy&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="8990" end="9004" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q956250" start="9071" end="9091" title="This Boy&amp;#x27;s Life" label="This Boy&amp;#x27;s Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q495754" start="9126" end="9138" title="Tobias Wolff" label="Tobias Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q229234" start="9241" end="9253" title="Ellen Barkin" label="Ellen Barkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945041" start="9298" end="9317" title="Michael Caton-Jones" label="Michael Caton-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907703" start="9483" end="9494" title="Bilge Ebiri" label="Bilge Ebiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9504" end="9517" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="9864" end="9875" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q660894" start="9902" end="9934" title="What&amp;#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape" label="What&amp;#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="9986" end="9990" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q316051" start="10044" end="10059" title="Lasse Hallström" label="Lasse Hallström"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789544" start="10489" end="10519" title="National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="National Board of Review Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="10550" end="10568" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="10576" end="10589" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10632" end="10662" title="List of oldest and youngest Academy Award winners and nominees#Youngest nominees 4" label="seventh-youngest Oscar nominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10769" end="10783" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="10797" end="10809" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046243" start="10991" end="11002" title="Caryn James" label="Caryn James"/>
<link wikidata="Q275402" start="11303" end="11312" title="Sam Raimi" label="Sam Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q756416" start="11334" end="11356" title="The Quick and the Dead (1995 film)" label="The Quick and the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="11369" end="11382" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="11436" end="11448" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q444806" start="11596" end="11607" title="Jim Carroll" label="Jim Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q962809" start="11695" end="11717" title="The Basketball Diaries (film)" label="The Basketball Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q543462" start="11762" end="11775" title="Total Eclipse (film)" label="Total Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q231019" start="11950" end="11967" title="Agnieszka Holland" label="Agnieszka Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="12036" end="12050" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="12066" end="12079" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212790" start="12081" end="12094" title="David Thewlis" label="David Thewlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514" start="12120" end="12133" title="River Phoenix" label="River Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969697" start="12243" end="12268" title="Warner Archive Collection" label="Warner Archive Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="12313" end="12325" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="12377" end="12400" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q867813" start="12658" end="12670" title="Claire Danes" label="Claire Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q250545" start="12674" end="12686" title="Baz Luhrmann" label="Baz Luhrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q463313" start="12700" end="12714" title="Romeo + Juliet" label="Romeo + Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="12758" end="12777" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="12785" end="12801" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="romantic tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939416" start="13228" end="13244" title="Murray Pomerance" label="Murray Pomerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176847" start="13384" end="13397" title="David Thomson (film critic)" label="David Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="13407" end="13419" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q819973" start="13736" end="13762" title="Silver Bear for Best Actor" label="Silver Bear for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q63466" start="13770" end="13809" title="47th Berlin International Film Festival" label="1997 Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q559907" start="13892" end="13910" title="Marvin&amp;#x27;s Room (film)" label="Marvin&amp;#x27;s Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="13979" end="13991" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q102642" start="13996" end="14008" title="Diane Keaton" label="Diane Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558398" start="14105" end="14121" title="Lisa Schwarzbaum" label="Lisa Schwarzbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="14131" end="14151" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q291170" start="14548" end="14561" title="Boogie Nights" label="Boogie Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="14592" end="14604" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="14608" end="14621" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="14635" end="14642" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="14712" end="14735" title="Titanic" label="RMS &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020753" start="14988" end="15013" title="Rosarito, Baja California" label="Rosarito, Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="15387" end="15401" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="15439" end="15451" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="15531" end="15574" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15665" end="15698" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="16297" end="16308" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="16407" end="16422" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q43247" start="16427" end="16441" title="Ingrid Bergman" label="Ingrid Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877087" start="16497" end="16500" title="Vox (website)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034298" start="16729" end="16738" title="teen idol" label="teen idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="16967" end="16978" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052826" start="17013" end="17022" title="Celebrity (1998 film)" label="Celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="17149" end="17163" title="King Louis XIV" label="King Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339625" start="17217" end="17232" title="Randall Wallace" label="Randall Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123463" start="17246" end="17270" title="The Man in the Iron Mask (1998 film)" label="The Man in the Iron Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057360" start="17304" end="17317" title="The Man in the Iron Mask (1939 film)" label="the 1939 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q738056" start="17341" end="17350" title="The Iron Mask (1929 film)" label="1929 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q104127" start="17356" end="17373" title="Douglas Fairbanks" label="Douglas Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="17512" end="17527" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535145" start="17849" end="17895" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple" label="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405126" start="17974" end="17989" title="American Psycho (film)" label="American Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="18066" end="18078" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q470692" start="18166" end="18175" title="The Beach (film)" label="The Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q542634" start="18204" end="18216" title="Alex Garland" label="Alex Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197181" start="18224" end="18234" title="The Beach (novel)" label="1996 novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="18335" end="18351" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q602299" start="18513" end="18551" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor" label="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="18553" end="18566" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="18576" end="18583" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242222" start="18905" end="18920" title="Don&amp;#x27;s Plum" label="Don&amp;#x27;s Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273573" start="18959" end="18969" title="R. D. Robb" label="R. D. Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q165524" start="19037" end="19050" title="Tobey Maguire" label="Tobey Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="19190" end="19229" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="2001 Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="19333" end="19349" title="Darth Vader" label="Anakin Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19359" end="19403" title="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones" label="Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="19526" end="19545" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q116774" start="19574" end="19592" title="Frank Abagnale Jr." label="Frank Abagnale Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q13586711" start="19633" end="19644" title="check fraud" label="check fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="19688" end="19704" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="20033" end="20044" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="20462" end="20477" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q154581" start="20491" end="20508" title="Gangs of New York" label="Gangs of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144561" start="20570" end="20590" title="Five Points, Manhattan" label="Five Points district"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="20744" end="20757" title="Miramax Films" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="21332" end="21344" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="21443" end="21459" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858710" start="21528" end="21550" title="Appian Way Productions" label="Appian Way Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="21566" end="21582" title="Appian Way" label="the Italian road"/>
<link wikidata="Q757976" start="21840" end="21874" title="The Assassination of Richard Nixon" label="The Assassination of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="21896" end="21905" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q930534" start="21909" end="21920" title="Samuel Byck" label="Samuel Byck"/>
<link wikidata="Q919233" start="21946" end="21971" title="2004 Cannes Film Festival" label="2004 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="22020" end="22033" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="22097" end="22126" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="22137" end="22148" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q270097" start="22253" end="22265" title="Michael Mann (director)" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="22451" end="22457" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="22693" end="22706" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q400007" start="22710" end="22721" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q654620" start="22728" end="22753" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="22806" end="22818" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q74958" start="22862" end="22875" title="Blood Diamond (film)" label="Blood Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="23014" end="23023" title="Irish Mob" label="Irish Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="23182" end="23196" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="23579" end="23592" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="23658" end="23668" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="23876" end="23897" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="24068" end="24081" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24178" end="24219" title="Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture" label="Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="24361" end="24369" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="24393" end="24415" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="Sierra Leone Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q462794" start="24477" end="24504" title="SOS Children&amp;#x27;s Village" label="SOS Children&amp;#x27;s Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="24508" end="24514" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="24516" end="24526" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="24939" end="24948" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q51641814" start="25041" end="25053" title="Ann Hornaday" label="Ann Hornaday"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="25063" end="25082" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758274" start="25312" end="25328" title="Gardener of Eden" label="Gardener of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="25361" end="25383" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q785773" start="25557" end="25570" title="The 11th Hour (2007 film)" label="The 11th Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="25612" end="25631" title="natural environment" label="natural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046472" start="25645" end="25669" title="Earthwatch Institute" label="Earthwatch Environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139533" start="25726" end="25738" title="Planet Green" label="Planet Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604486" start="25752" end="25762" title="Greensburg (TV series)" label="Greensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q988732" start="25818" end="25836" title="Greensburg, Kansas" label="Greensburg, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="25875" end="25886" title="Sustainability" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q131345189" start="25914" end="25937" title="2007 Greensburg tornado" label="2007 Greensburg tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q578312" start="25979" end="25991" title="Body of Lies (film)" label="Body of Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936926" start="26023" end="26045" title="Body of Lies (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q196936" start="26216" end="26233" title="The Parallax View" label="The Parallax View"/>
<link wikidata="Q458033" start="26257" end="26281" title="Three Days of the Condor" label="Three Days of the Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q276299" start="26545" end="26563" title="Revolutionary Road (film)" label="Revolutionary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="26600" end="26610" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393977" start="26787" end="26807" title="Revolutionary Road" label="1961 eponymous novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q544611" start="26811" end="26824" title="Richard Yates (novelist)" label="Richard Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317671" start="26856" end="26869" title="Justin Haythe" label="Justin Haythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="27390" end="27392" title="GQ (magazine)" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q357183" start="27674" end="27692" title="Jaume Collet-Serra" label="Jaume Collet-Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q387414" start="27741" end="27747" title="Orphan (2009 film)" label="Orphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q264840" start="27771" end="27783" title="Vera Farmiga" label="Vera Farmiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q315099" start="27785" end="27800" title="Peter Sarsgaard" label="Peter Sarsgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q237053" start="27805" end="27821" title="Isabelle Fuhrman" label="Isabelle Fuhrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210364" start="28041" end="28055" title="Shutter Island (film)" label="Shutter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q612511" start="28072" end="28103" title="Shutter Island" label="the 2003 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q311744" start="28107" end="28120" title="Dennis Lehane" label="Dennis Lehane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887890" start="28400" end="28416" title="Phoenix Pictures" label="Phoenix Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376474" start="28621" end="28635" title="Peter Bradshaw" label="Peter Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q229268" start="28904" end="28921" title="Patricia Clarkson" label="Patricia Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="29066" end="29083" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="29148" end="29157" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q181078" start="29195" end="29209" title="lucid dreaming" label="lucid dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306501" start="29214" end="29230" title="dream incubation" label="dream incubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087498" start="29888" end="29906" title="first-dollar gross" label="first-dollar gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="30104" end="30119" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="30123" end="30137" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137236" start="30151" end="30159" title="J. Edgar" label="J. Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="30234" end="30237" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="30307" end="30315" title="closeted" label="closeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q229598" start="30667" end="30686" title="Catherine Hardwicke" label="Catherine Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q815608" start="30721" end="30736" title="Red Riding Hood (2011 film)" label="Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="30808" end="30812" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="30917" end="30931" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q543581" start="30961" end="30978" title="The Ides of March (2011 film)" label="The Ides of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877396" start="31003" end="31016" title="Beau Willimon" label="Beau Willimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436218" start="31040" end="31054" title="Farragut North (play)" label="Farragut North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="31126" end="31143" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="31151" end="31168" title="Spaghetti Western" label="Spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q571032" start="31176" end="31192" title="Django Unchained" label="Django Unchained"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="31567" end="31572" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048121" start="32110" end="32120" title="Jay Gatsby" label="Jay Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q892735" start="32150" end="32166" title="The Great Gatsby (2013 film)" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="32191" end="32210" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="32223" end="32245" title="The Great Gatsby" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q219655" start="32259" end="32273" title="Carey Mulligan" label="Carey Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649797" start="32402" end="32446" title="AACTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="AACTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="32477" end="32484" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379900" start="33011" end="33024" title="Runner Runner (film)" label="Runner Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061288" start="33198" end="33216" title="Out of the Furnace" label="Out of the Furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="33257" end="33280" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183674" start="33424" end="33438" title="Jordan Belfort" label="Jordan Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902843" start="33594" end="33611" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (book)" label="his autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="33660" end="33669" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="33674" end="33692" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="33869" end="33898" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038736" start="34204" end="34216" title="Film Comment" label="Film Comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="34317" end="34326" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="34364" end="34432" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395479" start="34672" end="34679" title="Virunga (film)" label="Virunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="34779" end="34796" title="mountain gorillas" label="mountain gorillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q853325" start="34846" end="34867" title="Tribeca Film Festival" label="Tribeca Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671951" start="34917" end="34921" title="67th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895159" start="34922" end="34992" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="35137" end="35144" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="35265" end="35276" title="fur trapper" label="fur trapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139550" start="35277" end="35287" title="Hugh Glass" label="Hugh Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q55215" start="35291" end="35312" title="Alejandro González Iñárritu" label="Alejandro G. Iñárritu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18002795" start="35341" end="35353" title="The Revenant (2015 film)" label="The Revenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q56751" start="35572" end="35578" title="Pawnee language" label="Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q56539" start="35583" end="35590" title="Arikara language" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282562" start="35791" end="35803" title="Mark Kermode" label="Mark Kermode"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821200" start="36274" end="36288" title="The Ivory Game" label="The Ivory Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136720" start="36305" end="36321" title="Catching the Sun (film)" label="Catching the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869689" start="36389" end="36405" title="Before the Flood (film)" label="Before the Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="36418" end="36432" title="Global warming" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q21293827" start="36468" end="36481" title="Live by Night (film)" label="Live by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514888" start="36663" end="36671" title="Delirium (2018 film)" label="Delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28811584" start="36729" end="36739" title="Robin Hood (2018 film)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q63922403" start="36820" end="36831" title="Ice on Fire (2019 film)" label="Ice on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="36942" end="36971" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="37017" end="37028" title="Rick Dalton" label="Rick Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465501" start="37075" end="37083" title="stuntman" label="stuntman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="37319" end="37333" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="37338" end="37349" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249975" start="37396" end="37402" title="homage (arts)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q55436055" start="37625" end="37650" title="2019 Cannes Film Festival" label="2019 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="37727" end="37743" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111380" start="37836" end="37847" title="Digital Spy" label="Digital Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120961" start="38211" end="38238" title="The Right Stuff (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Right Stuff&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301814" start="38276" end="38294" title="The Right Stuff (book)" label="1973 namesake book"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="38366" end="38373" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807688" start="38449" end="38463" title="The Last Dance (TV series)" label="The Last Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q350405" start="38501" end="38511" title="Adam McKay" label="Adam McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q100361490" start="38542" end="38560" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Up" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q189490" start="38680" end="38697" title="Jennifer Lawrence" label="Jennifer Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q60933643" start="38855" end="38869" title="climate crisis" label="climate crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985356" start="39356" end="39360" title="NDTV" label="NDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q66316924" start="39618" end="39644" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (film)" label="Killers of the Flower Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309957" start="39671" end="39692" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (book)" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354395" start="39696" end="39707" title="David Grann" label="David Grann"/>
<link wikidata="Q110316799" start="39794" end="39816" title="Thomas Bruce White Sr." label="Thomas Bruce White Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q123189870" start="39884" end="39899" title="Ernest Burkhart" label="Ernest Burkhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024460" start="40000" end="40009" title="IndieWire" label="IndieWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25132" start="40285" end="40305" title="Paul Thomas Anderson" label="Paul Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085614" start="40333" end="40357" title="One Battle After Another" label="One Battle After Another"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="40377" end="40386" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q235141" start="40391" end="40402" title="Regina Hall" label="Regina Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="40656" end="40673" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962760" start="40700" end="40714" title="Nancy Jo Sales" label="Nancy Jo Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225801" start="40887" end="40901" title="Justin Herwick" label="Justin Herwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="41076" end="41087" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="41099" end="41120" title="United States Senator" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="41363" end="41379" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="42362" end="42379" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="43552" end="43565" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776558" start="43745" end="43805" title="Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro" label="Scorsese&amp;#x27;s acclaimed collaborations with Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="44306" end="44319" title="method acting" label="method acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="44401" end="44413" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183570" start="44665" end="44678" title="Philip French" label="Philip French"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="45099" end="45107" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="45210" end="45222" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="45407" end="45413" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="45450" end="45470" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q580633" start="45573" end="45581" title="Playgirl" label="Playgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="45880" end="45909" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q384602" start="45917" end="45943" title="Minister of Culture (France)" label="French Minister of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="46012" end="46051" title="Time 100" label="100most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="46061" end="46065" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="46107" end="46113" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622431" start="46136" end="46172" title="List of highest-paid film actors" label="the world&amp;#x27;s highest-paid actors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46433" end="46440" title="Motion Picture Association film rating system#MPA film ratings" label="R-rated"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="47187" end="47201" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="47206" end="47216" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129778" start="47587" end="47599" title="East of Eden (film)" label="East of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18746339" start="47884" end="47907" title="Climate movement" label="climate change movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="47927" end="47941" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="48090" end="48110" title="Deforestation" label="rainforest depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="48119" end="48134" title="Extinction" label="loss of species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248582" start="48504" end="48524" title="debt-for-nature swap" label="debt-for-nature swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="48721" end="48740" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666594" start="48745" end="48782" title="International Fund for Animal Welfare" label="International Fund for Animal Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="48825" end="48849" title="Hybrid electric vehicle" label="electric-hybrid vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="48862" end="48873" title="private jet" label="private jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="48885" end="48891" title="yachts" label="yachts"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="48948" end="48964" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q124473" start="48997" end="49006" title="Earth Day" label="Earth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="49048" end="49060" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133770" start="49160" end="49172" title="Live Earth concert, New York City" label="American leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233398" start="49176" end="49186" title="Live Earth" label="Live Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118246" start="49223" end="49252" title="Wildlife Conservation Society" label="Wildlife Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="49397" end="49411" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="49656" end="49667" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16738510" start="49824" end="49841" title="2014 UN Climate Summit" label="UN Climate Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903988" start="49944" end="49968" title="Fossil fuel divestment" label="divest from fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715792" start="50037" end="50067" title="2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="Paris Climate Change Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="50092" end="50104" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="50392" end="50406" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254248" start="50516" end="50542" title="rights of Native Americans" label="rights of Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="50555" end="50580" title="climate change mitigation" label="mitigating climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="50612" end="50624" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619061" start="50688" end="50710" title="Dakota Access Pipeline" label="Dakota Access Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="50765" end="50777" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q29613553" start="50829" end="50856" title="People&amp;#x27;s Climate March (2017)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Climate March"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="51160" end="51177" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="51220" end="51235" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="51244" end="51270" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="51322" end="51331" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942161" start="51727" end="51744" title="voter suppression" label="voter suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942150" start="51761" end="51774" title="Voter identification laws in the United States" label="voter ID laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942109" start="51783" end="51793" title="VoteRiders" label="VoteRiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q380634" start="51890" end="51906" title="Prakazrel Michel" label="Prakazrel Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="52097" end="52110" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="52149" end="52174" title="climate change mitigation" label="climate change mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52218" end="52230" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105" start="52466" end="52477" title="Celine Dion" label="Celine Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q234588" start="52566" end="52579" title="Millvina Dean" label="Millvina Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="52756" end="52770" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="the earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491695" start="52801" end="52826" title="Animal Legal Defense Fund" label="Animal Legal Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418645" start="52918" end="52940" title="Grosse Tête, Louisiana" label="Grosse Tête, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="52991" end="52996" title="GLAAD" label="GLAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098408" start="53080" end="53104" title="Children of Armenia Fund" label="Children of Armenia Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531885" start="53169" end="53182" title="Tony Shafrazi" label="Tony Shafrazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="53195" end="53218" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey (2017)"/>
<link wikidata="Q77924746" start="53346" end="53364" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season" label="Australia bushfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="53392" end="53424" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="53519" end="53535" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q152208" start="54022" end="54037" title="Gisele Bündchen" label="Gisele Bündchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q298197" start="54113" end="54124" title="Bar Refaeli" label="Bar Refaeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q64960" start="54180" end="54190" title="Toni Garrn" label="Toni Garrn"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="54291" end="54298" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="54324" end="54333" title="Coachella" label="Coachella"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="54386" end="54393" title="Tabloid journalism" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449526" start="54521" end="54535" title="Camila Morrone" label="Camila Morrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207531" start="54591" end="54607" title="Vittoria Ceretti" label="Vittoria Ceretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905521" start="54727" end="54742" title="Blackadore Caye" label="Blackadore Caye"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="54757" end="54763" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q466502" start="54861" end="54872" title="Dinah Shore" label="Dinah Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295305" start="54905" end="54918" title="Donald Wexler" label="Donald Wexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="54922" end="54946" title="Palm Springs, California" label="Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61088518" start="55303" end="55323" title="Red Granite Pictures" label="Red Granite Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="55344" end="55380" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal" label="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12696236" start="55513" end="55520" title="Jho Low" label="Jho Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="55592" end="55605" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="55622" end="55635" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q155407" start="55663" end="55683" title="Jean-Michel Basquiat" label="Jean-Michel Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904131" start="55794" end="55809" title="Jeffrey Epstein" label="Jeffrey Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="55860" end="55874" title="United States Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q223142" start="55939" end="55954" title="Box Office Mojo" label="Box Office Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="55963" end="55979" title="review aggregate" label="review aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="55985" end="56000" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q660894" start="56082" end="56114" title="What&amp;#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape" label="What&amp;#x27;s Eating Gilbert Grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q463313" start="56135" end="56149" title="Romeo + Juliet" label="Romeo + Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="56170" end="56177" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="56198" end="56217" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q154581" start="56238" end="56255" title="Gangs of New York" label="Gangs of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="56276" end="56287" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="56308" end="56320" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q74958" start="56341" end="56354" title="Blood Diamond" label="Blood Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q210364" start="56375" end="56389" title="Shutter Island (film)" label="Shutter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="56410" end="56419" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q571032" start="56440" end="56456" title="Django Unchained" label="Django Unchained"/>
<link wikidata="Q892735" start="56477" end="56493" title="The Great Gatsby (2013 film)" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="56514" end="56537" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q18002795" start="56558" end="56570" title="The Revenant (2015 film)" label="The Revenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="56591" end="56620" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q100361490" start="56641" end="56659" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Up" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q66316924" start="56684" end="56710" title="Killers of the Flower Moon (film)" label="Killers of the Flower Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q944352" start="56875" end="56894" title="66th Academy Awards" label="66th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="56903" end="56924" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q504962" start="56989" end="57008" title="77th Academy Awards" label="77th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="57017" end="57027" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213699" start="57071" end="57090" title="79th Academy Awards" label="79th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419956" start="57155" end="57174" title="86th Academy Awards" label="86th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="57183" end="57195" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q20022969" start="57267" end="57286" title="88th Academy Awards" label="88th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496499" start="57343" end="57362" title="92nd Academy Awards" label="92nd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="57465" end="57484" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="57486" end="57519" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="57581" end="57626" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q400007" start="57681" end="57692" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q654620" start="57699" end="57724" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57786" end="57904" title="List of oldest and youngest Academy Award winners and nominees#Youngest nominees 4" label="List of oldest and youngest Academy Award winners and nominees – Youngest nominees for Best Actor in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q24063766" start="57907" end="57952" title="List of actors with Academy Award nominations" label="List of actors with Academy Award nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151712" start="57955" end="58034" title="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories" label="List of actors with two or more Academy Awards nominations in acting categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571998" start="58037" end="58065" title="List of Golden Globe winners" label="List of Golden Globe winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q52438971" start="58074" end="58104" title="Grouvellinus leonardodicaprioi" label="Grouvellinus leonardodicaprioi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53211360" start="58150" end="58178" title="Spintharus leonardodicaprioi" label="Spintharus leonardodicaprioi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52713" wikidata="Q50053" url="?curid=52713" title="Binary star">
<text>A binary star or binary star system is a system of two stars that are gravitationally bound to and in orbit around each other. Binary stars in the night sky that are seen as a single object to the naked eye are often resolved as separate stars using a telescope, in which case they are called &quot;visual binaries&quot;. Many visual binaries have long orbital periods of several centuries or millennia and therefore have orbits which are uncertain or poorly known. They may also be detected by indirect techniques, such as spectroscopy (&quot;spectroscopic binaries&quot;) or astrometry (&quot;astrometric binaries&quot;). If a binary star happens to orbit in a plane along our line of sight, its components will eclipse and transit each other; these pairs are called &quot;eclipsing binaries&quot;, or, together with other binaries that change brightness as they orbit, &quot;photometric binaries&quot;.

If components in binary star systems are close enough, they can gravitationally distort each other&#x27;s outer stellar atmospheres. In some cases, these &quot;close binary systems&quot; can exchange mass, which may bring their evolution to stages that single stars cannot attain. Examples of binaries are Sirius, and Cygnus X-1 (Cygnus X-1 being a well-known black hole). Binary stars are also common as the nuclei of many planetary nebulae, and are the progenitors of both novae and type Ia supernovae.

==Discovery==
Double stars, a pair of stars that appear close to each other, have been observed since the invention of the telescope. Early examples include Mizar and Acrux. Mizar, in the Big Dipper (Ursa Major), was observed to be double by Giovanni Battista Riccioli in 1650 (and probably earlier by Benedetto Castelli and Galileo). The bright southern star Acrux, in the Southern Cross, was discovered to be double by Father Fontenay in 1685.

Evidence that stars in pairs were more than just optical alignments came in 1767 when English natural philosopher and clergyman John Michell became the first person to apply the mathematics of statistics to the study of the stars, demonstrating in a paper that many more stars occur in pairs or groups than a perfectly random distribution and chance alignment could account for. He focused his investigation on the Pleiades cluster, and calculated that the likelihood of finding such a close grouping of stars was about one in half a million. He concluded that the stars in these double or multiple star systems might be drawn to one another by gravitational pull, thus providing the first evidence for the existence of binary stars and star clusters.

William Herschel began observing double stars in 1779, hoping to find a near star paired with a distant star so he could measure the near star&#x27;s changing position as the Earth orbited the Sun (measure its parallax), allowing him to calculate the distance to the near star. He would soon publish catalogs of about 700 double stars. By 1803, he had observed changes in the relative positions in a number of double stars over the course of 25 years, and concluded that, instead of showing parallax changes, they seemed to be orbiting each other in binary systems. The first orbit of a binary star was computed in 1827, when Félix Savary computed the orbit of Xi Ursae Majoris.

Over the years, many more double stars have been catalogued and measured. As of June 2017, the Washington Double Star Catalog, a database of visual double stars compiled by the United States Naval Observatory, contains over 100,000 pairs of double stars, including optical doubles as well as binary stars. Orbits are known for only a few thousand of these double stars.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;binary&quot; was first used in this context by Sir William Herschel in 1802, when he wrote:

By the modern definition, the term &quot;binary star&quot; is generally restricted to pairs of stars which revolve around a common center of mass. Binary stars which can be resolved with a telescope or interferometric methods are known as &quot;visual binaries&quot;. For most of the known visual binary stars one whole revolution has not been observed yet; rather, they are observed to have travelled along a curved path or a partial arc.

The more general term &quot;double star&quot; is used for pairs of stars which are seen to be close together in the sky. This distinction is rarely made in languages other than English. Double stars may be binary systems or may be merely two stars that appear to be close together in the sky but have vastly different true distances from the Sun. The latter are termed &quot;optical doubles&quot; or &quot;optical pairs&quot;.

==Classifications==
===Methods of observation===
Binary stars are classified into four types according to the way in which they are observed: visually, by observation; spectroscopically, by periodic changes in spectral lines; photometrically, by changes in brightness caused by an eclipse; or astrometrically, by measuring a deviation in a star&#x27;s position caused by an unseen companion. Any binary star can belong to several of these classes; for example, several spectroscopic binaries are also eclipsing binaries.

====Visual binaries====

A &quot;visual binary&quot; star is a binary star for which the angular separation between the two components is great enough to permit them to be observed as a double star in a telescope, or even high-powered binoculars. The angular resolution of the telescope is an important factor in the detection of visual binaries, and as better angular resolutions are applied to binary star observations, an increasing number of visual binaries will be detected. The relative brightness of the two stars is also an important factor, as glare from a bright star may make it difficult to detect the presence of a fainter component.

The brighter star of a visual binary is the &quot;primary&quot; star, and the dimmer is considered the &quot;secondary.&quot; In some publications (especially older ones), a faint secondary is called the &quot;comes&quot; (plural &quot;comites&quot;; companion). If the stars are the same brightness, the discoverer designation for the primary is customarily accepted.

The position angle of the secondary with respect to the primary is measured, together with the angular distance between the two stars. The time of observation is also recorded. After a sufficient number of observations are recorded over a period of time, they are plotted in polar coordinates with the primary star at the origin, and the most probable ellipse is drawn through these points such that the Keplerian law of areas is satisfied. This ellipse is known as the &quot;apparent ellipse&quot;, and is the projection of the actual elliptical orbit of the secondary with respect to the primary on the plane of the sky. From this projected ellipse the complete elements of the orbit may be computed, where the semi-major axis can only be expressed in angular units unless the stellar parallax, and hence the distance, of the system is known.

====Spectroscopic binaries====
Sometimes, the only evidence of a binary star comes from the Doppler effect on its emitted light. In these cases, the binary consists of a pair of stars where the spectral lines in the light emitted from each star shifts first towards the blue, then towards the red, as each moves first towards us, and then away from us, during its motion about their common center of mass, with the period of their common orbit.

In these systems, the separation between the stars is usually very small, and the orbital velocity very high. Unless the plane of the orbit happens to be perpendicular to the line of sight, the orbital velocities have components in the line of sight, and the observed radial velocity of the system varies periodically. Since radial velocity can be measured with a spectrometer by observing the Doppler shift of the stars&#x27; spectral lines, the binaries detected in this manner are known as &quot;spectroscopic binaries&quot;. Most of these cannot be resolved as a visual binary, even with telescopes of the highest existing resolving power.

In some spectroscopic binaries, spectral lines from both stars are visible, and the lines are alternately double and single. Such a system is known as a double-lined spectroscopic binary (often denoted &quot;SB2&quot;). In other systems, the spectrum of only one of the stars is seen, and the lines in the spectrum shift periodically towards the blue, then towards red and back again. Such stars are known as single-lined spectroscopic binaries (&quot;SB1&quot;).

The orbit of a spectroscopic binary is determined by making a long series of observations of the radial velocity of one or both components of the system. The observations are plotted against time, and from the resulting curve a period is determined. If the orbit is circular, then the curve is a sine curve. If the orbit is elliptical, the shape of the curve depends on the eccentricity of the ellipse and the orientation of the major axis with reference to the line of sight.

It is impossible to determine individually the semi-major axis &quot;a&quot; and the inclination of the orbit plane &quot;i&quot;. However, the product of the semi-major axis and the sine of the inclination (i.e. ) may be determined directly in linear units (e.g. kilometres). If either &quot;a&quot; or &quot;i&quot; can be determined by other means, as in the case of eclipsing binaries, a complete solution for the orbit can be found.

Binary stars that are both visual and spectroscopic binaries are rare and are a valuable source of information when found. About 40 are known. Visual binary stars often have large true separations, with periods measured in decades to centuries; consequently, they usually have orbital speeds too small to be measured spectroscopically. Conversely, spectroscopic binary stars move fast in their orbits because they are close together, usually too close to be detected as visual binaries. Binaries that are found to be both visual and spectroscopic thus must be relatively close to Earth.

====Eclipsing binaries====

An &quot;eclipsing binary star&quot; is a binary star system in which the orbital plane of the two stars lies so nearly in the line of sight of the observer that the components undergo mutual eclipses. In the case where the binary is also a spectroscopic binary and the parallax of the system is known, the binary is quite valuable for stellar analysis. Algol, a triple star system in the constellation Perseus, contains the best-known example of an eclipsing binary.
Eclipsing binaries are variable stars, not because the light of the individual components vary but because of the eclipses. The light curve of an eclipsing binary is characterized by periods of practically constant light, with periodic drops in intensity when one star passes in front of the other. The brightness may drop twice during the orbit, once when the secondary passes in front of the primary and once when the primary passes in front of the secondary. The deeper of the two eclipses is called the primary regardless of which star is being occulted, and if a shallow second eclipse also occurs it is called the secondary eclipse. The size of the brightness drops depends on the relative brightness of the two stars, the proportion of the occulted star that is hidden, and the surface brightness (i.e. effective temperature) of the stars. Typically the occultation of the hotter star causes the primary eclipse.

An eclipsing binary&#x27;s period of orbit may be determined from a study of its light curve, and the relative sizes of the individual stars can be determined in terms of the radius of the orbit, by observing how quickly the brightness changes as the disc of the nearest star slides over the disc of the other star. If it is also a spectroscopic binary, the orbital elements can also be determined, and the mass of the stars can be determined relatively easily, which means that the relative densities of the stars can be determined in this case.

Since about 1995, measurement of extragalactic eclipsing binaries&#x27; fundamental parameters has become possible with 8-meter class telescopes. This makes it feasible to use them to directly measure the distances to external galaxies, a process that is more accurate than using standard candles. By 2006, they had been used to give direct distance estimates to the LMC, SMC, Andromeda Galaxy, and Triangulum Galaxy. Eclipsing binaries offer a direct method to gauge the distance to galaxies to an improved 5% level of accuracy.

====Non-eclipsing binaries that can be detected through photometry====
Nearby non-eclipsing binaries can also be photometrically detected by observing how the stars affect each other in three ways. The first is by observing extra light which the stars reflect from their companion. Second is by observing ellipsoidal light variations which are caused by deformation of the star&#x27;s shape by their companions. The third method is by looking at how relativistic beaming affects the apparent magnitude of the stars. Detecting binaries with these methods requires accurate photometry.

====Astrometric binaries====
Astronomers have discovered some stars that seemingly orbit around an empty space. &quot;Astrometric binaries&quot; are relatively nearby stars which can be seen to wobble around a point in space, with no visible companion. The same mathematics used for ordinary binaries can be applied to infer the mass of the missing companion. The companion could be very dim, so that it is currently undetectable or masked by the glare of its primary, or it could be an object that emits little or no electromagnetic radiation, for example a neutron star.

The visible star&#x27;s position is carefully measured and detected to vary, due to the gravitational influence from its counterpart. The position of the star is repeatedly measured relative to more distant stars, and then checked for periodic shifts in position. Typically this type of measurement can only be performed on nearby stars, such as those within 10 parsecs. Nearby stars often have a relatively high proper motion, so astrometric binaries will appear to follow a &quot;wobbly&quot; path across the sky.

If the companion is sufficiently massive to cause an observable shift in position of the star, then its presence can be deduced. From precise astrometric measurements of the movement of the visible star over a sufficiently long period of time, information about the mass of the companion and its orbital period can be determined. Even though the companion is not visible, the characteristics of the system can be determined from the observations using Kepler&#x27;s laws.

This method of detecting binaries is also used to locate extrasolar planets orbiting a star. However, the requirements to perform this measurement are very exacting, due to the great difference in the mass ratio, and the typically long period of the planet&#x27;s orbit. Detection of position shifts of a star is a very exacting science, and it is difficult to achieve the necessary precision. Space telescopes can avoid the blurring effect of Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, resulting in more precise resolution.

===Configuration of the system===

Another classification is based on the distance between the stars, relative to their sizes:

&quot;Detached binaries&quot; are binary stars where each component is within its Roche lobe, i.e. the area where the gravitational pull of the star itself is larger than that of the other component. While on the main sequence the stars have no major effect on each other, and essentially evolve separately. Most binaries belong to this class.

&quot;Semidetached binary stars&quot; are binary stars where one of the components fills the binary star&#x27;s Roche lobe and the other does not. In this interacting binary star, gas from the surface of the Roche-lobe-filling component (donor) is transferred to the other, accreting star. The mass transfer dominates the evolution of the system. In many cases, the inflowing gas forms an accretion disc around the accretor.

A &quot;contact binary&quot; is a type of binary star in which both components of the binary fill their Roche lobes. The uppermost part of the stellar atmospheres forms a &quot;common envelope&quot; that surrounds both stars. As the friction of the envelope brakes the orbital motion, the stars may eventually merge. W Ursae Majoris is an example.

===Cataclysmic variables and X-ray binaries===
When a binary system contains a compact object such as a white dwarf, neutron star or black hole, gas from the other (donor) star can accrete onto the compact object. This releases gravitational potential energy, causing the gas to become hotter and emit radiation. Cataclysmic variable stars, where the compact object is a white dwarf, are examples of such systems. In X-ray binaries, the compact object can be either a neutron star or a black hole. These binaries are classified as low-mass or high-mass according to the mass of the donor star. High-mass X-ray binaries contain a young, early-type, high-mass donor star which transfers mass by its stellar wind, while low-mass X-ray binaries are semidetached binaries in which gas from a late-type donor star or a white dwarf overflows the Roche lobe and falls towards the neutron star or black hole. Probably the best known example of an X-ray binary is the high-mass X-ray binary Cygnus X-1. In Cygnus X-1, the mass of the unseen companion is estimated to be about nine times that of the Sun, far exceeding the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit for the maximum theoretical mass of a neutron star. It is therefore believed to be a black hole; it was the first object for which this was widely believed.

==Orbital period==
Orbital periods can be less than an hour (for AM CVn stars), or a few days (components of Beta Lyrae), but also hundreds of thousands of years (Proxima Centauri around Alpha Centauri AB).

===Variations in period===
The Applegate mechanism explains long term orbital period variations seen in certain eclipsing binaries. As a main-sequence star goes through an activity cycle, the outer layers of the star are subject to a magnetic torque changing the distribution of angular momentum, resulting in a change in the star&#x27;s oblateness. The orbit of the stars in the binary pair is gravitationally coupled to their shape changes, so that the period shows modulations (typically on the order of ∆P/P ~ 10−5) on the same time scale as the activity cycles (typically on the order of decades).

Another phenomenon observed in some Algol binaries has been monotonic period increases. This is quite distinct from the far more common observations of alternating period increases and decreases explained by the Applegate mechanism. Monotonic period increases have been attributed to mass transfer, usually (but not always) from the less massive to the more massive star

==Designations==
===A and B===

The components of binary stars are denoted by the suffixes &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; appended to the system&#x27;s designation, &quot;A&quot; denoting the primary and &quot;B&quot; the secondary. The suffix &quot;AB&quot; may be used to denote the pair (for example, the binary star α Centauri AB consists of the stars α Centauri A and α Centauri B.) Additional letters, such as &quot;C&quot;, &quot;D&quot;, etc., may be used for systems with more than two stars. In cases where the binary star has a Bayer designation and is widely separated, it is possible that the members of the pair will be designated with superscripts; an example is Zeta Reticuli, whose components are ζ1 Reticuli and ζ2 Reticuli.

===Discoverer designations===
Double stars are also designated by an abbreviation giving the discoverer together with an index number. α Centauri, for example, was found to be double by Father Richaud in 1689, and so is designated &quot;RHD 1&quot;. These discoverer codes can be found in the Washington Double Star Catalog.

===Hot and cold===
The secondary star in a binary star system may be designated as the &quot;hot companion&quot; or &quot;cool companion&quot;, depending on its temperature relative to the primary star.

Examples:
* Antares (Alpha Scorpii) is a red supergiant star in a binary system with a hotter blue main-sequence star Antares B. Antares B can therefore be termed a hot companion of the cool supergiant.
* Symbiotic stars, such as R Aquarii, are binary star systems composed of a late-type giant star and a hotter companion object. Since the nature of the companion is not well-established in all cases, it may be termed a &quot;hot companion&quot;.
* The luminous blue variable Eta Carinae has been determined to be a binary star system. The secondary appears to have a higher temperature than the primary and has therefore been described as being the &quot;hot companion&quot; star. It may be a Wolf–Rayet star.
* NASA&#x27;s Kepler mission has discovered examples of eclipsing binary stars where the secondary is the hotter component. KOI-74b is a 12,000 K white dwarf companion of KOI-74 (), a 9,400 K early A-type main-sequence star. KOI-81b is a 13,000 K white dwarf companion of KOI-81 (), a 10,000 K late B-type main-sequence star.

==Evolution==
===Formation===
While it is not impossible that some binaries might be created through gravitational capture between two single stars, given the very low likelihood of such an event (three objects being actually required, as conservation of energy rules out a single gravitating body capturing another) and the high number of binaries currently in existence, this cannot be the primary formation process. The observation of binaries consisting of stars not yet on the main sequence supports the theory that binaries develop during star formation. Fragmentation of the molecular cloud during the formation of protostars is an acceptable explanation for the formation of a binary or multiple star system.

The outcome of the three-body problem, in which the three stars are of comparable mass, is that eventually one of the three stars will be ejected from the system and, assuming no significant further perturbations, the remaining two will form a stable binary system.

===Mass transfer and accretion===
As a main-sequence star increases in size during its evolution, it may at some point exceed its Roche lobe, meaning that some of its matter ventures into a region where the gravitational pull of its companion star is larger than its own. The result is that matter will transfer from one star to another through a process known as Roche lobe overflow (RLOF), either being absorbed by direct impact or through an accretion disc. The mathematical point through which this transfer happens is called the first Lagrangian point. It is not uncommon that the accretion disc is the brightest (and thus sometimes the only visible) element of a binary star.

If a star grows outside of its Roche lobe too fast for all abundant matter to be transferred to the other component, it is also possible that matter will leave the system through other Lagrange points or as stellar wind, thus being effectively lost to both components.
Since the evolution of a star is determined by its mass, the process influences the evolution of both companions, and creates stages that cannot be attained by single stars.

Studies of the eclipsing ternary Algol led to the &quot;Algol paradox&quot; in the theory of stellar evolution: although components of a binary star form at the same time, and massive stars evolve much faster than the less massive ones, it was observed that the more massive component Algol A is still in the main sequence, while the less massive Algol B is a subgiant at a later evolutionary stage. The paradox can be solved by mass transfer: when the more massive star became a subgiant, it filled its Roche lobe, and most of the mass was transferred to the other star, which is still in the main sequence. In some binaries similar to Algol, a gas flow can actually be seen.

===Runaways and novae===

It is also possible for widely separated binaries to lose gravitational contact with each other during their lifetime, as a result of external perturbations. The components will then move on to evolve as single stars. A close encounter between two binary systems can also result in the gravitational disruption of both systems, with some of the stars being ejected at high velocities, leading to runaway stars.

If a white dwarf has a close companion star that overflows its Roche lobe, the white dwarf will steadily accrete gases from the star&#x27;s outer atmosphere. These are compacted on the white dwarf&#x27;s surface by its intense gravity, compressed and heated to very high temperatures as additional material is drawn in. The white dwarf consists of degenerate matter and so is largely unresponsive to heat, while the accreted hydrogen is not. Hydrogen fusion can occur in a stable manner on the surface through the CNO cycle, causing the enormous amount of energy liberated by this process to blow the remaining gases away from the white dwarf&#x27;s surface. The result is an extremely bright outburst of light, known as a nova.

In extreme cases this event can cause the white dwarf to exceed the Chandrasekhar limit and trigger a supernova that destroys the entire star, another possible cause for runaways. An example of such an event is the supernova SN 1572, which was observed by Tycho Brahe. The Hubble Space Telescope recently took a picture of the remnants of this event.

==Astrophysics==
Binaries provide the best method for astronomers to determine the mass of a distant star. The gravitational pull between them causes them to orbit around their common center of mass. From the orbital pattern of a visual binary, or the time variation of the spectrum of a spectroscopic binary, the mass of its stars can be determined, for example with the binary mass function. In this way, the relation between a star&#x27;s appearance (temperature and radius) and its mass can be found, which allows for the determination of the mass of non-binaries.

Because a large proportion of stars exist in binary systems, binaries are particularly important to our understanding of the processes by which stars form. In particular, the period and masses of the binary tell us about the amount of angular momentum in the system. Because this is a conserved quantity in physics, binaries give us important clues about the conditions under which the stars were formed.

===Calculating the center of mass in binary stars===
In a simple binary case, the distance &quot;r&quot;1 from the center of the first star to the center of mass or barycenter is given by

formula_1

where
* &quot;a&quot; is the distance between the two stellar centers, and
* &quot;m&quot;1 and &quot;m&quot;2 are the masses of the two stars.

If &quot;a&quot; is taken to be the semimajor axis of the orbit of one body around the other, then &quot;r&quot;1 is the semimajor axis of the first body&#x27;s orbit around the center of mass or &quot;barycenter&quot;, and is the semimajor axis of the second body&#x27;s orbit. When the center of mass is located within the more massive body, that body appears to wobble rather than following a discernible orbit.

=== Center-of-mass animations ===

The red cross marks the center of mass of the system. These images do not represent any specific real system.

===Research findings===

It is estimated that approximately one third of the star systems in the Milky Way are binary or multiple, with the remaining two thirds being single stars. The overall multiplicity frequency of ordinary stars is a monotonically increasing function of stellar mass. That is, the likelihood of being in a binary or a multi-star system steadily increases as the masses of the components increase.

There is a direct correlation between the period of revolution of a binary star and the eccentricity of its orbit, with systems of short period having smaller eccentricity. Binary stars may be found with any conceivable separation, from pairs orbiting so closely that they are practically in contact with each other, to pairs so distantly separated that their connection is indicated only by their common proper motion through space. Among gravitationally bound binary star systems, there exists a so-called log normal distribution of periods, with the majority of these systems orbiting with a period of about 100 years. This is supporting evidence for the theory that binary systems are formed during star formation.

In pairs where the two stars are of equal brightness, they are also of the same spectral type.
In systems where the brightnesses are different, the fainter star is bluer if the brighter star is a giant star, and redder if the brighter star belongs to the main sequence.

The mass of a star can be directly determined only from its gravitational attraction. Apart from the Sun and stars which act as gravitational lenses, this can be done only in binary and multiple star systems, making the binary stars an important class of stars. In the case of a visual binary star, after the orbit and the stellar parallax of the system has been determined, the combined mass of the two stars may be obtained by a direct application of the Keplerian harmonic law.

Unfortunately, it is impossible to obtain the complete orbit of a spectroscopic binary unless it is also a visual or an eclipsing binary, so from these objects only a determination of the joint product of mass and the sine of the angle of inclination relative to the line of sight is possible. In the case of eclipsing binaries which are also spectroscopic binaries, it is possible to find a complete solution for the specifications (mass, density, size, luminosity, and approximate shape) of both members of the system.

====Planets====

While a number of binary star systems have been found to harbor extrasolar planets, such systems are comparatively rare compared to single star systems. Observations by the Kepler space telescope have shown that most single stars of the same type as the Sun have plenty of planets, but only one-third of binary stars do. According to theoretical simulations, even widely separated binary stars often disrupt the discs of rocky grains from which protoplanets form. On the other hand, other simulations suggest that the presence of a binary companion can actually improve the rate of planet formation within stable orbital zones by &quot;stirring up&quot; the protoplanetary disk, increasing the accretion rate of the protoplanets within.

Detecting planets in multiple star systems introduces additional technical difficulties, which may be why they are only rarely found. Examples include the white dwarf-pulsar binary PSR B1620-26, the subgiant-red dwarf binary Gamma Cephei, and the white dwarf-red dwarf binary NN Serpentis, among others.

A study of fourteen previously known planetary systems found three of these systems to be binary systems. All planets were found to be in S-type orbits around the primary star. In these three cases the secondary star was much dimmer than the primary and so was not previously detected. This discovery resulted in a recalculation of parameters for both the planet and the primary star.

Science fiction has often featured planets of binary or ternary stars as a setting, for example, George Lucas&#x27; Tatooine from &quot;Star Wars&quot;, and one notable story, &quot;Nightfall&quot;, even takes this to a six-star system. In reality, some orbital ranges are impossible for dynamical reasons (the planet would be expelled from its orbit relatively quickly, being either ejected from the system altogether or transferred to a more inner or outer orbital range), whilst other orbits present serious challenges for eventual biospheres because of likely extreme variations in surface temperature during different parts of the orbit. Planets that orbit just one star in a binary system are said to have &quot;S-type&quot; orbits, whereas those that orbit around both stars have &quot;P-type&quot; or &quot;circumbinary&quot; orbits. It is estimated that 50–60% of binary systems are capable of supporting habitable terrestrial planets within stable orbital ranges.

==Examples==
The large distance between the components, as well as their difference in color, make Albireo one of the easiest observable visual binaries. The brightest member, which is the third-brightest star in the constellation Cygnus, is actually a close binary itself. Also in the Cygnus constellation is Cygnus X-1, an X-ray source considered to be a black hole. It is a high-mass X-ray binary, with the optical counterpart being a variable star. Sirius is another binary and the brightest star in the night time sky, with a visual apparent magnitude of −1.46. It is located in the constellation Canis Major. In 1844 Friedrich Bessel deduced that Sirius was a binary. In 1862 Alvan Graham Clark discovered the companion (Sirius B; the visible star is Sirius A). In 1915 astronomers at the Mount Wilson Observatory determined that Sirius B was a white dwarf, the first to be discovered. In 2005, using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers determined Sirius B to be in diameter, with a mass that is 98% of the Sun.
An example of an eclipsing binary is Epsilon Aurigae in the constellation Auriga. The visible component belongs to the spectral class F0, the other (eclipsing) component is not visible. The last such eclipse occurred from 2009 to 2011, and it is hoped that the extensive observations that will likely be carried out may yield further insights into the nature of this system. Another eclipsing binary is Beta Lyrae, which is a semidetached binary star system in the constellation of Lyra.

Other interesting binaries include 61 Cygni (a binary in the constellation Cygnus, composed of two K class (orange) main-sequence stars, 61 Cygni A and 61 Cygni B, which is known for its large proper motion), Procyon (the brightest star in the constellation Canis Minor and the eighth-brightest star in the night time sky, which is a binary consisting of the main star with a faint white dwarf companion), SS Lacertae (an eclipsing binary which stopped eclipsing), V907 Sco (an eclipsing binary which stopped, restarted, then stopped again), BG Geminorum (an eclipsing binary which is thought to contain a black hole with a K0 star in orbit around it), and 2MASS J18082002−5104378 (a binary in the &quot;thin disk&quot; of the Milky Way, and containing one of the oldest known stars).

==Multiple-star examples==

Systems with more than two stars are termed multiple stars. Algol is the most noted ternary (long thought to be a binary), located in the constellation Perseus. Two components of the system eclipse each other, the variation in the intensity of Algol first being recorded in 1670 by Geminiano Montanari. The name Algol means &quot;demon star&quot; (from &quot;al-ghūl&quot;), which was probably given due to its peculiar behavior. Another visible ternary is Alpha Centauri, in the southern constellation of Centaurus, which contains the third-brightest star in the night sky, with an apparent visual magnitude of −0.01. This system also underscores the fact that no search for habitable planets is complete if binaries are discounted. Alpha Centauri A and B have an 11 AU distance at closest approach, and both should have stable habitable zones.

There are also examples of systems beyond ternaries: Castor is a sextuple star system, which is the second-brightest star in the constellation Gemini and one of the brightest stars in the nighttime sky. Astronomically, Castor was discovered to be a visual binary in 1719. Each of the components of Castor is itself a spectroscopic binary. Castor also has a faint and widely separated companion, which is also a spectroscopic binary. The Alcor–Mizar visual binary in Ursa Majoris also consists of six stars: four comprising Mizar and two comprising Alcor. QZ Carinae is a complex multiple star system made up of at least nine individual stars.

==See also==

* 104 Aquarii, possible binary
* 107 Aquarii, &quot;double star&quot;, about 240 light-years from Earth
* Beta Centauri
* Binary black hole
* Binary brown dwarfs
* Circumbinary planet
* Habitability of binary star systems
* HD 30453, a spectroscopic binary with a 3rd component
* Hills mechanism
* Heartbeat star, a type of binary star system
* Rotational Brownian motion (astronomy)
* Two-body problem in general relativity
==Notes and references==
==External links==

*IAU Commission G1: Binary and Multiple Star Systems
*List of the best visual binaries for amateurs, with orbital elements
*Pictures and news of binaries at Hubblesite.org
*Chandra X-ray Observatory
*Selected visual double stars and their relative position as a function of time 
*AAVSO Eclipsing Binaries section
*OGLE Atlas of Variable Star Light Curves - Eclipsing binaries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="2" end="13" title="Binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="17" end="35" title="Binary star" label="binary star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="41" end="47" title="Star system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="55" end="59" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="70" end="85" title="gravity" label="gravitationally"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="102" end="107" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="252" end="261" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="524" end="536" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="577" end="587" title="astrometry" label="astrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="714" end="721" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888" start="726" end="733" title="transit (astronomy)" label="transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q978297" start="1073" end="1086" title="binary system" label="binary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="1135" end="1144" title="stellar evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="1213" end="1219" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q332674" start="1225" end="1235" title="Cygnus X-1" label="Cygnus X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="1267" end="1277" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="1331" end="1347" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="1382" end="1386" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q582000" start="1392" end="1409" title="type Ia supernova" label="type Ia supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q13890" start="1427" end="1438" title="Double star" label="Double star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="1536" end="1545" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q66477109" start="1570" end="1575" title="Mizar" label="Mizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13102" start="1580" end="1585" title="Acrux" label="Acrux"/>
<link wikidata="Q10460" start="1601" end="1611" title="Big Dipper" label="Big Dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="1613" end="1623" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q196472" start="1655" end="1681" title="Giovanni Battista Riccioli" label="Giovanni Battista Riccioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q560872" start="1715" end="1733" title="Benedetto Castelli" label="Benedetto Castelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="1738" end="1745" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13102" start="1773" end="1778" title="Acrux" label="Acrux"/>
<link wikidata="Q10542" start="1787" end="1801" title="Crux" label="Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q373097" start="1988" end="2000" title="John Michell" label="John Michell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="2275" end="2283" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="2613" end="2629" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="2823" end="2831" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="3140" end="3145" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q485990" start="3239" end="3251" title="Félix Savary" label="Félix Savary"/>
<link wikidata="Q66531057" start="3274" end="3290" title="Xi Ursae Majoris" label="Xi Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q932275" start="3388" end="3418" title="Washington Double Star Catalog" label="Washington Double Star Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700" start="3470" end="3501" title="United States Naval Observatory" label="United States Naval Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="3744" end="3760" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424908" start="3959" end="3967" title="optical resolution" label="resolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="3988" end="4003" title="interferometry" label="interferometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13890" start="4255" end="4266" title="double star" label="double star"/>
<link wikidata="Q978297" start="4433" end="4446" title="Binary system (astronomy)" label="binary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="4823" end="4840" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopically"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="4865" end="4878" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="4881" end="4896" title="photometry (astronomy)" label="photometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="4948" end="4963" title="Astrometry" label="astrometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088182" start="5210" end="5223" title="visual binary" label="visual binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="5380" end="5389" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="5412" end="5422" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="5428" end="5446" title="angular resolution" label="angular resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071047" start="6035" end="6040" title="comes" label="comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105737" start="6199" end="6213" title="position angle" label="position angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="6470" end="6486" title="Polar coordinate system" label="polar coordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="6547" end="6554" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="6599" end="6621" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="Keplerian law of areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="6908" end="6923" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="6974" end="6990" title="Parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="7133" end="7147" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="7235" end="7248" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="7431" end="7445" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="7641" end="7654" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="7755" end="7770" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="7851" end="7863" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="7881" end="7894" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="7914" end="7927" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="8079" end="8088" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="8114" end="8129" title="Angular resolution" label="resolving power"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="8863" end="8871" title="circle" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="8893" end="8897" title="Trigonometric function" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8921" end="8931" title="ellipse" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="8971" end="8983" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="9122" end="9137" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="10322" end="10329" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="10400" end="10408" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q13080" start="10484" end="10489" title="Algol" label="Algol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511" start="10519" end="10540" title="Perseus (constellation)" label="constellation Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="10726" end="10737" title="light curve" label="light curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="11383" end="11401" title="surface brightness" label="surface brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="11408" end="11429" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="11600" end="11611" title="light curve" label="light curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="11877" end="11893" title="orbital elements" label="orbital elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="12347" end="12362" title="standard candle" label="standard candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49957" start="12434" end="12437" title="Large Magellanic Cloud" label="LMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49984" start="12439" end="12442" title="Small Magellanic Cloud" label="SMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="12444" end="12460" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="12466" end="12483" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="Triangulum Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="12711" end="12726" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705752" start="13048" end="13068" title="relativistic beaming" label="relativistic beaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="13170" end="13180" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="13512" end="13516" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="13701" end="13726" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="13742" end="13754" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="14119" end="14125" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="14170" end="14183" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="14416" end="14427" title="Astrometry" label="astrometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="14726" end="14732" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="14740" end="14743" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14789" end="14803" title="Methods of detecting extrasolar planets#Astrometry" label="used to locate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="14804" end="14821" title="extrasolar planet" label="extrasolar planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="15191" end="15214" title="atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q848485" start="15465" end="15475" title="Roche lobe" label="Roche lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="15501" end="15519" title="Gravitation" label="gravitational pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="15596" end="15609" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271256" start="15883" end="15906" title="interacting binary star" label="interacting binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q909534" start="16022" end="16035" title="mass transfer" label="mass transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="16117" end="16131" title="accretion disc" label="accretion disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716249" start="16162" end="16176" title="contact binary" label="contact binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q848485" start="16258" end="16268" title="Roche lobe" label="Roche lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311" start="16297" end="16315" title="stellar atmosphere" label="stellar atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="16423" end="16437" title="orbital motion" label="orbital motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748327" start="16464" end="16469" title="Stellar collision" label="merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659882" start="16471" end="16486" title="W Ursae Majoris" label="W Ursae Majoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q368442" start="16582" end="16596" title="compact star" label="compact object"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="16607" end="16618" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="16620" end="16632" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047034" start="16636" end="16646" title="stellar-mass black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="16684" end="16691" title="accretion (astronomy)" label="accrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297853" start="16731" end="16761" title="gravitational potential energy" label="gravitational potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059564" start="16816" end="16841" title="Cataclysmic variable star" label="Cataclysmic variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="16920" end="16934" title="X-ray binaries" label="X-ray binaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="16971" end="16983" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047034" start="16989" end="16999" title="stellar-mass black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="17034" end="17042" title="low-mass X-ray binary" label="low-mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="17046" end="17055" title="high-mass X-ray binary" label="high-mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="17139" end="17149" title="Stellar classification" label="early-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="17200" end="17212" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="17290" end="17299" title="Stellar classification" label="late-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="17461" end="17483" title="high-mass X-ray binary" label="high-mass X-ray binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332674" start="17484" end="17494" title="Cygnus X-1" label="Cygnus X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139232" start="17615" end="17647" title="Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit" label="Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="17825" end="17839" title="Orbital period" label="Orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q294556" start="17871" end="17882" title="AM CVn star" label="AM CVn star"/>
<link wikidata="Q13352" start="17915" end="17925" title="Beta Lyrae" label="Beta Lyrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14266" start="17969" end="17985" title="Proxima Centauri" label="Proxima Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="17993" end="18007" title="Alpha Centauri" label="Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="18151" end="18169" title="main-sequence star" label="main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616" start="19530" end="19547" title="Bayer designation" label="Bayer designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q196847" start="19669" end="19682" title="Zeta Reticuli" label="Zeta Reticuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q932275" start="20028" end="20058" title="Washington Double Star Catalog" label="Washington Double Star Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166" start="20277" end="20284" title="Antares" label="Antares"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393176" start="20470" end="20484" title="Symbiotic star" label="Symbiotic star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367419" start="20495" end="20504" title="R Aquarii" label="R Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q742741" start="20720" end="20742" title="luminous blue variable" label="luminous blue variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185" start="20743" end="20754" title="Eta Carinae" label="Eta Carinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251" start="20961" end="20976" title="Wolf–Rayet star" label="Wolf–Rayet star"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="20980" end="20984" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272" start="20992" end="21006" title="Kepler mission" label="Kepler mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062558" start="21102" end="21109" title="KOI-74b" label="KOI-74b"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="21124" end="21135" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q471805" start="21176" end="21201" title="A-type main-sequence star" label="A-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098516" start="21203" end="21210" title="KOI-81b" label="KOI-81b"/>
<link wikidata="Q767432" start="21277" end="21302" title="B-type main-sequence star" label="B-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937676" start="21406" end="21427" title="gravitational capture" label="gravitational capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="21544" end="21566" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="21787" end="21800" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="21850" end="21864" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="21887" end="21902" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="21927" end="21936" title="protostar" label="protostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q607699" start="22042" end="22060" title="three-body problem" label="three-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="22329" end="22347" title="Main sequence" label="main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="22377" end="22386" title="stellar evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q848485" start="22420" end="22430" title="Roche lobe" label="Roche lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="22497" end="22515" title="Gravitation" label="gravitational pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="22735" end="22749" title="accretion disc" label="accretion disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="22830" end="22846" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="23180" end="23192" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q13080" start="23450" end="23455" title="Algol" label="Algol"/>
<link wikidata="Q596993" start="23473" end="23486" title="Algol paradox" label="Algol paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="23510" end="23527" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="23726" end="23739" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="23777" end="23785" title="subgiant" label="subgiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q909534" start="23846" end="23859" title="mass transfer" label="mass transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q848485" start="23921" end="23931" title="Roche lobe" label="Roche lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="24517" end="24529" title="runaway star" label="runaway star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="24538" end="24549" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q848485" start="24596" end="24606" title="Roche lobe" label="Roche lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="24638" end="24645" title="accretion (astrophysics)" label="accrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="24881" end="24898" title="degenerate matter" label="degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="24975" end="24990" title="Nuclear fusion" label="Hydrogen fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="25047" end="25056" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="25256" end="25260" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q51366" start="25331" end="25350" title="Chandrasekhar limit" label="Chandrasekhar limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="25365" end="25374" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q554280" start="25488" end="25495" title="SN 1572" label="SN 1572"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="25519" end="25530" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="25536" end="25558" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305264" start="25987" end="26007" title="binary mass function" label="binary mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="26420" end="26436" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205805" start="26470" end="26488" title="Conservation law (physics)" label="conserved quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="26756" end="26766" title="barycenter" label="barycenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="26910" end="26914" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="26972" end="26986" title="semimajor axis" label="semimajor axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="27575" end="27586" title="star system" label="star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="27595" end="27604" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="27717" end="27731" title="main sequence star" label="ordinary stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="27737" end="27761" title="monotonically increasing" label="monotonically increasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079618" start="27774" end="27786" title="stellar mass" label="stellar mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27960" end="27980" title="orbital period#Two bodies orbiting each other" label="period of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="28006" end="28018" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716249" start="28195" end="28217" title="contact binary" label="practically in contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="28323" end="28336" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q826116" start="28426" end="28449" title="log-normal distribution" label="log normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="28621" end="28635" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="28680" end="28690" title="absolute magnitude" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="28718" end="28731" title="Stellar classification" label="spectral type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="28834" end="28844" title="giant star" label="giant star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="28893" end="28906" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="29037" end="29055" title="gravitational lens" label="gravitational lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="29232" end="29248" title="Parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="29366" end="29388" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="Keplerian harmonic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="29609" end="29613" title="trigonometric function" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="29831" end="29838" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="29846" end="29856" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="29994" end="30012" title="extrasolar planets" label="extrasolar planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272" start="30103" end="30125" title="Kepler space telescope" label="Kepler space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="30184" end="30187" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q849009" start="30375" end="30387" title="protoplanets" label="protoplanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="30823" end="30834" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="30835" end="30841" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q615753" start="30849" end="30861" title="PSR B1620-26" label="PSR B1620-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="30867" end="30875" title="subgiant" label="subgiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="30876" end="30885" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13265" start="30893" end="30905" title="Gamma Cephei" label="Gamma Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="30915" end="30926" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="30927" end="30936" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091284" start="30944" end="30956" title="NN Serpentis" label="NN Serpentis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="31359" end="31374" title="Science fiction" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="31394" end="31400" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q723764" start="31475" end="31483" title="Tatooine" label="Tatooine"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="31495" end="31504" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="31541" end="31550" title="Nightfall (Asimov short story)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="31894" end="31903" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q205901" start="32174" end="32186" title="Circumbinary planet" label="circumbinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q67622059" start="32433" end="32440" title="Albireo" label="Albireo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="32551" end="32564" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8921" start="32565" end="32571" title="Cygnus (constellation)" label="Cygnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332674" start="32644" end="32654" title="Cygnus X-1" label="Cygnus X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="32659" end="32664" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="32691" end="32701" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="32711" end="32733" title="high-mass X-ray binary" label="high-mass X-ray binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="32772" end="32785" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="32787" end="32793" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="32872" end="32890" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q10538" start="32936" end="32947" title="Canis Major" label="Canis Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="32957" end="32973" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Friedrich Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q247076" start="33016" end="33034" title="Alvan Graham Clark" label="Alvan Graham Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="33129" end="33153" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="33185" end="33196" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="33245" end="33267" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222" start="33393" end="33408" title="Epsilon Aurigae" label="Epsilon Aurigae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10476" start="33430" end="33436" title="Auriga (constellation)" label="Auriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="33475" end="33489" title="stellar classification" label="spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q13352" start="33759" end="33769" title="Beta Lyrae" label="Beta Lyrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10484" start="33838" end="33842" title="Lyra" label="Lyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q249302" start="33880" end="33888" title="61 Cygni" label="61 Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8921" start="33920" end="33926" title="Cygnus (constellation)" label="Cygnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="33944" end="33960" title="Stellar classification" label="K class (orange)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="33961" end="33974" title="main sequence" label="main-sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="34038" end="34051" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13034" start="34054" end="34061" title="Procyon" label="Procyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9305" start="34103" end="34114" title="Canis Minor" label="Canis Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="34227" end="34238" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290447" start="34387" end="34399" title="BG Geminorum" label="BG Geminorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q58315594" start="34502" end="34525" title="2MASS J18082002−5104378" label="2MASS J18082002−5104378"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34549" end="34558" title="Milky Way#Age and cosmological history" label="thin disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="34572" end="34581" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="34703" end="34716" title="multiple star" label="multiple star"/>
<link wikidata="Q13080" start="34719" end="34724" title="Algol" label="Algol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511" start="34811" end="34818" title="Perseus (constellation)" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311823" start="34941" end="34960" title="Geminiano Montanari" label="Geminiano Montanari"/>
<link wikidata="Q208446" start="35018" end="35025" title="ghoul" label="al-ghūl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="35116" end="35130" title="Alpha Centauri" label="Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8844" start="35165" end="35174" title="Centaurus" label="Centaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184221" start="35195" end="35215" title="list of brightest stars" label="third-brightest star"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="35242" end="35267" title="Apparent magnitude" label="apparent visual magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13029" start="35559" end="35565" title="Castor (star)" label="Castor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8923" start="35649" end="35655" title="Gemini (constellation)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146387" start="35943" end="35954" title="Alcor–Mizar" label="Alcor–Mizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781933" start="36061" end="36071" title="QZ Carinae" label="QZ Carinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="36085" end="36105" title="Star system" label="multiple star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232839" start="36166" end="36177" title="104 Aquarii" label="104 Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q957951" start="36197" end="36208" title="107 Aquarii" label="107 Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13175" start="36270" end="36283" title="Beta Centauri" label="Beta Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913879" start="36286" end="36303" title="Binary black hole" label="Binary black hole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36306" end="36325" title="Brown dwarf#Binary brown dwarfs" label="Binary brown dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205901" start="36328" end="36347" title="Circumbinary planet" label="Circumbinary planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656470" start="36350" end="36385" title="Habitability of binary star systems" label="Habitability of binary star systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097038" start="36388" end="36396" title="HD 30453" label="HD 30453"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766581" start="36444" end="36459" title="Hills mechanism" label="Hills mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15814548" start="36462" end="36476" title="Heartbeat star" label="Heartbeat star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370318" start="36509" end="36547" title="Rotational Brownian motion (astronomy)" label="Rotational Brownian motion (astronomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006428" start="36550" end="36588" title="Two-body problem in general relativity" label="Two-body problem in general relativity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52716" wikidata="Q1357867" url="?curid=52716" title="Microsoft SharePoint Workspace">
<text>Microsoft SharePoint Workspace (formerly Microsoft Office Groove) is a discontinued desktop application designed for document collaboration in teams with members who are regularly off-line or who do not share the same network security clearance. It is no longer included with Microsoft Office 2013. It has been replaced by a web-based service called OneDrive for Business.

Groove&#x27;s uses have included coordination between emergency relief agencies, where different organizations do not share a common security infrastructure and where offline access is important, and amongst teams of knowledge workers, such as consultants who need to work securely on client sites.
It is also used as a staging system for documents in development, where content can be developed then transferred to a portal when complete.

Groove was initially developed by Lotus Notes creator Ray Ozzie, and developed by Groove Networks of Beverly, Massachusetts, until Microsoft&#x27;s acquisition of Groove Networks in March 2005.

==Collaboration tools==
Groove&#x27;s basic set of services (including always-on security, persistent chat, store-and-forward messaging delivery, firewall/NAT transparency, &quot;ad-hoc&quot; group formation, and change notification) may be customized with tools.

&quot;Tools&quot; are mini-applications that rely on Groove&#x27;s underlying functionality to disseminate and synchronize their contents with other members&#x27; copies of the workspace. Groove provides various tools that can be added to (and removed from) a workspace to customize the functionality of each space (for example a calendar, discussion, file sharing, an outliner, pictures, notepad, sketchpad, web browser, etc.).
Tools that members use in a workspace often drive the nature of the person-to-person collaboration that ensues. In Groove 2007, the SharePoint Files tools can be used to take SharePoint 2007 document libraries offline.

Groove 2007 includes a presence subsystem, which keeps track of which users in the contact store are online, and presents the information in the launchbar. If Groove server is used, a user is considered online when they log on to the server. In absence of a server, the &quot;Device Presence Protocol&quot; (which comes in different variants for LANs and WANs) is used. Groove also allows sending instant messages to peers. All session and user information is stored by the Groove client at client side.

==Versions==
Groove Virtual Office 3.1 was the last version before Microsoft&#x27;s acquisition of Groove Networks. The following versions have been released since:
* Groove 2007 (Included in Office 2007 Ultimate and Enterprise editions and also available as a separate product), released January 27, 2007.
* SharePoint Workspace 2010, released July 15, 2010.

Microsoft claims the name change is a natural progression, since Groove is to SharePoint what Outlook is to Exchange. Microsoft asserts that features have been added to make it easier to deploy and manage, and claims that SharePoint Workspace will make it easier to access SharePoint content (or content from any server that implements the publicly documented protocols).

==Server application==
Microsoft Groove Server is a tool for centrally managing all deployments of Microsoft SharePoint Workspace in an enterprise. It enables using Active Directory for Groove user accounts, and create Groove Domains, with individual policy settings.

==See also==
* Comparison of office suites
* Collaborative software

==References==
==Further reading ==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1357867" start="0" end="30" title="Microsoft SharePoint Workspace" label="Microsoft SharePoint Workspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357867" start="41" end="64" title="Microsoft SharePoint Workspace" label="Microsoft Office Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287636" start="117" end="139" title="document collaboration" label="document collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928179" start="180" end="188" title="off-line" label="off-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q724878" start="276" end="297" title="Microsoft Office 2013" label="Microsoft Office 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q864889" start="350" end="371" title="OneDrive for Business" label="OneDrive for Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="428" end="444" title="emergency relief" label="emergency relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914017" start="591" end="607" title="knowledge worker" label="knowledge worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q60198" start="849" end="860" title="Lotus Notes" label="Lotus Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q92637" start="869" end="878" title="Ray Ozzie" label="Ray Ozzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547410" start="897" end="912" title="Groove Networks" label="Groove Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q54138" start="916" end="938" title="Beverly, Massachusetts" label="Beverly, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="1091" end="1099" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="1112" end="1116" title="online chat" label="chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q603357" start="1118" end="1135" title="store-and-forward" label="store-and-forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="1156" end="1164" title="firewall (networking)" label="firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="1165" end="1168" title="Network Address Translation" label="NAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="1605" end="1613" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="1627" end="1639" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531370" start="1644" end="1652" title="outliner" label="outliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="1684" end="1695" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q18833" start="1879" end="1894" title="SharePoint 2007" label="SharePoint 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="2270" end="2273" title="LAN" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="2279" end="2282" title="Wide area network" label="WAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210606" start="2855" end="2861" title="Groove Coaster" label="Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="3328" end="3344" title="Active Directory" label="Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14273961" start="3447" end="3474" title="Comparison of office suites" label="Comparison of office suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="3477" end="3499" title="Collaborative software" label="Collaborative software"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52717" wikidata="Q243240" url="?curid=52717" title="Louis Sullivan">
<text>Louis Henry Sullivan (September 3, 1856 – April 14, 1924) was an American architect, and has been called a &quot;father of skyscrapers&quot; and &quot;father of modernism&quot;. He was an influential architect of the Chicago School, a mentor to Frank Lloyd Wright, and an inspiration to the Chicago group of architects who have come to be known as the Prairie School. Along with Wright and Henry Hobson Richardson, Sullivan is one of &quot;the recognized trinity of American architecture.&quot; The phrase &quot;form follows function&quot; is attributed to him; it encapsulated earlier theories of architecture and he applied them to the modern age of the skyscraper. In 1944, Sullivan was the second architect to posthumously receive the AIA Gold Medal.

==Early life and career==
Sullivan was born to a Swiss-born mother, Andrienne List (who had emigrated to Boston from Geneva with her parents and two siblings, Jenny, b. 1836, and Jules, b. 1841) and an Irish-born father, Patrick Sullivan. Both had immigrated to the United States in the late 1840s. He learned that he could both graduate from high school a year early and bypass the first two years at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology by passing a series of examinations. Entering MIT at the age of sixteen, Sullivan studied architecture there briefly. After one year of study, he moved to Philadelphia and took a job with architect Frank Furness.

The Depression of 1873 dried up much of Furness&#x27;s work, and he was forced to let Sullivan go. Sullivan moved to Chicago in 1873 to take part in the building boom following the Great Chicago Fire of 1871. He worked for William LeBaron Jenney, the architect often credited with erecting the first steel frame building. After less than a year with Jenney, Sullivan moved to Paris and studied at the École des Beaux-Arts for a year. He returned to Chicago and began work for the firm of Joseph S. Johnston &amp; John Edelman as a draftsman. Johnston &amp; Edleman were commissioned for the design of the Moody Tabernacle, and tasked Sullivan with the design of the interior decorative &quot;fresco secco&quot; stencils (stencil technique applied on dry plaster). In 1879 Dankmar Adler hired Sullivan. A year later, Sullivan became a partner in Adler&#x27;s firm. The time at Adler &amp; Sullivan marked the beginning of Sullivan&#x27;s most productive years.

Adler and Sullivan initially achieved fame as theater architects. While most of their theaters were in Chicago, their fame won commissions as far west as Pueblo, Colorado, and Seattle, Washington (unbuilt). The culminating project of this phase of the firm&#x27;s history was the 1889 Auditorium Building (1886–90, opened in stages) in Chicago, an extraordinary mixed-use building that included not only a 4,200-seat theater, but also a hotel and an office building with a 17-story tower and commercial storefronts at the ground level of the building, fronting Congress and Wabash Avenues. After 1889 the firm became known for their office buildings, particularly the 1891 Wainwright Building in St. Louis and the Schiller (later Garrick) Building and theater (1890) in Chicago. Other buildings often noted include the Chicago Stock Exchange Building (1894), the Guaranty Building (also known as the Prudential Building) of 1895–96 in Buffalo, New York, and the 1899–1904 Carson Pirie Scott Department Store by Sullivan on State Street in Chicago.

==Sullivan and the steel high-rise==

Prior to the late nineteenth century, the weight of a multi-story building had to be supported principally by the strength of its walls. The taller the building, the more strain this placed on the lower sections of the building; since there were clear engineering limits to the weight such &quot;load-bearing&quot; walls could sustain, tall designs meant massively thick walls on the ground floors, and definite limits on the building&#x27;s height.

The development of cheap, versatile steel in the second half of the nineteenth century changed those rules. America was in the midst of rapid social and economic growth that made for great opportunities in architectural design. A much more urbanized society was forming and the society called out for new, larger buildings. The mass production of steel was the main driving force behind the ability to build skyscrapers during the mid-1880s. By assembling a framework of steel girders, architects and builders could create tall, slender buildings with a strong and relatively lightweight steel skeleton. The rest of the building elements—walls, floors, ceilings, and windows—were suspended from the skeleton, which carried the weight. This new way of constructing buildings, so-called &quot;column-frame&quot; construction, pushed them up rather than out. The steel weight-bearing frame allowed not just taller buildings, but permitted much larger windows, which meant more daylight reaching interior spaces. Interior walls became thinner, which created more usable (and rentable) floor space.

Chicago&#x27;s Monadnock Building (not designed by Sullivan) straddles this remarkable moment of transition: the northern half of the building, finished in 1891, is of load-bearing construction, while the southern half, finished only two years later, is of column-frame construction. While experiments in this new technology were taking place in many cities, Chicago was the crucial laboratory. Industrial capital and civic pride drove a surge of new construction throughout the city&#x27;s downtown in the wake of the 1871 fire.

The technical limits of weight-bearing masonry had imposed formal as well as structural constraints; suddenly, those constraints were gone. None of the historical precedents needed to be applied and this new freedom resulted in a technical and stylistic crisis of sorts. Sullivan addressed it by embracing the changes that came with the steel frame, creating a grammar of form for the high rise (base, shaft, and cornice), simplifying the appearance of the building by breaking away from historical styles, using his own intricate floral designs, in vertical bands, to draw the eye upward and to emphasize the vertical form of the building, and relating the shape of the building to its specific purpose. All this was revolutionary, appealingly honest, and commercially successful.

In 1896, Louis Sullivan wrote:

It is the pervading law of all things organic and inorganic, of all things physical and metaphysical, of all things human, and all things super-human, of all true manifestations of the head, of the heart, of the soul, that the life is recognizable in its expression, that form ever follows function. &quot;This is the law.&quot; (italics in original)

&quot;Form follows function&quot; would become one of the prevailing tenets of modern architects.

Sullivan attributed the concept to Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, the Roman architect, engineer, and author, who first asserted in his book, &quot;De architectura (On architecture)&quot;, that a structure must exhibit the three qualities of &quot;firmitas, utilitas, venustas&quot; – that is, it must be &quot;solid, useful, beautiful.&quot; This credo, which placed the demands of practical use equal to aesthetics, later would be taken by influential designers to imply that decorative elements, which architects call &quot;ornament&quot;, were superfluous in modern buildings, but Sullivan neither thought nor designed along such dogmatic lines during the peak of his career and this credo never put one concept above another. While his buildings could be spare and crisp in their principal masses, he often punctuated their plain surfaces with eruptions of lush Art Nouveau or Celtic Revival decorations, usually cast in iron or terra cotta, and ranging from organic forms, such as vines and ivy, to more geometric designs and interlace, inspired by his Irish design heritage. Terra cotta is lighter and easier to work with than stone masonry. Sullivan used it in his architecture because it had a malleability that was appropriate for his ornament. Probably the most famous example of ornament used by Sullivan is the writhing green ironwork that covers the entrance canopies of the Carson Pirie Scott store on south State Street.

Such ornaments, often executed by the talented younger draftsmen in Sullivan&#x27;s employ, eventually would become Sullivan&#x27;s trademark; to students of architecture, they are instantly recognizable as his signature.

Another signature element of Sullivan&#x27;s work is the massive, semi-circular arch. Sullivan employed such arches throughout his career—in shaping entrances, in framing windows, or as interior design.

All of these elements are found in Sullivan&#x27;s widely admired Guaranty Building, which he designed while partnered with Adler. Completed in 1895, this office building in Buffalo, New York is in the Palazzo style, visibly divided into three &quot;zones&quot; of design: a plain, wide-windowed base for the ground-level shops; the main office block, with vertical ribbons of masonry rising unimpeded across nine upper floors to emphasize the building&#x27;s height; and an ornamented cornice perforated by round windows at the roof level, where the building&#x27;s mechanical units (such as the elevator motors) were housed. The cornice is covered by Sullivan&#x27;s trademark Art Nouveau vines and each ground-floor entrance is topped by a semi-circular arch.

Because Sullivan&#x27;s remarkable accomplishments in design and construction occurred at such a critical time in architectural history, he often has been described as the &quot;father&quot; of the American skyscraper. But many architects had been building skyscrapers before or as contemporaries of Sullivan; they were designed as an expression of new technology. Chicago was replete with extraordinary designers and builders in the late years of the nineteenth century, including Sullivan&#x27;s partner, Dankmar Adler, as well as Daniel Burnham and John Wellborn Root. Root was one of the builders of the Monadnock Building (see above). That and another Root design, the Masonic Temple Tower (both in Chicago), are cited by many as the originators of skyscraper aesthetics of bearing wall and column-frame construction, respectively.

==Later career and decline==
In 1890, Sullivan was one of the ten U.S. architects, five from the east and five from the west, chosen to build a major structure for the &quot;White City&quot;, the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, held in Chicago in 1893. Sullivan&#x27;s massive Transportation Building and huge arched &quot;Golden Door&quot; stood out as the only building not of the current Beaux-Arts style, and with the only multicolored facade in the entire White City. Sullivan and fair director Daniel Burnham were vocal about their displeasure with each other. Sullivan later claimed (1922) that the fair set the course of American architecture back &quot;for half a century from its date, if not longer.&quot; His was the only building to receive extensive recognition outside America, receiving three medals from the French-based &quot;Union Centrale des Arts Decoratifs&quot; the following year.

Like all American architects, Adler and Sullivan suffered a precipitous decline in their practice with the onset of the Panic of 1893. According to Charles Bebb, who was working in the office at that time, Adler borrowed money to try to keep employees on the payroll. By 1894, however, in the face of continuing financial distress with no relief in sight, Adler and Sullivan dissolved their partnership. The Guaranty Building was considered the last major project of the firm.

By both temperament and connections, Adler had been the one who brought in new business to the partnership, and following the rupture Sullivan received few large commissions after the Carson Pirie Scott Department Store. He went into a twenty-year-long financial and emotional decline, beset by a shortage of commissions, chronic financial problems, and alcoholism. He obtained a few commissions for small-town Midwestern banks (see below), wrote books, and in 1922 appeared as a critic of Raymond Hood&#x27;s winning entry for the Tribune Tower competition.

In 1922, Sullivan was paid $100 a month to write an autobiography in installments to be published in the journal for the American Institute of Architects. Sullivan worked on the series with Journal editor Charles Harris Whitaker, who advised he &quot;plot out the material by periods.&quot; &quot;The Autobiography of an Idea&quot; began its publication in the June 1922 Journal for the American Institute of Architects and upon its conclusion was published as a book.

He died in a Chicago hotel room on April 14, 1924. He left a wife, Mary Azona Hattabaugh, from whom he was separated. A modest headstone marks his final resting spot in Graceland Cemetery in Chicago&#x27;s Uptown and Lake View neighborhood. Later, a monument was erected in Sullivan&#x27;s honor, a few feet from his headstone.

==Legacy==
Sullivan&#x27;s legacy is contradictory. Some consider him the first modernist. His forward-looking designs clearly anticipate some issues and solutions of Modernism; however, his embrace of ornament makes his contribution distinct from the Modern Movement that coalesced in the 1920s and became known as the &quot;International Style&quot;. Sullivan&#x27;s built work expresses the appeal of his incredible designs: the vertical bands on the Wainwright Building, the burst of welcoming Art Nouveau ironwork on the corner entrance of the Carson Pirie Scott store, the (lost) terra cotta griffins and porthole windows on the Union Trust building, and the white angels of the Bayard Building, Sullivan&#x27;s only work in New York City. Except for some designs by his longtime draftsman George Grant Elmslie, and the occasional tribute to Sullivan such as Schmidt, Garden &amp; Martin&#x27;s First National Bank in Pueblo, Colorado (built across the street from Adler and Sullivan&#x27;s Pueblo Opera House), his style is unique. A visit to the preserved Chicago Stock Exchange trading floor, now at The Art Institute of Chicago, is proof of the immediate and visceral power of the ornament that he used so selectively.

After his death Sullivan was referred to as a bold architect: &quot;Boldly he challenged the whole theory of copying and imitating, and the catchword of &quot;precedent&quot;, declaring that architecture was naturally a living and creative art.&quot;

Original drawings and other archival materials from Sullivan are held by the Ryerson &amp; Burnham Libraries in the Art Institute of Chicago and by the drawings and archives department in the Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library at Columbia University. Fragments of Sullivan buildings also are held in many fine art and design museums around the world.

==Preservation==
During the postwar era of urban renewal, Sullivan&#x27;s works fell into disfavor, and many were demolished. In the 1970s, growing public concern for these buildings finally resulted in many being saved. The most vocal voice was Richard Nickel, who organized protests against the demolition of architecturally significant buildings. Nickel and others sometimes rescued decorative elements from condemned buildings, sneaking in during demolition. Nickel died inside Sullivan&#x27;s Stock Exchange building while trying to retrieve some elements, when a floor above him collapsed. Nickel had compiled extensive research on Adler and Sullivan and their many architectural commissions, which he intended to publish in book form.

After Nickel&#x27;s death, in 1972, the Richard Nickel Committee was formed, to arrange for completion of his book, which was published in 2010. The book features all 256 commissions of Adler and Sullivan. The extensive archive of photographs and research that underpinned the book was donated to the Ryerson and Burnham Libraries at The Art Institute of Chicago. More than 1,300 photographs may be viewed on their website and more than 15,000 photographs are part of the collection at The Art Institute of Chicago. As finally published, the book, &quot;The Complete Architecture of Adler &amp; Sullivan&quot;, was authored by Richard Nickel, Aaron Siskind, John Vinci, and Ward Miller.

Another champion of Sullivan&#x27;s legacy was the architect Crombie Taylor (1907–1991), of Crombie Taylor Associates. After working in Chicago, where he had headed the famous &quot;Institute of Design&quot;, later known as the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), in the 1950s and early 1960s, he had moved to Southern California. He led the effort to save the Van Allen Building in Clinton, Iowa from demolition. Taylor, acting as an aesthetic consultant, had worked on the renovation of the Auditorium Building (now Roosevelt University) in Chicago.

When he read an article about the planned demolition in Clinton, he uprooted his family from their home in southern California and moved them to Iowa. With the vision of a destination neighborhood comparable to Oak Park, Illinois, he set about creating a nonprofit to save the building, and was successful in doing so. Another advocate both of Sullivan buildings and of Wright structures was Jack Randall, who led an effort to save the Wainwright Building in St. Louis, Missouri at a very critical time. He relocated his family to Buffalo, New York to save Sullivan&#x27;s Guaranty Building and Frank Lloyd Wright&#x27;s Darwin Martin House from possible demolition. His efforts were successful in both St. Louis and Buffalo.

A collection of architectural ornaments designed by Sullivan is on permanent display at Lovejoy Library at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. The St. Louis Art Museum also has Sullivan architectural elements displayed. The City Museum in St. Louis has a large collection of Sullivan ornamentation on display, including a cornice from the demolished Chicago Stock Exchange, 29 feet long on one side, 13 feet on another, and nine feet high.

The Guaranty Building Interpretive Center in Buffalo, on the first floor of the building now owned and occupied by the law firm Hodgson Russ, LLP, opened in 2017. The exhibit space was financed by Hodgson Russ, LLP, and co-designed by Flynn Battaglia Architects and Hadley Exhibits. It features a scale model of the building by David J. Carli, Professor of Engineering at the State University of New York at Alfred. The center&#x27;s exhibits were donated to Preservation Buffalo Niagara. The center, the only museum dedicated to Sullivan, is open to the public.

==Sullivan in Ayn Rand&#x27;s &quot;The Fountainhead&quot;==
That the fictional character of Henry Cameron in Ayn Rand&#x27;s 1943 novel &quot;The Fountainhead&quot; was similar to the real-life Sullivan was noted, if only in passing, by at least one journalist contemporary to the book.

Although Rand&#x27;s journal notes contain &quot;in toto&quot; only some 50 lines directly referring to Sullivan, it is clear from her mention of Sullivan&#x27;s &quot;Autobiography of an Idea&quot; (1924) in her 25th-anniversary introduction to her earlier novel &quot;We the Living&quot; (first published in 1936, and unrelated to architecture) that she was intimately familiar with his life and career. The term &quot;the Fountainhead&quot;, which appears nowhere in Rand&#x27;s novel proper, is found twice (as &quot;the fountainhead&quot; and later as &quot;the fountain head&quot;) in Sullivan&#x27;s autobiography, both times used metaphorically.

The fictional Cameron is, like Sullivan – whose physical description he matches – a great innovative skyscraper pioneer late in the nineteenth century who dies impoverished and embittered in the mid-1920s. Cameron&#x27;s rapid decline is explicitly attributed to the wave of classical Greco-Roman revivalism in architecture in the wake of the 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, just as Sullivan in his autobiography attributed his own downfall to the same event.

The major difference between novel and real life was in the chronology of Cameron&#x27;s relation with his protégé Howard Roark, the novel&#x27;s hero, who eventually goes on to redeem his vision. That Roark&#x27;s uncompromising individualism and his innovative organic style in architecture were drawn from the life and work of Frank Lloyd Wright is clear from Rand&#x27;s journal notes, her correspondence, and various contemporary accounts. In the novel, however, the 23-year-old Roark, a generation younger than the real-life Wright, becomes Cameron&#x27;s protégé in the early 1920s, when Sullivan was long in decline.

The young Wright, by contrast, was Sullivan&#x27;s protégé for seven years, beginning in 1887, when Sullivan was at the height of his fame and power. The two architects would sever their ties in 1894 due to Sullivan&#x27;s angry reaction to Wright&#x27;s moonlighting in breach of his contract with Sullivan, but Wright continued to call Sullivan &quot;lieber Meister&quot; (&quot;beloved Master&quot;) for the rest of his life. After decades of estrangement, Wright would again become close to the now-destitute Sullivan in the early 1920s, the time when Roark first comes under the likewise impoverished Cameron&#x27;s tutelage in the novel. Wright, however, was now in his fifties. Nevertheless, both the young Roark and middle-aged Wright had in common at that time that they both faced a decade of struggle ahead. After the triumphs earlier in his career, Wright came increasingly to be viewed as a has-been, until he experienced a renaissance in the latter half of the 1930s with such projects as Fallingwater and the Johnson Wax Headquarters.

==Selected projects==

Buildings 1887–1895 by Adler &amp; Sullivan:
* Martin Ryerson Tomb, Graceland Cemetery, Chicago (1887)
* Auditorium Building, Chicago (1889)
* Carrie Eliza Getty Tomb, Graceland Cemetery, Chicago (1890)
* Wainwright Building, St. Louis (1890)

* Charlotte Dickson Wainwright Tomb, Bellefontaine Cemetery, St. Louis (1892), listed on the National Register of Historic Places (shown at right), is considered a major American architectural triumph, a model for ecclesiastical architecture, a &quot;masterpiece&quot;, and has been called &quot;the Taj Mahal of St. Louis&quot;. The family name appears nowhere on the tomb.
* Union Trust Building, St. Louis (1893; street-level ornament heavily altered in 1924)
* Guaranty Building (formerly Prudential Building), Buffalo (1894)

Buildings 1887–1922 by Louis Sullivan:
(256 total commissions and projects)
* Springer Block (later Bay State Building and Burnham Building) and Kranz Buildings, Chicago (1885–1887)
* Selz, Schwab &amp; Company Factory, Chicago (1886–1887)
* Hebrew Manual Training School, Chicago (1889–1890)
* James H. Walker Warehouse &amp; Company Store, Chicago (1886–1889)
* Warehouse for E. W. Blatchford, Chicago (1889)
* James Charnley House (also known as the Charnley–Persky House Museum and the National Headquarters of the Society of Architectural Historians), Chicago (1891–1892)
* Albert Sullivan Residence, Chicago (1891–1892)
* McVicker&#x27;s Theater, second remodeling, Chicago (1890–1891)
* Bayard Building, (now Bayard-Condict Building), 65–69 Bleecker Street, New York City (1898). Sullivan&#x27;s only building in New York, with a glazed terra cotta curtain wall expressing the steel structure behind it.
* Commercial Loft of Gage Brothers &amp; Company, Chicago (1898–1900)
* Holy Trinity Russian Orthodox Cathedral and Rectory, Chicago (1900–1903)
* Carson Pirie Scott store, (originally known as the Schlesinger &amp; Mayer Store, now known as &quot;Sullivan Center&quot;) Chicago (1899–1904)
* Virginia Hall of Tusculum College, Greeneville, Tennessee (1901)
* Van Allen Building, Clinton, Iowa (1914)
* St. Paul United Methodist Church, Cedar Rapids, Iowa (1910)
* Krause Music Store, Chicago (final commission 1922; front façade only)

===Banks===

By the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, Sullivan&#x27;s star was well on the descent and, for the remainder of his life, his output consisted primarily of a series of small bank and commercial buildings in the Midwest. Yet a look at these buildings clearly reveals that Sullivan&#x27;s muse had not abandoned him. When the director of a bank that was considering hiring him asked Sullivan why they should engage him at a cost higher than the bids received for a conventional Neo-Classic styled building from other architects, Sullivan is reported to have replied, &quot;A thousand architects could design those buildings. Only I can design this one.&quot; He got the job. Today these commissions are collectively referred to as Sullivan&#x27;s &quot;Jewel Boxes&quot;. All still stand.
* National Farmer&#x27;s Bank, Owatonna, Minnesota (1908)
* Peoples Savings Bank, Cedar Rapids, Iowa (1912)
* Henry Adams Building, Algona, Iowa (1913)
* Merchants&#x27; National Bank, Grinnell, Iowa (1914)
* Home Building Association Company, Newark, Ohio (1914)
* Purdue State Bank, West Lafayette, Indiana (1914)
* People&#x27;s Federal Savings and Loan Association, Sidney, Ohio (1918)
* Farmers and Merchants Bank, Columbus, Wisconsin (1919)
* First National Bank, Manistique, Michigan (1919–1920), a remodeling of an existing bank building

===Lost buildings===
* Grand Opera House, Chicago, 1880 remodel and reconstruction with Dankmar Adler as lead architect and Sullivan as assistant; later remodeled and reconstructed in 1926 by Andrew Rebori; demolished May 1962
* Washington Elementary School, Marengo, Illinois, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1883, demolished by early 1990s
* Pueblo Opera House, Pueblo, Colorado, 1890, destroyed by fire 1922
* New Orleans Union Station, 1892, demolished 1954
* Dooly Block, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1891, demolished 1965

* Chicago Stock Exchange Building, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1893, demolished 1972
::The entrance and other portions of the building were removed prior to the demolition and subsequently were restored in the Art Institute of Chicago in 1977; the entryway arch (seen at right) stands outside on the northeast corner of the AIC site
* Zion Temple, Chicago, 1884, demolished 1954
* Troescher Building, Chicago, 1884, demolished 1978
* Transportation Building, World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1893–94, an exposition building built to last a year
* Louis Sullivan and Charnley Cottages, Ocean Springs, Mississippi, destroyed in Hurricane Katrina; Frank Lloyd Wright also claimed credit for the design
* Schiller Building (later Garrick Theater), Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1891, demolished 1961
* Third McVickers Theater, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1883? demolished 1922
* Thirty-Ninth Street Passenger Station, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1886, demolished 1934
* Standard Club, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1887–88, demolished 1931
* Pilgrim Baptist Church, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1891, destroyed by fire January 6, 2006
* Wirt Dexter Building, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1887, destroyed by fire October 24, 2006
* George Harvey House, Chicago, Adler &amp; Sullivan, 1888 destroyed by fire November 4, 2006

==Gallery==
==See also==

* American Prize for Architecture
* Richard Bock

==References==
Notes
Bibliography
* &quot;Columbian Gallery – A Portfolio of Photographs of the World&#x27;s Fair&quot;, The Werner Company, Chicago, IL, 1894.
* Condit, Carl W., &quot;The Chicago School of Architecture&quot;, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1964.
* Connely, Willard, &quot;Louis Sullivan as He Lived&quot;, Horizon Press, Inc., NY, 1960.
* Engelbrecht, Lloyd C., &quot;Adler and Sullivan&#x27;s Pueblo Opera House: City Status for a New Town in the Rockies&quot;, &quot;The Art Bulletin&quot;, College Art Association of America, June 1985.
* 
* Morrison, Hugh, &quot;Louis Sullivan – Prophet of Modern Architecture&quot;, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., Inc. New York City, 1963.
* Nickel, Richard; Siskind, Aaron; Vinci, John; and Miller, Ward. &quot;The Complete Architecture of Adler &amp; Sullivan&quot;, Richard Nickel Committee, Chicago, Illinois, 2010.
* Sullivan, Louis, &quot;The Autobiography of an Idea&quot;, Press of the American institute of Architects, Inc., New York City, 1924.
* Sullivan, Louis, &quot;Kindergarten Chats and Other Writings&quot;, Dover Publications, Inc., New York City, 1979.
* Sullivan, Louis, &quot;Louis Sullivan: The Public Papers&quot; Ed. Robert Twombly, Chicago University Press, Chicago &amp; London, 1988
* Thomas, George E.; Cohen, Jeffrey A.; and Lewis, Michael J.; &quot;Frank Furness – The Complete Works&quot;, Princeton Architectural Press, New York City, 1991.
* Twombly, Robert, &quot;Louis Sullivan – His Life and Work&quot;, Elizabeth Sifton Books, New York City, 1986.
* Vinci, John, &quot;The Art Institute of Chicago: The Stock Exchange Trading Room,&quot; The Art Institute of Chicago, 1977.
* Weingarden, Lauren S. &quot;Louis H. Sullivan: A System of Architectural Ornament&quot; [1924]. Art Institute of Chicago and Ernst Wasmuth Verlag (Germany); distributed by Rizzoli International (U.S.), Wasmuth (Germany), Mardaga (France), 1990.
* Weingarden, Lauren S. &quot;Louis H. Sullivan: The Banks&quot;. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1987.

==External links==
* Book: &quot;The Complete Architecture of Adler &amp; Sullivan&quot; by Richard Nickel, Aaron Siskind, John Vinci and Ward Miller
* Atlantic.com slideshow, &quot;The Architecture of Louis Sullivan&quot;, with photographs by Richard Nickel and others
* Article on fragments of Adler and Sullivan Buildings in Chicago
* &quot;Sullivan&#x27;s Banks&quot; documentary by Heinz Emigholz
* Louis H. Sullivan Ornaments – digital photographs of ornaments with historic photographs of the original buildings
* Louis Sullivan &quot;The tall office building artistically considered&quot; – Transcribed from Lippincott&#x27;s Magazine (March 1896)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243240" start="0" end="20" title="Louis Sullivan" label="Louis Henry Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072060" start="217" end="231" title="Chicago school (architecture)" label="Chicago School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="245" end="263" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q616358" start="352" end="366" title="Prairie School" label="Prairie School"/>
<link wikidata="Q723234" start="390" end="413" title="Henry Hobson Richardson" label="Henry Hobson Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83474" start="512" end="533" title="form follows function" label="form follows function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="656" end="666" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317387" start="739" end="753" title="AIA Gold Medal" label="AIA Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="873" end="879" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716318" start="1162" end="1199" title="MIT School of Architecture and Planning" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1355" end="1367" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082622" start="1398" end="1411" title="Frank Furness" label="Frank Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417847" start="1418" end="1436" title="Long Depression" label="Depression of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="1595" end="1613" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q715701" start="1637" end="1659" title="William LeBaron Jenney" label="William LeBaron Jenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="1714" end="1725" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056289" start="1815" end="1835" title="École des Beaux-Arts" label="École des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192521" start="1945" end="1954" title="technical drawing" label="draftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76573" start="2186" end="2199" title="Dankmar Adler" label="Dankmar Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683278" start="2290" end="2310" title="Adler &amp;amp; Sullivan" label="Adler &amp;amp; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683278" start="2375" end="2393" title="Adler and Sullivan" label="Adler and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="2529" end="2545" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="2551" end="2558" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q546009" start="2660" end="2679" title="Auditorium Building, Chicago" label="Auditorium Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143548" start="3048" end="3067" title="Wainwright Building" label="Wainwright Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="3071" end="3080" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523989" start="3105" end="3112" title="Garrick Theater (Chicago)" label="Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778256" start="3238" end="3255" title="Prudential (Guaranty) Building" label="Guaranty Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="3310" end="3327" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324863" start="3347" end="3382" title="Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building" label="Carson Pirie Scott Department Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199833" start="5023" end="5041" title="Monadnock Building" label="Monadnock Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q83474" start="6712" end="6733" title="Form follows function" label="Form follows function"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="6840" end="6863" title="Marcus Vitruvius Pollio" label="Marcus Vitruvius Pollio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6869" end="6874" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232238" start="6946" end="6961" title="De architectura" label="De architectura"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="7204" end="7214" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="7665" end="7676" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="7680" end="7694" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="7732" end="7743" title="terra cotta" label="terra cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324863" start="8187" end="8211" title="Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building" label="Carson Pirie Scott store"/>
<link wikidata="Q986343" start="8221" end="8233" title="State Street (Chicago)" label="State Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898821" start="8525" end="8543" title="semi-circular arch" label="semi-circular arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778256" start="8729" end="8746" title="Guaranty Building (Buffalo, New York)" label="Guaranty Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="8837" end="8854" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127018" start="8865" end="8878" title="Palazzo style architecture" label="Palazzo style"/>
<link wikidata="Q76573" start="9934" end="9947" title="Dankmar Adler" label="Dankmar Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="9960" end="9974" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q94005" start="9979" end="9997" title="John Wellborn Root" label="John Wellborn Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907269" start="10101" end="10121" title="Masonic Temple (Chicago, Illinois)" label="Masonic Temple Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="10461" end="10494" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="10659" end="10669" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="10768" end="10782" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="11294" end="11307" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075504" start="11322" end="11334" title="Charles Bebb" label="Charles Bebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q745903" start="12142" end="12154" title="Raymond Hood" label="Raymond Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143136" start="12184" end="12197" title="Tribune Tower" label="Tribune Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="12333" end="12365" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12417" end="12440" title="Charles Harris Whitaker" label="Charles Harris Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="12599" end="12631" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148426" start="12851" end="12869" title="Graceland Cemetery" label="Graceland Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746755" start="12888" end="12894" title="Uptown, Chicago" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="13337" end="13356" title="International Style (architecture)" label="International Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="13509" end="13520" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q117322719" start="13646" end="13666" title="Hotel Saint Louis" label="Union Trust building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637062" start="13696" end="13711" title="Bayard-Condict Building" label="Bayard Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539862" start="13807" end="13827" title="George Grant Elmslie" label="George Grant Elmslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="13935" end="13941" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633007" start="14075" end="14097" title="Chicago Stock Exchange" label="Chicago Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="14120" end="14148" title="The Art Institute of Chicago" label="The Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7385031" start="14570" end="14591" title="Ryerson &amp;amp; Burnham" label="Ryerson &amp;amp; Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="14609" end="14633" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q790646" start="14685" end="14726" title="Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library" label="Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="14730" end="14749" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="14895" end="14908" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328066" start="15098" end="15112" title="Richard Nickel" label="Richard Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16344" end="16358" title="Crombie Taylor" label="Crombie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913106" start="16648" end="16666" title="Van Allen Building" label="Van Allen Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q676421" start="16670" end="16683" title="Clinton, Iowa" label="Clinton, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q546009" start="16780" end="16799" title="Auditorium Building" label="Auditorium Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124886" start="16805" end="16825" title="Roosevelt University" label="Roosevelt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q331397" start="17051" end="17069" title="Oak Park, Illinois" label="Oak Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="17435" end="17453" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166906" start="17461" end="17480" title="Darwin D. Martin House" label="Darwin Martin House"/>
<link wikidata="Q615635" start="17655" end="17670" title="Lovejoy Library" label="Lovejoy Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q519349" start="17674" end="17715" title="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville" label="Southern Illinois University Edwardsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123311" start="17798" end="17809" title="City Museum" label="City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778256" start="18019" end="18036" title="Prudential (Guaranty) Building" label="Guaranty Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723471" start="18391" end="18429" title="Alfred State College" label="State University of New York at Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="18689" end="18697" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q612688" start="18722" end="18738" title="The Fountainhead" label="The Fountainhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565443" start="19138" end="19151" title="We the Living" label="We the Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="19866" end="19904" title="1893 World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="1893 World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="20322" end="20340" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q463179" start="21621" end="21633" title="Fallingwater" label="Fallingwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702484" start="21642" end="21666" title="Johnson Wax Headquarters" label="Johnson Wax Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683278" start="21715" end="21735" title="Adler &amp;amp; Sullivan" label="Adler &amp;amp; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776503" start="21739" end="21758" title="Martin Ryerson Tomb" label="Martin Ryerson Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148426" start="21760" end="21778" title="Graceland Cemetery" label="Graceland Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q546009" start="21797" end="21816" title="Auditorium Building, Chicago" label="Auditorium Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046222" start="21835" end="21858" title="Carrie Eliza Getty Tomb" label="Carrie Eliza Getty Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143548" start="21897" end="21916" title="Wainwright Building" label="Wainwright Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960230" start="21938" end="21971" title="Wainwright Tomb" label="Charlotte Dickson Wainwright Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972444" start="21973" end="21995" title="Bellefontaine Cemetery" label="Bellefontaine Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="22236" end="22245" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117322719" start="22313" end="22333" title="Hotel Saint Louis" label="Union Trust Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778256" start="22401" end="22418" title="Guaranty Building (Buffalo, New York)" label="Guaranty Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="22451" end="22458" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131262" start="22880" end="22900" title="James Charnley House" label="James Charnley House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511563" start="23095" end="23118" title="McVicker&amp;#x27;s Theater" label="McVicker&amp;#x27;s Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637062" start="23183" end="23206" title="Bayard-Condict Building" label="Bayard-Condict Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567349" start="23304" end="23322" title="Glazed architectural terra-cotta" label="glazed terra cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094314" start="23399" end="23426" title="Gage Group Buildings" label="Gage Brothers &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498222" start="23450" end="23501" title="Holy Trinity Cathedral (Chicago, Illinois)" label="Holy Trinity Russian Orthodox Cathedral and Rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324863" start="23525" end="23549" title="Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building" label="Carson Pirie Scott store"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564294" start="23688" end="23704" title="Tusculum College" label="Tusculum College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002631" start="23706" end="23728" title="Greeneville, Tennessee" label="Greeneville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913106" start="23738" end="23756" title="Van Allen Building" label="Van Allen Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q676421" start="23758" end="23771" title="Clinton, Iowa" label="Clinton, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591278" start="23781" end="23813" title="St. Paul United Methodist Church (Cedar Rapids, Iowa)" label="St. Paul United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="23815" end="23833" title="Cedar Rapids, Iowa" label="Cedar Rapids, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388182" start="23843" end="23861" title="Krause Music Store" label="Krause Music Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="24155" end="24162" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336873" start="24733" end="24760" title="National Farmer&amp;#x27;s Bank of Owatonna" label="National Farmer&amp;#x27;s Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q853577" start="24762" end="24770" title="Owatonna, Minnesota" label="Owatonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166082" start="24791" end="24811" title="Peoples Savings Bank" label="Peoples Savings Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="24813" end="24825" title="Cedar Rapids, Iowa" label="Cedar Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717111" start="24841" end="24861" title="Henry Adams Building" label="Henry Adams Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q646484" start="24863" end="24875" title="Algona, Iowa" label="Algona, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818426" start="24885" end="24914" title="Merchants&amp;#x27; National Bank" label="Merchants&amp;#x27; National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903250" start="24916" end="24930" title="Grinnell, Iowa" label="Grinnell, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888266" start="24940" end="24973" title="Home Building Association Company" label="Home Building Association Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q986689" start="24975" end="24981" title="Newark, Ohio" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260982" start="24997" end="25014" title="Purdue State Bank" label="Purdue State Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q166481" start="25016" end="25030" title="West Lafayette, Indiana" label="West Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165551" start="25049" end="25099" title="People&amp;#x27;s Federal Savings and Loan Association" label="People&amp;#x27;s Federal Savings and Loan Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q998626" start="25101" end="25113" title="Sidney, Ohio" label="Sidney, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435828" start="25123" end="25149" title="Farmers and Merchants Union Bank (Columbus, Wisconsin)" label="Farmers and Merchants Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570063" start="25151" end="25159" title="Columbus, Wisconsin" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616145" start="25201" end="25221" title="Manistique, Michigan" label="Manistique, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q120434696" start="25301" end="25327" title="Grand Opera House (Chicago)" label="Grand Opera House, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q76573" start="25366" end="25379" title="Dankmar Adler" label="Dankmar Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758370" start="25470" end="25483" title="Andrew Rebori" label="Andrew Rebori"/>
<link wikidata="Q27183930" start="25612" end="25630" title="Pueblo Opera House" label="Pueblo Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010799" start="25681" end="25706" title="New Orleans Union Station" label="New Orleans Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864786" start="25732" end="25743" title="Dooly Building" label="Dooly Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="25994" end="26018" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="26243" end="26276" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688234" start="26364" end="26400" title="Louis Sullivan Bungalow" label="Louis Sullivan and Charnley Cottages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="26443" end="26460" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="26462" end="26480" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523989" start="26518" end="26535" title="Schiller Building" label="Schiller Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193921" start="26863" end="26885" title="Pilgrim Baptist Church" label="Pilgrim Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268384" start="26960" end="26980" title="Wirt Dexter Building" label="Wirt Dexter Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866505" start="27177" end="27208" title="American Prize for Architecture" label="American Prize for Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324233" start="27211" end="27223" title="Richard Bock" label="Richard Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814982" start="27452" end="27479" title="University of Chicago Press" label="University of Chicago Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137023" start="28310" end="28328" title="Dover Publications" label="Dover Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="28994" end="29018" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="29227" end="29236" title="MIT Press" label="MIT Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52720" wikidata="Q591378" url="?curid=52720" title="Final Fantasy Tactics">
<text>is a 1997 tactical role-playing game developed and published by Square for the PlayStation. It was released in Japan in June 1997 and in North America in January 1998 by Sony Computer Entertainment, it is the first game of the &quot;Tactics&quot; sub-series within the &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; franchise, and the first entry set in the fictional world later known as Ivalice. The story follows Ramza Beoulve, a highborn cadet placed in the middle of a military conflict known as The Lion War, where two opposing noble factions are coveting the throne of the kingdom.

Production began in 1995 by Yasumi Matsuno, a newcomer who had created the &quot;Ogre Battle&quot; series at Quest Corporation. Matsuno&#x27;s wish was for an accessible tactical game with a storyline focusing on class-based conflict and the rewriting of history. Matsuno acted as director and writer, &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; creator Hironobu Sakaguchi was producer, and the battles were designed by Hiroyuki Ito. Multiple other staff members were veterans of the &quot;Ogre Battle&quot; series, including artists Hiroshi Minagawa and Akihiko Yoshida, and composers Hitoshi Sakimoto and Masaharu Iwata.

The game received critical acclaim and has become a cult classic since its release. It sold about 1.24 million units in Japan during 1997, and over 2.4 million worldwide by August 2011. It has been cited as one of the greatest video games ever made. The world of Ivalice saw the setting for multiple other titles, including other &quot;Tactics&quot; games and the 2006 mainline entry &quot;Final Fantasy XII&quot;. An enhanced port of the game, &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions&quot;, was released in 2007 as part of the &quot;Ivalice Alliance&quot; project.

==Gameplay==
&quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; is a tactical role-playing game in which players follow the story of protagonist Ramza Beoulve. The game features two modes of play: battles and the world map. Battles take place on three-dimensional, isometric fields. Characters move on a battlefield composed of square tiles; movement and action ranges are determined by the character&#x27;s statistics and job class. The battlefield also factors in elements such as terrain and weather to determine strategic advantages and disadvantages during clashes. Battles are turn-based; a unit may act when its Charge Time (CT) reaches 100 and increased once every CT unit (a measure of time in battles) by an amount equal to the unit&#x27;s speed statistic. During battle, whenever a unit performs an action successfully, it gains experience points (EXP) and job points (JP). Actions can include magical attacks, physical attacks, or using an item. Hit points (HP) of enemy units are also visible to the player (except in the case of certain bosses), allowing the player to know how much damage they still have to inflict on a particular unit.

In the world map, the player moves on predefined paths connecting the towns and battle points. When the character icon is over a town, a menu can be opened with several options: &quot;Bar&quot; for taking sidequest job offers, &quot;Shop&quot; for buying supplies and equipment, and &quot;Soldier Office&quot; for recruiting new characters. Later in the game, some towns contain &quot;Fur Shops&quot; for obtaining items by way of poaching monsters. Random battles happen in pre-set locations on the map, marked in green. Passing over one of these spots may result in a random encounter.
&quot;Tactics&quot; features a character class system, which allows players to customize characters into various roles. The game makes extensive use of most of the original character classes seen in earlier &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; games, including Summoners, Wizards (Black Mages), Priests (White Mages), Monks, Lancers (Dragoons), and Thieves. New recruits start out as either a Squire or a Chemist, the base classes for warrior and magician jobs, respectively. The game features twenty jobs accessible by normal characters.

The JP rewarded in battle are used to learn new abilities within each job class. Accumulating enough JP results in a job level up; new jobs are unlocked by attaining a certain level in the current job class (for instance, to become a Priest or Wizard, the unit must first attain Job Level2 as a Chemist), which also allows the character to gain more JP in that class in battles. Once all the abilities of a job class have been learned, the class is &quot;Mastered&quot;. A soldier in a specific Job always has its innate skill equipped (Wizards always have &quot;Black Magic&quot;, Knights always have &quot;Battle Skill&quot;) but a second job-skill slot and several other ability slots (Reaction, Support, and Movement) can be filled with any skill the particular soldier has learned.

==Plot==
===Setting===

The story takes place in the kingdom of Ivalice, inspired by the Middle Ages. The kingdom is located in a peninsula surrounded by sea on the north, west and south, with a headland south of the landmass. It is heavily populated by human beings, although intelligent monsters can be found living in less populated areas. Magic is predominant in the land, although ruins and artifacts indicated that the past populace had relied on machinery, such as airships and robots. Ivalice&#x27;s neighbors are the kingdom of Ordalia in the east and Romanda, a military nation to the north. While the three nations share common royal bloodlines, major wars have taken place between them. An influential religious institution known as the Glabados Church heads the dominant faith, centering around a religious figure known as Saint Ajora.

The story takes place after Ivalice ended its war with the two nations in what is known as the Fifty Years War, and is facing economic problems and political strife. The king of Ivalice has recently died and his heir is an infant, so a regent is needed to rule in place of the prince. The kingdom is split between two candidates named Prince Goltana, represented by the Black Lion, and Prince Larg, symbolized by the White Lion. The conflict leads to what is known in the game as the Lion War. Behind this backdrop is a revelation by the game&#x27;s historian Alazlam J. Durai, who seeks to reveal the story of an unknown character whose role in the Lion War was major but was covered up by the kingdom&#x27;s church.

===Characters===
Most of the game&#x27;s plot is portrayed from Ramza&#x27;s perspective, who is the player character of the story. He is joined by a cadre of characters which include Delita Hyral, his closest friend, and Agrias Oaks, the knight in charge of protecting Princess Ovelia. He is introduced to various factions of the Lion War; the most prominent are those of Prince Goltana and Prince Larg, who both want to become the guardian of Ivalice&#x27;s monarch and are engaged in a war with each other. The story progresses to include characters from the Glabados Church, which has been controlling Ivalice silently and engineering the war in question.

As the game progresses, players are able to recruit generic player characters and customize them using the Job system of the Final Fantasy series. Several battles also feature characters controlled via the game&#x27;s A.I., which may be recruited later in the game according to the story proper. The characters were designed by Akihiko Yoshida, who was also in charge of the illustration and character designs for &quot;Tactics Ogre&quot;, and then went on to do the same for &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics Advance&quot;, &quot;Final Fantasy XII&quot;, and &quot;Vagrant Story&quot;.

===Story===
Ivalice is recovering from the Fifty Year War against Ordalia. After the death of its ruler, Princess Ovelia and Prince Orinas are both candidates for the throne. The former is supported by Prince Goltana of the Black Lion, and the latter by Queen Ruvelia and her brother, Prince Larg of the White Lion. The two groups engage in battles in the Lion War.

Nobles and commoners regard each other negatively and many commoners joined the Corpse Brigade to fight against the nobles&#x27; soldiers. Ramza, part of the noble Beoulve family of knights, and Delita, his childhood friend who was an ordinary commoner, witness the murder of Delita&#x27;s sister during an uprising. This causes Delita and Ramza to abandon their ties to the nobility. Ramza joins a mercenary group, led by Gafgarion, who protects Princess Ovelia from being hunted by both sides of the Lion War. Delita joins Goltana&#x27;s forces. They are reunited when Gafgarion attempts to take Ovelia to Prince Larg. Agrias suggests visiting Cardinal Delacroix of the Glabados Church to protect Ovelia. Along the way, Ramza meets Mustadio, a machinist in possession of a holy relic called the Zodiac Stone. Hunted by a trading company for the power it contains, Mustadio also seeks Delacroix&#x27;s intervention.

Ramza discovers that High Confessor Marcel Funebris and the church used the legend of the holy Zodiac Braves to gather the Zodiac Stones and instigated the Lion War. To prevent Ramza&#x27;s interference, Delacroix uses the stone to transform into a Lucavi demon and Ramza defeats him. Ramza is regarded as a heretic by the church and he is chased by the Knights Templar, the soldiers of the church who are hunting the Zodiac Stones. He acquires proof of the Church&#x27;s lies about Saint Ajora, a central figure in the religion, and attempts to use it along with the Zodiac Stone to reveal the organization&#x27;s plot.

The two sides in the Lion War face off in a major battle that results in the deaths of Larg and Goltana. Ramza stops the battle and rescues the general, Count Cidolfus Orlandeau, though the Church eliminates the two leaders to secure its control over Ivalice. Ramza discovers that the Knights Templar are possessed by the Lucavi, who are seeking to resurrect their leader Ultima, and they needed bloodshed and a suitable body to complete the resurrection. Alma, Ramza&#x27;s sister, is to serve as the host for Ultima&#x27;s incarnation. Ultima is resurrected and Ramza and his allies succeed in destroying her and escape Ivalice.

In the epilogue, Delita marries Ovelia and becomes the King of Ivalice. He fails to find true satisfaction as even Ovelia distrusts him, leading her to stab Delita. Ovelia is stabbed by Delita in return, with her fate left ambiguous in the game. Delita then cries out to Ramza, asking what Ramza gained in return for his actions, compared to Delita. Olan Durai, a historian who had many encounters with Ramza, attempts to reveal the Church&#x27;s evil plot with the &quot;Durai Report&quot; but his papers are confiscated and he is burned at the stake for heresy. Many centuries later historian Alazlam J. Durai tries to describe the story of the Lion War.

==Development==

&quot;Tactics&quot; was conceived in 1993 by &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi, who is a fan of the tactical role-playing genre. Due to his heavy involvement with the mainline series, he was unable to realize it at the time. Production finally began at the end of 1995 under Yasumi Matsuno, who until that year had worked at Quest Corporation on the &quot;Ogre Battle&quot; series, resigning once work was completed on &quot;Tactics Ogre: Let Us Cling Together&quot; and bringing several of its staff over to Square. During this period, Square had broken its long-standing development partnership with Nintendo and moved their game projects over to Sony&#x27;s PlayStation.

Matsuno acted as director and lead scenario writer. Sakaguchi was the game&#x27;s producer. The lead programmer was Taku Murata, who had previously worked on the &quot;Mana&quot; series. Matsuno described the working environment at Square as more democratic than at Quest, with a greater ability for the whole staff to contribute design ideas. The art design was a collaborative effort led by &quot;Tactics Ogre&quot; veterans Hiroshi Minagawa and Akihiko Yoshida, with additional character designs and artwork by Hideo Minaba and Eiichiro Nakatsu. Contrasting against the polished CGI aesthetic of &quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot;, the team wanted a hand-drawn artstyle. The opening and closing cinematics were created by Western company Animatek International.

===Design===
Matsuno&#x27;s prototype was originally closer to his previous real-time strategy game &quot;Ogre Battle: The March of the Black Queen&quot; and would have featured 2D graphics; some sample images were produced, but this concept was then scrapped. Matsuno then aimed for a tactical RPG that would be accessible, something he originally aimed for with the &quot;Ogre Battle&quot; titles and later felt he had failed to accomplish with &quot;Tactics&quot;. When deciding how to differentiate &quot;Tactics&quot; from his earlier title, he placed a focus on individual character growth similar to the main series, contrasting against the army-based simulation of &quot;Tactics Ogre&quot; while keeping its chess-inspired gameplay. While Matsuno designed most of the rest of the game systems, due to staff shortages and needing to focus on the scenario the battle system was designed by Hiroyuki Ito. Ito disliked tactical RPGs of the time, growing bored with their mechanics, so designed the battle system to be engaging and feel fast and exciting. Matsuno had to push against Ito&#x27;s wish to simplify the class system. The level design, which used compact diorama-style levels, was chosen to allow the intended 60 frames per second, carrying over the smooth gameplay experience gamers expected from the genre. The small scale of battles also reinforced the personal nature of the game&#x27;s narrative conflicts. Level design and mastering continued until a week before the game shipped.

Under Matsuno&#x27;s direction, the game&#x27;s design strayed significantly from Sakaguchi&#x27;s original concept, particularly in its narrative tone. Matsuno at the time described his wish for the narrative to emulate &quot;a sense of swashbuckling heroism&quot;. His aim was to create a &quot;Final Fantasy&quot;-themed morality tale. Matsuno stated that the game&#x27;s thematic use of class-based society was derived from his experiences within game production companies, observing their hierarchy and how senior designers were treated as royalty. The story premise of a long-suppressed account of ancient history was inspired by the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls, and the story of &quot;The Name of the Rose&quot;. For &quot;Tactics&quot;, Matsuno created an entire new world dubbed Ivalice, which he would use in multiple later projects. Ivalice was designed as a complex setting with a deep historical background. He described it as a blank canvas on which he and later others could create narratives. While some aspects of the ending were left ambiguous, Matsuno considered the narrative complete on its own.

===Music===

During its preplanning phase, the music was going to be in an upbeat style in line with the mainline &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; series. Due to its portrayal of people fighting each other rather than fighting monsters, Matsuno felt upbeat music was wrong. The original score was written by Hitoshi Sakimoto and Masaharu Iwata, both veterans of the &quot;Ogre Battle&quot; series. Sakimoto, who was brought on board the project by Matsuno, was advised by both Matsuno and established &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; composer Nobuo Uematsu not to worry about keeping to the style of the main &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; series. Iwata described the game as a &quot;giant project&quot; to work on, and he received a lot of help from other staff members at Square. Several tracks were inspired by the game&#x27;s storyline and concept art, with some track names being chosen by Sakimoto based on first impressions of relevant characters. Sakimoto described his music for the game as &quot;bright and cheerful tunes&quot;, carrying themes of hope and love. Sakimoto and Iwata worked separately on their own tracks. The album was first released on two compact discs by DigiCube on June 21, 1997, and was re-released by Square Enix on March 24, 2006.

==Versions and re-releases==
&quot;Tactics&quot; was first released in Japan on June 20, 1997. It came bundled with a demo disc for &quot;SaGa Frontier&quot;. The English localization was partly outsourced, with the other part of translation and localization being handled by Square Soft&#x27;s Michael Baskett. Baskett started writing the script in a style close to Old English, but this was beginning to impact the game&#x27;s understandability and make characters sound alike, so it was toned down in the final script. It was released in North America on January 28, 1998, by Sony Computer Entertainment America, who, at the time, acted as Square&#x27;s Western publisher for the platform. It was re-released as part of the Square&#x27;s Millennium Collection. This series of games was released only in Japan, and each title is bought with a set of related merchandise. &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; was sold on June 29, 2000, along with titles such as &quot;Saga Frontier&quot;, &quot;Saga Frontier 2&quot;, &quot;Brave Fencer Musashi&quot;, &quot;Front Mission 3&quot;, &quot;Ehrgeiz&quot; and &quot;Legend of Mana&quot;.

In 2001, four years after its release, &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; was selected as part of the Sony Greatest Hits line of re-releases. &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; also became part of Ultimate Hits, Square Enix&#x27;s main budget range available in Japan.

A PlayStation Portable version of &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot;, entitled &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions&quot; was released on May 10, 2007, in Japan, and later across all regions. It is the second game announced as part of the &quot;Ivalice Alliance&quot;. The game features an updated version of &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot;, along with new features including in-game cutscenes, new characters, and multiplayer capability. The updated mechanics contain a 16:9 widescreen support, new items, new jobs, and cel-shaded full motion videos. The English version contains full voice acting during the cinematic cut scenes, whereas the Japanese version does not.

==Reception==
&quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; sold nearly 825,000 copies in Japan in the first half of 1997, and ended the year at almost 1.24 million copies sold. By 2007 the game had sold approximately 1.35 million copies in Japan. As of August 2011, the game had sold over 2.4 million copies worldwide.

&quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; received critical acclaim upon its release. Some reviews lauded the battle sequences as challenging, requiring more strategic planning than ordinary RPGs and utilising many gameplay mechanics in later battle sequences. The visuals were also lauded, particularly the spell effects, 3D battlegrounds, and camera that can be rotated and zoomed. Other reviewers disagreed and considered these elements a problem because it necessitated that the battles consist of fewer characters. John Ricciardi, in his review for &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot;, argued that the game should have been done in 2D style so that the PlayStation&#x27;s processors could handle larger battlefields. Nob Ogasawara, when writing for &quot;GamePro&quot;, was also concerned with the small scale of the battles, saying that as a result the game &quot;isn&#x27;t so much &quot;Tactics Ogre&quot; with a &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; flavor as it is FF with a TO flavor&quot;. A reviewer at &quot;RPGFan&quot; criticized the game&#x27;s difficulty as inconsistent, in part due to abilities unique to certain characters which unfairly sway the tide of battle either in favor of or against the player.

Critics praised the story&#x27;s depth and plot twists but some remarked that the large number of similar-looking characters made it hard to distinguish between characters to develop an emotional attachment. &quot;RPGFan&quot; criticized the English localization as rife with grammatical mistakes. The game&#x27;s soundtrack was also praised.

&quot;IGN&quot; awarded the game the Editor&#x27;s Choice Award in 1998, praising the in-game graphics as &quot;amazing&quot; and the battle environments with its extra details as being &quot;extremely well designed&quot;. &quot;GameSpot&quot; named &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; as one of &quot;the greatest games of all time&quot; in 2007. The game placed 84th in the &quot;Top 100 Favorite Games of All Time&quot; poll by Japanese magazine &quot;Famitsu&quot; in March 2006, 45th in &quot;Game Informer&quot; list of top 100 games, 43rd in &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; list, and 38th in &quot;IGN&quot;″s rankings of greatest games.

==Legacy==
The world of &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; has been featured in several other Square video games. After the game&#x27;s release, the development staff developed &quot;Vagrant Story&quot;, which featured several subtle references to &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot;. In an interview, Matsuno said both titles are set in the same fictional world of Ivalice.

During the development of &quot;Vagrant Story&quot;, Matsuno and Sakaguchi initiated a sequel to &quot;Tactics&quot;, which would have used 2D graphics due to issues with 3D development at the time. The project was outsourced to an unspecified developer because of the team&#x27;s commitment to &quot;Vagrant Story&quot; and was later cancelled for unspecified reasons.

In 2006, &quot;Final Fantasy XII&quot; was released, also set in the world of Ivalice. Square Enix announced at the end of the same year the &quot;Ivalice Alliance&quot;, a new series of games set in the world of Ivalice, during a Tokyo press conference. The first title released was &quot;Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings&quot;. Square released &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics Advance&quot; for the Nintendo Game Boy Advance in 2003. The game setting and engine are similar to the ones of its predecessor, but the cast of characters is considerably smaller and the plot is simpler. An indirect sequel to &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics Advance&quot;, titled &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift&quot;, was released in Japan in 2007 and in the rest of the world in 2008. It is also one of the titles released under the &quot;Ivalice Alliance&quot; game series, and takes place in the Ivalice universe.

Ramza and Agrias appeared in online trading card game &quot;Lord of Vermilion III&quot; in 2014. Ramza also appears as a playable character in the fighting game &quot;Dissidia Final Fantasy NT&quot;. In 2017, the MMORPG &quot;Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn&quot; portrayed an alternate version of &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; in which Ramza and his companions died at the end of &quot;Tactics&quot;. Matsuno said that the inspiration to depict this plot came from the number of players that misunderstood the ending of &quot;Tactics&quot;. &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot; is featured in the &quot;Final Fantasy Trading Card Game&quot;, with Ramza, Delita, Agrias, and other characters appearing in Opus I (Roman Numeral). &quot;Tactics&quot; has made additional appearances in Opus III, IV, V, VII, X, and XIII.

A remixed version of the song &quot;Ovelia &amp; Delita&quot; was nominated for &quot;Best Game Music Cover/Remix&quot; at the 16th Annual Game Audio Network Guild Awards.

An upcoming game, &quot;Unsung Story&quot;, is meant to be a spiritual successor to &quot;Final Fantasy Tactics&quot;. It has design input from Yasumi Matsuno and a soundtrack composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Official website at Square Enix America (archive)
* Official website at PlayStation.com (archive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1529437" start="10" end="36" title="tactical role-playing game" label="tactical role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="64" end="70" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="79" end="90" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="170" end="197" title="Sony Computer Entertainment" label="Sony Computer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12391356" start="275" end="288" title="Final Fantasy" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472618" start="368" end="375" title="Ivalice" label="Ivalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706773" start="597" end="611" title="Yasumi Matsuno" label="Yasumi Matsuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220205" start="650" end="661" title="Ogre Battle" label="Ogre Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737049" start="678" end="695" title="Quest Corporation" label="Quest Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q312525" start="905" end="923" title="Hironobu Sakaguchi" label="Hironobu Sakaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587127" start="971" end="983" title="Hiroyuki Ito" label="Hiroyuki Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q239429" start="1085" end="1101" title="Hiroshi Minagawa" label="Hiroshi Minagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662037" start="1106" end="1121" title="Akihiko Yoshida" label="Akihiko Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196596" start="1137" end="1153" title="Hitoshi Sakimoto" label="Hitoshi Sakimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297109" start="1158" end="1172" title="Masaharu Iwata" label="Masaharu Iwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="1227" end="1239" title="Cult following" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="1393" end="1423" title="greatest video games ever made" label="greatest video games ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q327594" start="1565" end="1582" title="Final Fantasy XII" label="Final Fantasy XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="1593" end="1606" title="enhanced port" label="enhanced port"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1626" end="1669" title="Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions" label="Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529437" start="1804" end="1830" title="tactical role-playing game" label="tactical role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114685" start="2318" end="2328" title="Conditional Turn-Based Battle System" label="turn-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="2575" end="2591" title="experience point" label="experience point"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="2693" end="2702" title="Hit point" label="Hit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114685" start="3508" end="3530" title="Final Fantasy character classes" label="character class system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3727" end="3735" title="Final Fantasy character classes#Summoner" label="Summoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114685" start="3761" end="3767" title="White Mage (Final Fantasy)" label="Priest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3784" end="3788" title="Final Fantasy character classes#Monk" label="Monk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3791" end="3797" title="Final Fantasy character classes#Dragoon" label="Lancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3815" end="3822" title="Final Fantasy character classes#Thief" label="Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q579516" start="3859" end="3865" title="Squire" label="Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="3871" end="3878" title="Chemist" label="Chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4883" end="4894" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="4989" end="4997" title="headland" label="headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662037" start="7352" end="7367" title="Akihiko Yoshida" label="Akihiko Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413485" start="7444" end="7456" title="Tactics Ogre" label="Tactics Ogre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072868" start="7506" end="7535" title="Final Fantasy Tactics Advance" label="Final Fantasy Tactics Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q327594" start="7549" end="7566" title="Final Fantasy XII" label="Final Fantasy XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536626" start="7584" end="7597" title="Vagrant Story" label="Vagrant Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q12391356" start="10871" end="10884" title="Final Fantasy" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312525" start="10906" end="10924" title="Hironobu Sakaguchi" label="Hironobu Sakaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706773" start="11121" end="11135" title="Yasumi Matsuno" label="Yasumi Matsuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737049" start="11171" end="11188" title="Quest Corporation" label="Quest Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220205" start="11202" end="11213" title="Ogre Battle" label="Ogre Battle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11271" end="11306" title="Tactics Ogre: Let Us Cling Together" label="Tactics Ogre: Let Us Cling Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="11355" end="11361" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="11448" end="11456" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="11507" end="11518" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q587964" start="11689" end="11693" title="Mana (series)" label="Mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q239429" start="11948" end="11964" title="Hiroshi Minagawa" label="Hiroshi Minagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662037" start="11969" end="11984" title="Akihiko Yoshida" label="Akihiko Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12388" end="12429" title="Ogre Battle: The March of the Black Queen" label="Ogre Battle: The March of the Black Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587127" start="13178" end="13190" title="Hiroyuki Ito" label="Hiroyuki Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="13452" end="13459" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="14442" end="14458" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q172850" start="14483" end="14503" title="The Name of the Rose" label="The Name of the Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472618" start="14579" end="14586" title="Ivalice" label="Ivalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196596" start="15210" end="15226" title="Hitoshi Sakimoto" label="Hitoshi Sakimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297109" start="15231" end="15245" title="Masaharu Iwata" label="Masaharu Iwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q312327" start="15438" end="15451" title="Nobuo Uematsu" label="Nobuo Uematsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="16057" end="16069" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224647" start="16074" end="16082" title="DigiCube" label="DigiCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660498" start="16294" end="16307" title="SaGa Frontier" label="SaGa Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660498" start="17122" end="17135" title="Saga Frontier" label="Saga Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660493" start="17149" end="17164" title="Saga Frontier 2" label="Saga Frontier 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426211" start="17178" end="17198" title="Brave Fencer Musashi" label="Brave Fencer Musashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088434" start="17212" end="17227" title="Front Mission 3" label="Front Mission 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121317" start="17241" end="17248" title="Ehrgeiz" label="Ehrgeiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361986" start="17265" end="17279" title="Legend of Mana" label="Legend of Mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q64483189" start="17389" end="17407" title="List of Sony Greatest Hits games" label="Sony Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q207784" start="17483" end="17495" title="Ultimate Hits (Square Enix)" label="Ultimate Hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="17558" end="17578" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17640" end="17683" title="Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions" label="Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="17985" end="17996" title="Multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="18102" end="18119" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="19103" end="19128" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="19305" end="19312" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413485" start="19440" end="19452" title="Tactics Ogre" label="Tactics Ogre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="20109" end="20112" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="20332" end="20340" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="20556" end="20563" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q327594" start="21512" end="21529" title="Final Fantasy XII" label="Final Fantasy XII"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21787" end="21820" title="Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings" label="Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072868" start="21850" end="21879" title="Final Fantasy Tactics Advance" label="Final Fantasy Tactics Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="22089" end="22095" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22155" end="22201" title="Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift" label="Final Fantasy Tactics A2: Grimoire of the Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043182" start="22469" end="22490" title="Lord of Vermilion III" label="Lord of Vermilion III"/>
<link wikidata="Q19795249" start="22576" end="22601" title="Dissidia Final Fantasy NT" label="Dissidia Final Fantasy NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="22622" end="22628" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22635" end="22668" title="Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn" label="Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965523" start="23016" end="23047" title="Final Fantasy Trading Card Game" label="Final Fantasy Trading Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324893" start="23429" end="23441" title="Unsung Story" label="Unsung Story"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52722" wikidata="Q1176035" url="?curid=52722" title="Suffix (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[suffix]] is part of a word; an affix that follows the morphemes to which it can attach.
* Possessive suffix, a suffix used in word formation for creation of various possessive forms

Suffix may also refer to:

* Suffix (name), the style at the end of a person&#x27;s name which gives additional identifying information about the person
* Suffix (computer science), the last part of a string of characters
* Suffix notation, a notation for manipulating vector quantities, also known as index notation
* Suffix array, an array of integers giving the starting positions of suffixes of a string in lexicographical order
* Suffix tree, a data structure that presents the suffixes of a given string in a way that allows for a particularly fast implementation of many important string operations

==See also==
* Prefix (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1176035" start="2" end="12" title="Suffix (disambiguation)" label="[[suffix]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q804020" start="94" end="111" title="Possessive suffix" label="Possessive suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176035" start="187" end="193" title="Suffix (disambiguation)" label="Suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964223" start="216" end="229" title="Suffix (name)" label="Suffix (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626534" start="342" end="367" title="Suffix (computer science)" label="Suffix (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017850" start="489" end="503" title="index notation" label="index notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q281472" start="506" end="518" title="Suffix array" label="Suffix array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426863" start="622" end="633" title="Suffix tree" label="Suffix tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q289508" start="809" end="832" title="Prefix (disambiguation)" label="Prefix (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52724" wikidata="Q428798" url="?curid=52724" title="Krist Novoselic">
<text>Krist Anthony Novoselic (; ; born May 16, 1965) is an American musician, politician and activist. Novoselic co-founded and played bass for the rock band Nirvana. 

Novoselic and Kurt Cobain formed the band Nirvana in 1987 along with drummer Aaron Burckhard, whom they recruited, and was the drummer of the group until October 1987. Through the late 1980s, Nirvana established themselves as part of the Seattle grunge scene. In 1989, the band released its debut album, &quot;Bleach&quot;. Nirvana released their second studio album &quot;Nevermind&quot; in 1991. The band achieved worldwide fame through the success of &quot;Nevermind&quot; and the lead track off the album, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;. The band&#x27;s third studio album, &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993), was also a major success. Nirvana abruptly ended in 1994 following the death of Kurt Cobain. Novoselic has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Nirvana, and has also received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award as a member of the band.

After Nirvana disbanded, Novoselic formed Sweet 75 in 1995 and Eyes Adrift in 2002, releasing one album with each band. From 2006 to 2009, he played in the punk rock band Flipper. In 2011, he contributed bass and accordion to the song &quot;I Should Have Known&quot; on the Foo Fighters&#x27; studio album &quot;Wasting Light&quot;. From 2017 to 2020, he played 
bass and accordion for the band Giants in the Trees.

Outside of music, Novoselic has been active politically. From 2007 through 2010, he wrote a weekly column on music and politics for the &quot;Seattle Weekly&quot; website. Novoselic has served on the board of the electoral reform organization FairVote and has served as its chair. In 2020, he became board chair of Zócalo Public Square. He joined the Forward Party in 2023 and became the party&#x27;s leader in Washington after the resignation of Chris Vance. In 2024, he founded the Cascade Party of Washington.

== Early life ==
Krist Anthony Novoselic was born in Compton, California, on May 16, 1965, the son of Croatian immigrants Kristo Novaselić and Marija Mustać. Kristo was a native of Veli Iž on the island of Iž while Marija originates from Privlaka. The original Croatian surname of Novaselić was mistakenly changed to Novoselic by a clerk when Kristo was applying for a passport to go to America. Novoselic lived in Compton for one year before his parents moved to the ethnically Croatian Los Angeles neighborhood of San Pedro. His first language is Croatian. He has a younger brother, Robert (born 1968), and a younger sister, Diana (born 1973). In 1979, his family relocated to Aberdeen, Washington. In 1980, his parents sent him to live with relatives in Zadar, Croatia. He returned to Aberdeen in 1981. His earliest memory of listening to music is listening to Chuck Berry with his father. Growing up, he had a severe underbite, for which he underwent corrective surgery.

Novoselic was interested in bands such as Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath, The Who, Van Halen, Devo, and Aerosmith. He also enjoyed listening to Yugoslavian bands such as Zabranjeno Pušenje, Prljavo kazalište and Azra. He became interested in punk rock, and discovered bands such as the Sex Pistols and the Ramones when he lived in Croatia at the age of 14 for one year. He has cited Paul McCartney, Geezer Butler, John Entwistle, and Gene Simmons as fundamental influences of his bass playing.

Novoselic&#x27;s brother Robert introduced him to his friend Kurt Cobain, who had noticed loud music coming from upstairs in the Novoselic household. Robert told Cobain that it was his older brother, who listened to punk rock. Cobain eventually befriended the older Novoselic, as the pair had similar musical tastes, including a fondness for local band Melvins. The two had several mutual friends and began hanging out shortly thereafter. Krist attended Aberdeen High School while Kurt attended high school in nearby Montesano. At one point, Cobain gave Novoselic a demo tape of his former band Fecal Matter, and asked him to form a band together. After several months, Novoselic finally listened to the tape, liked it, and agreed to start a band with Cobain. After high school, Novoselic worked as a painter and decorator but was eventually laid off.

== Career ==

===Nirvana (1987–1994)===
Cobain and Novoselic&#x27;s first band lasted barely a few weeks before it disbanded, leaving the pair to move on. However, the duo eventually discovered that the Melvins could pull $80 a night for one show. Inspired, Cobain and Novoselic started a Creedence Clearwater Revival cover band, in which Cobain played drums and Novoselic sang and played guitar. That band was short-lived as well. Some months later, Cobain and Novoselic met drummer Aaron Burckhard. While the new band never used the name, it was the first incarnation of Nirvana.
Burckhard lasted only a few months and Melvins&#x27; drummer Dale Crover filled in until Novoselic and Cobain met Chad Channing. The trio recorded their debut album &quot;Bleach&quot;, released in 1989. Channing left the band in 1990 and was briefly replaced by Crover and Mudhoney drummer Dan Peters. Novoselic contributed to the writing of various songs, providing ideas for Cobain.

Later in 1990, Melvins&#x27; singer-guitarist Buzz Osborne encouraged Novoselic and Cobain to check out a punk band called Scream. The pair were impressed by their drummer, Dave Grohl. A few weeks later, Scream disbanded, and Grohl placed a call to Osborne for advice. Osborne gave him Novoselic&#x27;s phone number, and Novoselic invited Grohl up to Seattle (from San Francisco, where Scream broke up). Grohl passed the audition and joined Nirvana. Grohl was Nirvana&#x27;s fifth and final drummer. Novoselic spent the following months with Nirvana traveling to various labels as the band shopped for a deal, eventually signing with DGC Records.

In the spring of 1991, the band entered Sound City Studios in Los Angeles to record &quot;Nevermind.&quot; Novoselic helped write the song &quot;Polly&quot;. Upon its release, &quot;Nevermind&quot; (1991) exceeded all expectations and became a worldwide commercial success.&quot; Nevermind&quot; had launched the band as a worldwide phenomenon with their hit single &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;.

At the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards, Nirvana would win awards for Best New Artist in a Video and Best Alternative Video for &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit.&quot; At the show, Nirvana performed &quot;Lithium&quot;. When Novoselic started playing the opening bass riff, he signaled that he could not hear his bass. Instead of continuing to play, Novoselic threw his bass guitar in the air, to perform a &quot;Bass Toss.&quot; He failed to catch it, later stating that he misjudged the height; he further stated that he &quot;faked like he was knocked out.&quot; Musician Brian May ran to give him medical attention; he did not suffer any injuries.

In 1992, Novoselic and the rest of Nirvana released a compilation album named &quot;Incesticide&quot;. Novoselic helped write lyrics for the songs &quot;Dive&quot;, &quot;Hairspray Queen&quot;, and &quot;Aneurysm&quot; on the album. This album was produced by a joint venture between DGC and Sub Pop.
During Nirvana&#x27;s 1992 Reading concert, Novoselic sang Oakland punk band &#x27;Fang&#x27;s&#x27; &quot;The Money Will Roll Right In&quot; with Cobain. Novoselic was an occasional vocalist and backing vocalist in Nirvana, occasionally singing &quot;Scoff&quot; and &quot;Rape Me&quot; at live shows. Novoselic stated that &quot;I kind of discovered my voice for the first time, and the more I did it, the better it got.&quot;

In September 1993, Nirvana&#x27;s third album &quot;In Utero&quot;, debuted at number one on the Billboard 200. However, the recording sessions mixed by Steve Albini were criticized by the band members, saying some songs &quot;didn&#x27;t sound perfect&quot;, as well as the band agreeing that Novoselic&#x27;s bass lines sounded &quot;too low&quot;. &quot;In Utero&quot; sold 3.5 million copies in the United States. In November of that year, Nirvana performed on MTV Unplugged with Lori Goldston playing cello, the introduction of guitarist Pat Smear, and Novoselic playing acoustic bass guitar, accordion, and acoustic rhythm guitar. This live performance was released a year later as an album, named &quot;MTV Unplugged in New York,&quot; which earned a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Performance.

Prior to their 1994 European tour, the band scheduled session time at Robert Lang Studios in Seattle to work on demos. For most of the three-day session, Cobain was absent, so Novoselic and Grohl worked on demos of their own songs. The duo completed several songs, including &quot;Exhausted&quot;, &quot;Big Me&quot;, &quot;February Stars&quot;, and &quot;Butterflies&quot;. On the third day of the session, Cobain finally arrived. The song &quot;You Know You&#x27;re Right&quot; was the band&#x27;s final studio recording.

Nirvana ended abruptly in April 1994 following Cobain&#x27;s death. For most of the rest of that year, Novoselic retreated from the spotlight. One of a few public appearances came that September at the MTV Video Music Awards, where the video for Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot; was awarded Best Alternative Video. Novoselic took the opportunity to pay tribute to Cobain.

On April 10, 2014, Novoselic was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Nirvana. Novoselic spoke at the band&#x27;s induction ceremony. On February 4, 2023, Nirvana received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award; Novoselic was on hand, along with Dave Grohl and Pat Smear, to receive the award.

===Post-Nirvana (1995–present)===
After Cobain&#x27;s death, Novoselic continued to dabble in musical endeavors. He co-formed the band Sweet 75 with Venezuelan musician Yva Las Vegass in 1995, releasing a single self-titled album in 1997. In 1996, Novoselic joined singer Johnny Cash, guitarist Kim Thayil of Soundgarden and drummer Sean Kinney of Alice in Chains to record a cover of Willie Nelson&#x27;s &quot;Time of the Preacher&quot;, for the tribute album &quot;Twisted Willie&quot;, released in January 1996. In 1998, Novoselic directed his first movie, &quot;L7: The Beauty Process&quot;, a pseudo-documentary that utilizes concert footage taped in 1997 in three American cities. In 1999, he joined Jello Biafra and Soundgarden guitarist Kim Thayil in the No WTO Combo.
In 2002, Novoselic performed uncredited background vocals on Foo Fighters&#x27; song &quot;Walking a Line&quot;, written as a tribute to Cobain, during the &quot;One by One&quot; album sessions. The track is included on the &quot;One by One&quot; bonus DVD, as well as being a bonus track to the album. He then joined former Meat Puppets front man Curt Kirkwood and former Sublime drummer Bud Gaugh to form Eyes Adrift. In Australia, there was another group called &quot;Eyes Adrift&quot;, and rather than pay to license that name, the trio called the band and album &quot;Bud, Curt &amp; Krist&quot; in this nation. Eyes Adrift released a self-titled album with twelve songs, with the Japanese version including two extras. Eyes Adrift was the first official release in Krist&#x27;s career where he sang lead vocals, singing lead on &quot;Inquiring Minds&quot;, &quot;Dottie Dawn &amp; Julie Jewel&quot; and &quot;Pasted&quot;. They also released a single named &quot;Alaska&quot;. He also took a highly active role in the songwriting process, co-writing several songs with Kirkwood. They toured mostly around the United States. The group disbanded in 2003.

Following the end of Eyes Adrift, Novoselic announced that he was quitting the music business, noting that he disliked the process of building up publicity for new records. However, in 2005, Novoselic had occasionally worked on music for a possible solo album, noting, &quot;Right now, I&#x27;m just doing it for myself, and that&#x27;s what it&#x27;s all about.&quot;

In November 2006, it was announced that Novoselic would join Flipper, replacing Bruno DeSmartas on bass, for a tour of the United Kingdom and Ireland. He was a full-time member of the band and had been working on their new album. On September 22, 2008, because of responsibilities at home, Novoselic announced his departure from the band. As a result, the band canceled the remainder of the tour. Rachel Thoele then replaced Novoselic.

In 2009, Novoselic played a newspaper vendor in the movie &quot;World&#x27;s Greatest Dad&quot; starring Robin Williams. In October 2010, Dave Grohl, former Nirvana bandmate of Novoselic, announced live on BBC radio, that Novoselic would be joining Foo Fighters as a bassist and accordionist on their next album, &quot;Wasting Light&quot;, which was released in 2011. Novoselic also played bass on children&#x27;s music artist Caspar Babypants&#x27; 2010 album &quot;This Is Fun!&quot;, for a cover of the Nirvana song &quot;Sliver&quot;. In 2011, he performed &quot;On a Plain&quot; and &quot;Sliver&quot; with the band at the &quot;Nevermind&quot; 20th anniversary celebration in Seattle.
In 2012, Novoselic and Grohl partnered with Paul McCartney on the song &quot;Cut Me Some Slack&quot;, which was composed specially for the soundtrack of the documentary &quot;Sound City&quot;, directed by Grohl. The song was first shown on December 12, 2012, at the 12-12-12 festival, which brought together music stars for the victims of Hurricane Sandy in New York. The song was received well by critics. Allmusic called it a &quot;tune with an immediate hook [and] melody&quot;. The song won the Grammy award for Best Rock Song in 2014. The partnership was referred to as &quot;Sirvana&quot; by Novoselic, referring to &quot;Sir Paul McCartney&quot;.

On April 17, 2016, Novoselic performed &quot;Helter Skelter&quot; with Paul McCartney in Seattle as part of the One on One tour. In November 2016, Novoselic confirmed that he was in the process of writing new music. His current band is Giants in the Trees, formed in 2017, with band members Jillian Raye, Erik Friend and Ray Prestegard. He is also in the band Filthy Friends, playing bass and accordion. He also collaborates with Lepidopterist and author Robert Michael Pyle with the musical project Butterfly Launches from Spar Pole. In late July 2017, Giants in the Trees released their first song, &quot;Sasquatch&quot;, which features a music video Novoselic joked as &quot;costing over 2 million U.S. dollars to produce&quot;. Giants in the Trees&#x27; first album was released in late 2017. Giants In The Trees&#x27; second album, &quot;Volume 2&quot;, was released in 2019.

Novoselic has been currently working with musicians such as Soundgarden&#x27;s Kim Thayil, alongside Matt Cameron, with production being handled by Jack Endino, as a new band, called 3rd Secret. A self-titled album was released in April 2022, with eleven songs recorded at The Bait Shop, in Ballard, Washington, as well as Novoselic&#x27;s home.

===Performance and recording with Foo Fighters===
In 1994, Grohl founded a new band, Foo Fighters. Grohl and his bandmates decided against Novoselic joining; Grohl said it would have felt &quot;really natural&quot; for them to work together again, but would have been uncomfortable for the other band members and placed more pressure on Grohl.

During the encore of the Foo Fighters&#x27; show on August 29, 1997, at Memorial Stadium as part of the Bumbershoot festival, Novoselic played bass on covers of &quot;Purple Rain&quot; and &quot;Communication Breakdown&quot;. In January 2002, Novoselic performed backing vocals for a non-album Foo Fighters track titled &quot;Walking a Line&quot;, later released on a special edition of their album &quot;One by One&quot;.

During the encore of Foo Fighters&#x27; secret show at Paladino&#x27;s in Tarzana, California on December 22, 2010, the band, with Grohl on drums, was joined onstage by Novoselic and the band&#x27;s live guitarist Pat Smear for a version of Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Marigold&quot;, a 1992 Grohl original, which was a B-side on Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot;. Novoselic also recorded bass and accordion for the song &quot;I Should Have Known&quot;, appearing on Foo Fighters&#x27; seventh studio album &quot;Wasting Light&quot;.

On December 5, 2017, Novoselic joined Foo Fighters on stage at Matthew Knight Arena in Eugene, Oregon, to play bass guitar on &quot;Big Me&quot;, a song from the Foo Fighters&#x27; debut album &quot;Foo Fighters&quot;. Ten months later, on October 6, 2018, Novoselic joined the band during an encore to play several Nirvana songs, with Grohl on drums, Pat Smear on guitar, and John J. McCauley and Joan Jett filling in as their lead singer.

==Political and social activism==

Novoselic was interested in politics—including the Northern Ireland conflict between Irish Nationalists and Unionists—at a young age.

In 1992, the Washington State Legislature attempted to pass a bill called the Erotic Music Law. The law would have allowed courts to declare certain albums &quot;erotic&quot; due to their content and would have made it illegal to sell those albums to anyone under the age of 18. Novoselic and Nirvana actively campaigned against the bill and performed a benefit concert for an organization that opposed it. Novoselic appeared on KOMO-TV″s &quot;Town Meeting&quot; as part of the campaign against this bill.

In 1995, the Erotic Music Law was reintroduced to the Washington State Legislature as the Matters Harmful to Minors bill. Noting that the music industry had serious clout in Seattle given the success of the grunge scene, Novoselic proposed creating a political action committee, which was named JAMPAC (Joint Artists and Musicians Political Action Committee). Over the next several years, JAMPAC fought a number of different issues, including the Teen Dance Ordinance, a 1985 law that strictly limited the ability of minors to attend shows. With JAMPAC, Novoselic began to turn his focus more and more towards politics.

Novoselic has advocated for electoral reform (especially instant-runoff voting and proportional representation). He considered a 2004 run for Lieutenant Governor of Washington as a Democrat, challenging an incumbent of the same party, but ultimately decided against it. He also joined the board of FairVote (then the Center for Voting and Democracy) and was appointed chair in January 2008. In 2020, Novoselic became board chair of Zócalo Public Square.

Novoselic&#x27;s first book, &quot;Of Grunge and Government: Let&#x27;s Fix This Broken Democracy&quot;, was published in October 2004. It covers Novoselic&#x27;s musical past, including Nirvana&#x27;s worldwide popularity in the early 1990s.
Novoselic supported Democratic Senator Barack Obama in the 2008 Democratic presidential primaries and in the 2008 general election. He later broke with the Democratic Party, stating that &quot;it&#x27;s a top-down structure&quot; averse to reform from its grassroots. 

In 2009, Novoselic ran for county clerk of Wahkiakum County, Washington, but later withdrew his candidacy. He had sought the office as a candidate of the &quot;Grange Party&quot; (a reference to his membership in the National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry) although no such party exists. His campaign was intended as a protest against Washington State&#x27;s party system, in which a candidate can claim any party (real or fictional) as their own without consent or support from the party. Novoselic explained his support for fair voting reforms on C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;Washington Journal&quot; in 2012.

In an interview for &quot;Reason TV&quot;, Novoselic was asked how he described his political views. He responded, &quot;I&#x27;m an anarcho-capitalist, socialist, moderate... I don&#x27;t know&quot; and continued to say that while his political views couldn&#x27;t be easily categorized, he finds fault in the political philosophies of both the left and right-wing. In 2015, he supported Lawrence Lessig&#x27;s presidential campaign. In 2016, Novoselic supported and campaigned for Libertarian presidential candidate Gary Johnson.

In June 2020, Novoselic made a Facebook post discussing President Donald Trump&#x27;s speech in response to unrest following the murder of George Floyd. He called Trump &quot;strong and direct&quot; but added that he &quot;should not be sending troops into states&quot;. Following criticism, Novoselic made his Facebook page private and deleted his Twitter account. After receiving backlash for the original post, Novoselic clarified: &quot;As an avowed independent, I don&#x27;t endorse a major party or candidate. And it feels insane to have to say this, but I don&#x27;t support fascism, and I don&#x27;t support an authoritarian state. I believe in a civilized society and that we all have to work toward that&quot;.

On May 22, 2023, the Forward Party published a tweet welcoming Novoselic onto their board.

In 2024, Novoselic founded the Cascade Party of Washington, a minor political party. To qualify as a political party, he announced a campaign for president in the 2024 United States presidential election, with a goal to gather 1,000 signatures. On August 24, 2024, he gathered the votes needed, and dropped out.

==In other media==
In 2004, Novoselic published &quot;Of Grunge and Government: Let&#x27;s Fix This Broken Democracy!.&quot;

In November 2007, Novoselic started writing blogs for the &quot;Seattle Weekly&quot; website. He stopped writing for Seattle Weekly in September 2010.

Novoselic has been the DJ numerous times for Coast radio on KMUN.

In 2014, ahead of Nirvana&#x27;s induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, Novoselic and Dave Grohl made guest appearances on &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon&quot;.

Novoselic has a blog titled &quot;Dream Journal&quot;.

==Personal life==
In 1989, Novoselic married Shelli Hyrkas, whom he had dated in high school. They divorced in 1999. In early 2004, he married American artist Darbury Ayn Stenderu. Together they have two children. They reside on a farm near Deep River, Washington, where they grow their own food. Novoselic stated, &quot;I live out in the country now and it&#x27;s quiet and it&#x27;s a place where I can think a lot.&quot;

Novoselic is an FAA-licensed pilot, earning a single-engine land rating after passing his flight test in April 2002. He went on to earn a multi-engine pilot certificate in February 2018. He has a strong interest in animals, geology, nature, and other sciences.

In 2016, Novoselic earned a BSc in social sciences from Washington State University.

==Discography==
===With Nirvana===

* &quot;Bleach&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Nevermind&quot; (1991)
* &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993)

===With Sweet 75===
* &quot;Sweet 75&quot; (1997)

===With the No WTO Combo===
* &quot;Live from the Battle in Seattle&quot; (2000)

===With Eyes Adrift===
* &quot;Eyes Adrift&quot; (2002)

===With Flipper===
* &quot;Love&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Fight&quot; (2009)

===With Filthy Friends===
* &quot;Invitation&quot; (2017)

===With Giants in the Trees===
* &quot;Giants in the Trees&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Volume 2&quot; (2019)

===With Butterfly Launches From Spar Pole===
* &quot;Butterfly Launches From Spar Pole&quot; (2019)

===With 3rd Secret===
* &quot;3rd Secret&quot; (2022)
* &quot;2nd 3rd Secret&quot; (2023)

===Collaborations===
==References==
==Notes==

* Bloch-Garcia, Peter. &quot;Kick Out the Jams&quot;. &quot;Real Change News&quot;. 2000.
==Further reading==

* &quot;Krist Novoselic: Grunge &amp; Government&quot; oral history’s by the Washington State Heritage Center. (October 2010) 
* &quot;The Best of Nirvana: A Step-by-Step Breakdown of the Bass Styles &amp; Techniques of Chris Novoselic&quot; (July 2003) 
* &quot;Of Grunge and Government: Let&#x27;s Fix This Broken Democracy&quot; (January 2004) 
* &quot;Taboo Tunes: A History of Banned Bands &amp; Censored Songs&quot; (April 2004) 
* &quot;Nirvana: The Biography&quot; (March 2007) 
* &quot;Kurt Cobain and Nirvana – Updated Edition: The Complete Illustrated History&quot; (September 2016) 

==External links==
* 
* Grammy Awards profile
* 
* FairVote profile 
* Audio interview &quot;Krist Novoselic Talks About Nirvana, Flipper, Bomb, and His Ideas On Changing Democracy&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="0" end="23" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Anthony Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="143" end="147" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="153" end="160" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="178" end="189" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990978" start="241" end="256" title="Aaron Burckhard" label="Aaron Burckhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="410" end="416" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="474" end="480" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="537" end="546" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="680" end="703" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="753" end="761" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="847" end="867" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="death of Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="906" end="932" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="981" end="1014" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419957" start="1083" end="1091" title="Sweet 75" label="Sweet 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580309" start="1104" end="1115" title="Eyes Adrift" label="Eyes Adrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1197" end="1206" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428959" start="1212" end="1219" title="Flipper (band)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="1315" end="1327" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="1353" end="1366" title="Wasting Light" label="Wasting Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121268" start="1436" end="1455" title="Giants in the Trees" label="Giants in the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q861430" start="1600" end="1614" title="Seattle Weekly" label="Seattle Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="1671" end="1687" title="electoral reform" label="electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429754" start="1701" end="1709" title="FairVote" label="FairVote"/>
<link wikidata="Q108816586" start="1809" end="1822" title="Forward Party (United States)" label="Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108358" start="1905" end="1916" title="Chris Vance (politician)" label="Chris Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q126944695" start="1942" end="1969" title="Cascade Party of Washington" label="Cascade Party of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="2025" end="2044" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003133" start="2074" end="2082" title="Croatian Americans" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q646054" start="2168" end="2174" title="List of islands of Croatia" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132307" start="2178" end="2180" title="Iž" label="Iž"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018714" start="2210" end="2218" title="Privlaka, Zadar County" label="Privlaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2460" end="2471" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="2488" end="2497" title="San Pedro, Los Angeles" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="2521" end="2529" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q233808" start="2651" end="2671" title="Aberdeen, Washington" label="Aberdeen, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="2729" end="2734" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="2736" end="2743" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="2836" end="2847" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320428" start="2893" end="2902" title="Malocclusion" label="underbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="2990" end="3002" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="3004" end="3017" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="3019" end="3026" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="3028" end="3037" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q908848" start="3039" end="3043" title="Devo" label="Devo"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="3049" end="3058" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="3089" end="3100" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q139061" start="3115" end="3133" title="Zabranjeno Pušenje" label="Zabranjeno Pušenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q530394" start="3135" end="3152" title="Prljavo kazalište" label="Prljavo kazalište"/>
<link wikidata="Q206744" start="3157" end="3161" title="Azra (band)" label="Azra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="3187" end="3196" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="3231" end="3242" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="3251" end="3258" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="3328" end="3342" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q310752" start="3344" end="3357" title="Geezer Butler" label="Geezer Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q215835" start="3359" end="3373" title="John Entwistle" label="John Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207197" start="3379" end="3391" title="Gene Simmons" label="Gene Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="3501" end="3512" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="3656" end="3665" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="3793" end="3800" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713582" start="3894" end="3914" title="Aberdeen High School (Washington)" label="Aberdeen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q987133" start="3957" end="3966" title="Montesano, Washington" label="Montesano"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="4006" end="4015" title="Demo (music)" label="demo tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q931863" start="4035" end="4047" title="Fecal Matter (band)" label="Fecal Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="4582" end="4610" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q181847" start="4611" end="4621" title="cover band" label="cover band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990978" start="4777" end="4792" title="Aaron Burckhard" label="Aaron Burckhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q451088" start="4936" end="4947" title="Dale Crover" label="Dale Crover"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="4989" end="5002" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="5046" end="5052" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="5148" end="5156" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q740145" start="5165" end="5175" title="Dan Peters" label="Dan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q711367" start="5307" end="5319" title="Buzz Osborne" label="Buzz Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030697" start="5384" end="5390" title="Scream (band)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="5434" end="5444" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="5895" end="5906" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855065" start="5949" end="5967" title="Sound City Studios" label="Sound City Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="5999" end="6008" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="6054" end="6059" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="6281" end="6304" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q822313" start="6320" end="6347" title="1992 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1992 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q595693" start="6378" end="6404" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist in a Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q821010" start="6409" end="6431" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Alternative Video" label="Best Alternative Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="6510" end="6517" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="6880" end="6889" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="7042" end="7053" title="Incesticide" label="Incesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376463" start="7111" end="7115" title="Dive (Nirvana song)" label="Dive"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="7129" end="7144" title="Hairspray Queen" label="Hairspray Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="7162" end="7170" title="Incesticide" label="Aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="7242" end="7245" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="7250" end="7257" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="7286" end="7293" title="Reading and Leeds Festivals" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="7511" end="7516" title="Scoff (song)" label="Scoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127350" start="7533" end="7540" title="Rape Me" label="Rape Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="7735" end="7755" title="In Utero (album)" label="&amp;quot;In Utero&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7786" end="7799" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="7842" end="7854" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="8154" end="8167" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119426" start="8173" end="8186" title="Lori Goldston" label="Lori Goldston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="8195" end="8200" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="8232" end="8241" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q212326" start="8399" end="8424" title="MTV Unplugged in New York" label="MTV Unplugged in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="8447" end="8459" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="8464" end="8499" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Performance."/>
<link wikidata="Q3435656" start="8571" end="8590" title="Robert Lang Studios" label="Robert Lang Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q638815" start="8805" end="8811" title="Big Me" label="Big Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q968646" start="8825" end="8839" title="February Stars" label="February Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418630" start="8948" end="8974" title="You Know You&amp;#x27;re Right" label="You Know You&amp;#x27;re Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="9073" end="9092" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="Cobain&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q257974" start="9228" end="9249" title="1994 MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="9293" end="9309" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q821010" start="9328" end="9350" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Alternative Video" label="Best Alternative Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="9691" end="9700" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419957" start="9860" end="9868" title="Sweet 75" label="Sweet 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655185" start="9937" end="9954" title="Sweet 75 (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="9997" end="10008" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="10020" end="10030" title="Kim Thayil" label="Kim Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="10034" end="10045" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q434768" start="10058" end="10069" title="Sean Kinney" label="Sean Kinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="10073" end="10088" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="10110" end="10123" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q755963" start="10137" end="10157" title="Red Headed Stranger" label="Time of the Preacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="10292" end="10294" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10296" end="10314" title="The Beauty Process: Triple Platinum" label="The Beauty Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q8812380" start="10324" end="10342" title="pseudo-documentary" label="pseudo-documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q334288" start="10432" end="10444" title="Jello Biafra" label="Jello Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="10449" end="10460" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="10471" end="10481" title="Kim Thayil" label="Kim Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982982" start="10489" end="10501" title="No WTO Combo" label="No WTO Combo"/>
<link wikidata="Q907578" start="10665" end="10675" title="One by One (Foo Fighters album)" label="One by One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132613" start="10828" end="10840" title="Meat Puppets" label="Meat Puppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q327126" start="10851" end="10864" title="Curt Kirkwood" label="Curt Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q591691" start="10876" end="10883" title="Sublime (band)" label="Sublime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506421" start="10892" end="10901" title="Bud Gaugh" label="Bud Gaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580309" start="10910" end="10921" title="Eyes Adrift" label="Eyes Adrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="11308" end="11319" title="Lead vocalist" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428959" start="12094" end="12101" title="Flipper (band)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q115597" start="12534" end="12559" title="World&amp;#x27;s Greatest Dad" label="World&amp;#x27;s Greatest Dad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="12575" end="12589" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="12608" end="12618" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="12627" end="12634" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12676" end="12679" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="12680" end="12685" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="12719" end="12731" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="12789" end="12802" title="Wasting Light" label="Wasting Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105802" start="12897" end="12913" title="Caspar Babypants" label="Caspar Babypants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706908" start="12995" end="13001" title="Sliver (song)" label="Sliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q611498" start="13037" end="13047" title="On a Plain" label="On a Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="13152" end="13159" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="13205" end="13219" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17489370" start="13238" end="13255" title="Cut Me Some Slack" label="Cut Me Some Slack"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13296" end="13329" title="Sound City: Real to Reel" label="the soundtrack of the documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855067" start="13336" end="13346" title="Sound City (film)" label="Sound City"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13427" end="13444" title="12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief" label="12-12-12 festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="13500" end="13515" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282636" start="13660" end="13691" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Song" label="Grammy award for Best Rock Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057533" start="13861" end="13875" title="Helter Skelter (song)" label="Helter Skelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="13887" end="13901" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058610" start="13928" end="13938" title="One on One (tour)" label="One on One"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121268" start="14052" end="14071" title="Giants in the Trees" label="Giants in the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457675" start="14176" end="14190" title="Filthy Friends" label="Filthy Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442870" start="14246" end="14259" title="Lepidopterist" label="Lepidopterist"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813480" start="14659" end="14667" title="Volume 2 (Giants in the Trees album)" label="Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="14758" end="14769" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="14777" end="14787" title="Kim Thayil" label="Kim Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q318587" start="14799" end="14811" title="Matt Cameron" label="Matt Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="14846" end="14857" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q111841819" start="14881" end="14891" title="3rd Secret" label="3rd Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="15130" end="15142" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588210" start="15462" end="15478" title="Memorial Stadium (Seattle)" label="Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997241" start="15494" end="15505" title="Bumbershoot" label="Bumbershoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000445" start="15557" end="15568" title="Purple Rain (song)" label="Purple Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q278356" start="15585" end="15608" title="Communication Breakdown" label="Communication Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q907578" start="15795" end="15805" title="One by One (Foo Fighters album)" label="One by One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708222" start="15888" end="15907" title="Tarzana, California" label="Tarzana, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q353973" start="16028" end="16037" title="Pat Smear" label="Pat Smear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134995" start="16076" end="16084" title="Marigold (Dave Grohl song)" label="Marigold"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="16127" end="16133" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q869706" start="16158" end="16174" title="Heart-Shaped Box" label="Heart-Shaped Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="16244" end="16263" title="I Should Have Known (Foo Fighters song)" label="I Should Have Known"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="16330" end="16343" title="Wasting Light" label="Wasting Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709065" start="16415" end="16435" title="Matthew Knight Arena" label="Matthew Knight Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="16439" end="16453" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q638815" start="16484" end="16490" title="Big Me" label="Big Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q735771" start="16551" end="16563" title="Foo Fighters (album)" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="16750" end="16759" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="16880" end="16905" title="The Troubles" label="Northern Ireland conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="16914" end="16932" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="16937" end="16946" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972258" start="16977" end="17005" title="Washington State Legislature" label="Washington State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191472" start="17393" end="17400" title="KOMO-TV" label="KOMO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972258" start="17526" end="17554" title="Washington State Legislature" label="Washington State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="17723" end="17749" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694290" start="17919" end="17939" title="Teen Dance Ordinance" label="Teen Dance Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="18121" end="18137" title="electoral reform" label="electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="18150" end="18171" title="instant-runoff voting" label="instant-runoff voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="18176" end="18203" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516453" start="18235" end="18254" title="Lieutenant governor" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="18258" end="18268" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="18274" end="18282" title="U.S. Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429754" start="18391" end="18399" title="FairVote" label="FairVote"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18583" end="18645" title="Of Grunge and Government: Let&amp;#x27;s Fix This Broken Democracy" label="Of Grunge and Government: Let&amp;#x27;s Fix This Broken Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="18811" end="18821" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="18830" end="18842" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="18900" end="18921" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q883211" start="19088" end="19100" title="county clerk" label="county clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q484015" start="19104" end="19132" title="Wahkiakum County, Washington" label="Wahkiakum County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753183" start="19278" end="19330" title="National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry" label="National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="19624" end="19630" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972012" start="19644" end="19662" title="Washington Journal" label="Washington Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="19705" end="19714" title="Reason (magazine)" label="Reason TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="19812" end="19830" title="anarcho-capitalist" label="anarcho-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="19832" end="19841" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="20025" end="20029" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="20034" end="20044" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20926395" start="20068" end="20112" title="Lawrence Lessig presidential campaign, 2016" label="Lawrence Lessig&amp;#x27;s presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997769" start="20162" end="20209" title="Gary Johnson 2016 presidential campaign" label="Libertarian presidential candidate Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="20243" end="20251" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="20268" end="20277" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="20278" end="20290" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="20341" end="20363" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="20561" end="20568" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738353" start="20702" end="20713" title="major party" label="major party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="20794" end="20801" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="20831" end="20844" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q108816586" start="20955" end="20968" title="Forward Party (United States)" label="Forward Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q126944695" start="21057" end="21084" title="Cascade Party of Washington" label="Cascade Party of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="21189" end="21229" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078759" start="21393" end="21456" title="Of Grunge and Government" label="Of Grunge and Government: Let&amp;#x27;s Fix This Broken Democracy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q861430" start="21529" end="21543" title="Seattle Weekly" label="Seattle Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="21640" end="21642" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138076" start="21662" end="21673" title="Coast (radio station)" label="Coast radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333968" start="21677" end="21681" title="KMUN" label="KMUN"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="21736" end="21762" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303732" start="21821" end="21859" title="The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" label="The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="21884" end="21888" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250260" start="22165" end="22187" title="Deep River, Washington" label="Deep River, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="22365" end="22368" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="22639" end="22642" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q597236" start="22667" end="22694" title="Washington State University" label="Washington State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="22735" end="22753" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="&amp;quot;Bleach&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="22769" end="22778" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="22800" end="22808" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655185" start="22851" end="22859" title="Sweet 75 (album)" label="Sweet 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657372" start="22910" end="22941" title="Live from the Battle in Seattle" label="Live from the Battle in Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580309" start="22987" end="22998" title="Eyes Adrift" label="Eyes Adrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981607" start="23040" end="23044" title="Love (Flipper album)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447723" start="23066" end="23071" title="Fight (Flipper album)" label="Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q56690704" start="23120" end="23130" title="Invitation (Filthy Friends album)" label="Invitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85763461" start="23184" end="23203" title="Giants in the Trees (album)" label="Giants in the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813480" start="23225" end="23233" title="Volume 2 (Giants in the Trees album)" label="Volume 2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52725" wikidata="Q273171" url="?curid=52725" title="Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer">
<text>Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (informally known as ELP) were an English progressive rock supergroup formed in London in 1970. The band consisted of Keith Emerson (keyboards) of The Nice, Greg Lake (vocals, bass, guitars, producer) of King Crimson, and Carl Palmer (drums, percussion) of Atomic Rooster. With nine RIAA-certified gold record albums in the US, and an estimated 48 million records sold worldwide, they are one of the most popular and commercially successful progressive rock groups of the 1970s, with a musical sound including adaptations of classical music with jazz and symphonic rock elements, dominated by Emerson&#x27;s flamboyant use of the Hammond organ, Moog synthesizer, and piano (although Lake wrote several acoustic songs for the group).

The band came to prominence following their performance at the Isle of Wight Festival in August 1970. In their first year, the group signed with E.G. Records (who distributed the band&#x27;s records through Island Records in the United Kingdom, and Atlantic Records in North America), and released &quot;Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer&quot; (1970) and &quot;Tarkus&quot; (1971), both of which reached the UK top five. The band&#x27;s success continued with &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; (1971), &quot;Trilogy&quot; (1972), and &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; (1973, released on ELP&#x27;s own Manticore Records label). After a three-year break, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer released &quot;Works Volume 1&quot; (1977) and &quot;Works Volume 2&quot; (1977). After &quot;Love Beach&quot; (1978), the group disbanded in 1979.

The band re-formed partially in the 1980s as Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell featuring Cozy Powell in place of Palmer, who was, by then, a member of Asia. Robert Berry then replaced Lake while Palmer returned, forming 3. In 1991, the original trio re-formed and released two more albums, &quot;Black Moon&quot; (1992) and &quot;In the Hot Seat&quot; (1994), and toured at various times between 1992 and 1998. Their final performance took place in 2010 at the High Voltage Festival in London to commemorate the band&#x27;s 40th anniversary. Both Emerson and Lake died in 2016, leaving Palmer as the only surviving member of the band.

==History==
===1969–1970: Formation and first gigs===
By the end of 1969, the Nice keyboardist Keith Emerson and King Crimson bassist/vocalist Greg Lake were looking to leave their respective groups and form a new band. The pair first met in New York City and discussed the possibility of forming one together; they met again in December 1969 when the Nice and King Crimson were billed together for concerts at the Fillmore West in San Francisco. During a soundcheck before one of the shows, Emerson described the first time he and Lake played together: &quot;Greg was moving a bass line and I played the piano in back and Zap! It was there.&quot; When the Nice split in March 1970 and Lake left King Crimson a month later, the pair began the search for a drummer, which turned out to be a difficult process. They initially approached Mitch Mitchell, who was at a loose end following the break-up of the Jimi Hendrix Experience and suggested a jam session take place among the three of them and guitarist Jimi Hendrix. The session never happened, but it caused the press to report rumours of a planned supergroup named HELP, an acronym for &quot;Hendrix Emerson Lake Palmer&quot;, which Lake later debunked. As part of auditions for drummers at a studio by Soho Square, Emerson&#x27;s manager, Tony Stratton Smith, suggested Carl Palmer of Atomic Rooster and previously the Crazy World of Arthur Brown. Palmer turned up for a session and enjoyed the chemistry, but was reluctant to commit as Atomic Rooster were starting to gain attention in Europe. Emerson and Lake persisted, and after several weeks Palmer agreed to join.

The three named themselves Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer to remove the focus on Emerson as the most famous of the three, and to ensure that they were not called the &quot;new Nice&quot;. Triton was a name that Emerson said &quot;was buzzing around&quot; for a little while, and Triumvirate and Seahorse were also in contention. They moved to Island Studios in Notting Hill to rehearse and form a live set. Most of the numbers were rock adaptations and arrangements of classical pieces, including: &quot;Allegro barbaro&quot; by Béla Bartók entitled &quot;The Barbarian&quot;, the jazz standard &quot;Blue Rondo à la Turk&quot; by Dave Brubeck entitled &quot;Rondo&quot; that Emerson had recorded with the Nice, &quot;Nut Rocker&quot; as an encore, and &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; by Modest Mussorgsky that Emerson wanted to do after seeing it performed by an orchestra. An original song from Lake, &quot;Take a Pebble&quot;, was also worked out. The group wished to enhance their live act, and spent £9,000 on a sound mixer and £4,000 on a Moog modular synthesizer imported from America that was adapted for better performance on stage.
The trio&#x27;s first live gig followed at Plymouth Guildhall on 23 August 1970, supported by Earth, a local band. They travelled to the venue in a transit van previously owned by fellow progressive rock band Yes, and were paid around £400 for the gig. A small venue outside London was deliberately chosen in case the concert was a failure, but the concert was well received. Their second gig took place on 29 August with a set at the Isle of Wight Festival which was attended by an estimated 600,000 people and drew considerable attention from the public and music press. At the end of &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;, the band fired two cannons that Emerson had tested in a field near Heathrow Airport.

The success of the group&#x27;s debut, as well as Lake&#x27;s prior association with King Crimson, led to the band signing management and recording contracts with E.G. Records, who distributed their records through Island in the UK and Cotillion, a subsidiary of Atlantic Records, in North America. Emerson believed that Atlantic&#x27;s chief and co-founder Ahmet Ertegun agreed to take the band on &quot;because we could sell out 20,000-seaters before we even had a record out. That was enough for him to think that a lot of people would go out and buy the record when it did come out.&quot;

===1970–1971: Debut album, &quot;Tarkus&quot;, and &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;===

In the months surrounding their debut gigs, the band recorded their first album, &quot;Emerson Lake &amp; Palmer&quot;, at Advision Studios. Lake took on the role of producer, which he had also done in King Crimson, with Eddy Offord as their engineer. The album included studio versions of &quot;The Barbarian&quot; and &quot;Take a Pebble&quot;, &quot;Knife-Edge&quot;, based on the first movement of &quot;Sinfonietta&quot; by Leoš Janáček and the Allemande of French Suite No. 1 in D minor by Johann Sebastian Bach, Palmer&#x27;s drum solo &quot;Tank&quot;, the three-part &quot;The Three Fates&quot;, and &quot;Lucky Man&quot;, an acoustic ballad that Lake wrote when he was twelve. The album was released in the UK in November 1970, and reached No. 4 in the UK and No. 18 in the US. &quot;Lucky Man&quot; was released as a single that peaked at No. 48 in the US.

From September 1970 to March 1971, the band completed their first concert tour with shows across the UK, Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. Emerson used a large Moog modular synthesizer on stage but it was unreliable as heat affected its sound. Their performance on 9 December 1970 at the Lyceum Theatre in London was filmed and released in UK theatres in 1972 with added psychedelic effects including characters from Marvel Comics.

During a break in their first tour in January 1971, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer returned to Advision Studios with Offord to record their second album, &quot;Tarkus&quot;. Friction between Emerson and Lake during the early recording sessions almost caused the group to disband as Lake disliked the material that Emerson was writing. Following a meeting with the band and management, Lake agreed to write his own songs and continue recording. The album was recorded in six days. The album&#x27;s first side is occupied by the 20-minute title track, a seven-part song based on reverse evolution that was recorded in four days. Its cover art was designed by painter and graphic designer William Neal. &quot;Tarkus&quot; was released in June 1971 and was a commercial success, reaching No. 1 in the UK and No. 9 in the US. The band resumed touring with their first North American tour, starting 24 April 1971 at Thiel College in Greenville, Pennsylvania, and continued until the end of May. Further dates across Europe followed until the end of the year.

The band&#x27;s third album, &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot;, was released as a budget album in the UK in November 1971. It features their version of the Mussorgsky suite performed live at Newcastle City Hall on 26 March 1971 plus the concert&#x27;s encore, &quot;Nut Rocker&quot;. It was to be released before &quot;Tarkus&quot;, but the group delayed its release on purpose to show the music press and public that they could write their own songs, and were not merely &quot;the band that did classical music&quot;. Atlantic Records declined to release it in the US, claiming it would not sell or receive any radio airplay because of its classical orientation and offered to release it on its sister label Nonesuch Records which handled budget, classical, and avant-garde albums. The band refused until Island imported 250,000 copies into the US which quickly sold, helped by radio DJ Scott Muni playing the entire album on WNEW-FM in New York City. The strong response prompted Atlantic to release it through Cotillion at full price in January 1972. The album peaked at No. 3 in the UK and No. 10 in the US.

===1971–1974: &quot;Trilogy&quot; and &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot;===
&quot;Trilogy&quot;, the band&#x27;s third studio album, was recorded at Advision Studios with Offord between October 1971 and January 1972. Its cover art was designed by Storm Thorgerson and Aubrey Powell of Hipgnosis. &quot;Hoedown&quot; is an adaptation of &quot;Rodeo&quot; by Aaron Copland. Released in July 1972, &quot;Trilogy&quot; reached No. 2 in the UK and No. 5 in the US. &quot;From the Beginning&quot;, an acoustic ballad featuring an extended synthesizer solo, was released as a single which reached No. 39 in the US. Lake has picked &quot;Trilogy&quot; as his favourite studio album by the band. The album was supported with a North American tour in March and April 1972 which included a spot at the Mar y Sol Pop Festival in Manatí, Puerto Rico on 3 April. Following dates across Europe, including their first in Italy, the band performed at the Concert 10 Festival at Pocono International Raceway in Long Pond, Pennsylvania, on 9 July 1972. This was followed by their first dates in Japan where a riot broke out during the show in Osaka, causing the power to be cut and the group fleeing the stage.
In early 1973, the band formed their own record label, Manticore Records, and purchased an abandoned cinema as their own rehearsal hall in Fulham, London. In June 1973, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer began recording &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; in London at Advision and Olympic Studios which lasted until September that year. Offord was not present for the recording sessions as he was working with Yes, leaving engineering and mixing duties to Chris Kimsey and Geoff Young. Lake wrote the album&#x27;s lyrics with Peter Sinfield and its sleeve was designed by H. R. Giger and includes the band&#x27;s new logo. Formed of five tracks, the album includes a rendition of &quot;Jerusalem&quot; which features the debut of the Moog Apollo, a prototype polyphonic synthesizer. &quot;Toccata&quot; is a cover of the fourth movement of Piano Concerto No. 1 by Argentine composer Alberto Ginastera and contains synthesised percussion in the form of an acoustic drum kit fitted with pick-ups that triggered electronic sounds. The 29-minute track &quot;Karn Evil 9&quot; is the longest song recorded by the group. &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; was released in November 1973 and reached No. 2 in the UK and No. 11 in the US.

From November 1973 to August 1974, the band toured North America and Europe which saw them carry almost 40 tons of equipment. On 6 April 1974, the band headlined the inaugural California Jam Festival at the Ontario Motor Speedway, California, to an attendance of 250,000 people. The show was filmed and broadcast across the US. These shows exhibited a mix of virtuoso musicianship and over-the-top performances which some criticised as excessive, such as Emerson playing a piano as it spun, suspended, end-over-end; Palmer playing on a rotating drum platform; and Emerson throwing a Hammond organ around the stage to create feedback. Emerson often used a knife, given to him by Lemmy Kilmister, who had roadied for the Nice, to force the keys on the organ to stay down. The tour was one of the top concert draws during for the 1973–1974 period. Performances from Anaheim, California, were documented in the live album, &quot;Welcome Back, My Friends, to the Show That Never Ends ~ Ladies and Gentlemen&quot;, released in August 1974 as a triple LP. The album peaked at No. 5 in the UK and No. 4 in the US.

===1974–1978: Hiatus and &quot;Works&quot;===
After touring in 1974, the band took an extended break. The three members bought homes overseas and became tax exiles in the process, but Emerson suffered a setback in 1975 when his Sussex home burned down and lost most of his possessions. The ordeal left him depressed, and he later credited his bandmates in helping him recover from drug misuse.

They regrouped in 1976 to record &quot;Works Volume 1&quot; at Mountain Studios in Montreux, Switzerland and EMI Studios in Paris, France. It is a double album with one side of an LP containing songs by each member and a fourth of group material. Much of the album was recorded with an orchestral accompaniment; Emerson&#x27;s side consists of his 18-minute, three-movement &quot;Piano Concerto No. 1&quot;. Lake contributed five songs he co-wrote with Sinfield, and Palmer&#x27;s includes two covers of classical pieces by Sergei Prokofiev and Bach. One of the two group tracks, &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot;, is a cover of the same-titled orchestral piece by Aaron Copland, who gave permission to have the band release it. &quot;Works Volume 1&quot; was released in March 1977 and peaked at No. 9 in the UK and No. 12 in the US. A single of &quot;Fanfare for the Common Man&quot; was released and reached No. 2 in the UK, the band&#x27;s highest charting UK single. In November 1977, &quot;Works Volume 2&quot; was released as a compilation of shorter tracks recorded from 1973 to 1976 during various album recording sessions. The album was not as commercially successful as the band&#x27;s previous albums; it reached No. 20 in the UK and No. 37 in the US. Three tracks from the album were released as singles: &quot;Tiger in a Spotlight&quot;, &quot;Maple Leaf Rag&quot;, and &quot;Watching Over You&quot;.
The two &quot;Works&quot; albums were supported by North American tours which lasted from May 1977 to February 1978, spanning over 120 dates. The original plan was to have an orchestra on stage with the band each night, but the idea was dropped after 11 shows due to the high costs and difficulties with the orchestra unions. The 64-piece orchestra and choir were formed from the 500 who auditioned for a position. The orchestra was used two other times on the tour: for three dates at Madison Square Garden in New York City and the August 1977 show at the Olympic Stadium in Montreal that was attended by an estimated 78,000 people, the highest attended Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer concert as a solo act. The concert was filmed and released as a live album in 1979 entitled &quot;Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer in Concert&quot; that reached No. 73 in the US. Emerson wished for a double album release, but Atlantic Records decided against it due to the band&#x27;s pending dissolution at its time of release. In 1993, the album was repackaged with additional tracks as &quot;Works Live&quot;, and put out on video in 1998. Emerson later said that his insistence on the band using an orchestra was a mistake, but he was unwilling to tour without one. Lake looked back on this period as the beginning of the end of the group&#x27;s original run.

===1978–1979: &quot;Love Beach&quot; and first break-up===
After their 1977–78 tour, the band discussed their next move. Emerson recalled that in order for the group to continue, &quot;we would have to do a lot of cutting down&quot; and considered the possibility of producing music with just a piano, bass guitar, and drums. As the group were contractually obliged to record one more studio album, the band relocated to Emerson&#x27;s home near Nassau in the Bahamas and recorded &quot;Love Beach&quot; at the nearby Compass Point Studios in 1978. Lake did not carry out the production duties, leaving Emerson to complete the record on his own after his bandmates returned home when recording was complete. The album has been dismissed by the band, who explained it was produced to fulfil a contractual obligation. Sinfield is credited on the majority of the tracks as a lyricist except &quot;Canario&quot;, an instrumental based on &quot;Fantasía para un gentilhombre&quot; by Spanish composer Joaquín Rodrigo. The second side is taken up with &quot;Memoirs of an Officer and a Gentleman&quot;, a four-part 20-minute track that tells a coming of age story of a soldier during the World War II-era. Its cover is a photograph of the group at a beach off an island from Salt Cay, Turks Islands, &quot;decked out as bare-chested late-seventies disco stars&quot;. Despite Emerson expressing his disapproval on the album&#x27;s title and cover to Ertegun, neither was changed.

&quot;Love Beach&quot; was released in November 1978 and was poorly received by the music press. &quot;All I Want Is You&quot; was released as a single in the UK, but failed to chart. It did sell enough to be certified gold in the US for 500,000 copies sold, in January 1979. In early 1979, Palmer attempted to organise a farewell summer tour and have the group disband at its conclusion. Due to internal problems, such as &quot;what we should play and how we should play it&quot;, the tour never materialised. The band made no announcement of their break-up, and Palmer moved on by forming a band, PM, which released one album entitled &quot;1PM&quot;.

===1985–1989: Related activity===
In 1985, Emerson and Lake formed Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell with former Rainbow drummer Cozy Powell. Palmer declined to participate in a reunion as he was busy with commitments with Asia. Rumours also linked Bill Bruford to their new line-up, but he was committed to King Crimson and Earthworks. The group&#x27;s only album, &quot;Emerson Lake &amp; Powell&quot;, was released in June 1986 and charted at No. 35 in the UK and No. 23 in the US. The single &quot;Touch and Go&quot; went to No. 60 in the US and No. 2 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart. The trio toured the album in 1986, playing material by the Nice and Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer.

In 1988, Emerson and Palmer joined with Robert Berry to form the band 3. They released an album, &quot;To the Power of Three&quot;, in 1988.

===1990–1998: Re-formation, &quot;Black Moon&quot;, &quot;In the Hot Seat&quot;, and second break-up===
In 1990, former Atlantic Records executive Phil Carson approached Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer to reunite and produce music for a proposed film. The project never developed, but the trio remained in London and started to come up with new musical ideas. The sessions were productive, with the band working as much as five to six days a week for three months, which convinced them to abandon soundtrack work in favour of putting out a new album. By mid-1991, Carson had secured them with a two-album deal with his new independent label, Victory Music. Lake&#x27;s voice had deepened by this point, and the band took greater care in the key that songs were written to better suit his vocals. They also utilised modern recording technology to complement the songs, including MIDI and digital sampling, which Palmer said kept their material fresh. Atlantic capitalised on the reunion by releasing &quot;The Atlantic Years&quot;, a two-and-a-half hour compilation of their early material.
&quot;Black Moon&quot; was released in July 1992; it peaked at No. 78 in the US but failed to chart in the UK. The group supported it with a world tour between July 1992 and April 1993, which included their first shows in England since 1974. The concerts at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall were broadcast on BBC radio and released as a live album in 1993, entitled &quot;Live at the Royal Albert Hall&quot;. The shows were also filmed and subsequently released on DVD. Later in 1993, Victory Music released &quot;The Return of the Manticore&quot; a 4-disc box set retrospective of the band&#x27;s career and previously unreleased studio tracks, including a new studio recording of &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; in Dolby surround sound.

The band&#x27;s final studio album, &quot;In the Hot Seat&quot;, was released in September 1994. Victory Music was in financial trouble by this time, as albums by fellow label acts Tin Machine and Yes failed to generate strong enough sales, causing Victory and producer Keith Olsen to put pressure on Emerson to make a more commercially oriented album with the band. When Emerson reluctantly agreed, Victory and Olsen brought in several individuals to assist in the songwriting; Olsen received a credit on four tracks and Bill Wray on two. In the summer of 1994, the band cancelled an upcoming North American and Japanese tour, and the group split for a short period to pursue solo projects. Emerson underwent surgery to correct a compressed nerve in his arm in October, which left him able to play at only half his previous capacity. Palmer also had an operation to fix his carpal tunnel syndrome. Initial plans to commemorate the band&#x27;s 25th anniversary in 1995 were shelved. Following the demise of Victory Music, their back catalogue transferred to Rhino Records.

Emerson and Palmer eventually recovered enough to start touring again from August 1996, beginning with a 33-date US tour opening for Jethro Tull. This was followed by a Japanese tour in October, where the group played a full set. In 1997, the band completed a 50-date world tour. It is noted for Emerson&#x27;s Hammond organ catching fire during the show in Boston. The remains were donated to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In May 1998, Lake&#x27;s manager announced that the band had started work on a new studio album. This was followed by a North American tour in August as openers for Deep Purple and Dream Theater, which included the &quot;Tarkus&quot; suite performed in its entirety for the first time since 1974. After the tour, friction arose within the group as Lake wanted to relinquish his role as producer on the new album, and blamed the band&#x27;s recent creative lull on this fact. Emerson and Palmer were against the idea, and claimed Lake had not presented any tangible material for them to work on despite knowing he was collecting ideas for a solo album. The rift resulted in the trio&#x27;s split by the end of 1998, and a tour booked for the spring of 1999 was cancelled.

===2010–present: 40th anniversary concert, deaths of Emerson and Lake, and aftermath===
In April and May 2010, Emerson and Lake embarked on a North American tour, &#x27;Manticore Hall&#x27;, with stripped-down versions of Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, the Nice, and King Crimson songs. It originated when the pair got together at Lake&#x27;s home studio earlier in the year to write new songs. When they stopped for a break, they occasionally played an Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer song which led to the idea of recreating it on stage as it gave the songs a different feel to the originals. Later in 2010, the 4-CD box set &quot;A Time and a Place&quot; was released that features live tracks from 1970 to 1998. Two archival concerts followed in 2011: &quot;Live at Nassau Coliseum &#x27;78&quot; and &quot;Live at the Mar Y Sol Festival &#x27;72&quot;.

In September 2009, Palmer announced that the band had planned to reform earlier in the year, but it had to be pushed back for Emerson to receive medical attention on one of his hands. The three got together for a one-off concert for their 40th anniversary, headlining the High Voltage Festival at London&#x27;s Victoria Park on 25 July 2010. The show was recorded and filmed; a live album was released as &quot;High Voltage&quot;. The DVD and Blu-ray of the concert followed in August 2011, which also contained a documentary on the band&#x27;s career. Lake said that despite the band having &quot;tremendous technical problems&quot; on stage and struggled at points, the audience were enthusiastic and people enjoyed their performance. Palmer held a more critical view, and said the group rehearsed for five weeks before the show, which he initially considered excessive, but upon hearing the recording, &quot;maybe five weeks was not long enough. It wasn&#x27;t to the standard that I liked and I didn&#x27;t think it sounded that good.&quot;

Following their 2010 reunion, the band expressed differing opinions regarding their future. In early 2010, Emerson and Lake had not ruled out further Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer concerts or the possibility of a new studio album; the former said: &quot;I see no reason why we shouldn&#x27;t be doing more.&quot; In 2011, Lake said that Emerson and he were open to the idea of more group activity, but acknowledged Palmer&#x27;s more negative comments to the press shortly before the 40th anniversary concert. Lake said: &quot;I don&#x27;t know why Carl has a propensity to dwell on negative issues... Keith and I have had our differences over the years, but we&#x27;ve certainly put them behind us and just forgot about them... I&#x27;m waiting for Carl to reach the point of wisdom in his life when he realises that carrying around grudges from the past is pointless.&quot; In 2012, Lake was unsure that a reunion could take place: &quot;I doubt very much it will happen because I don&#x27;t think Carl and Keith are in that same frame of mind.&quot; In 2013, Palmer revealed that he put a stop on further group plans.

In December 2010, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer signed a worldwide licensing deal with Sony Music Entertainment. In 2012, they secured a new back catalogue agreement with American-based Razor &amp; Tie, and acquired a worldwide catalogue distribution deal with BMG Rights Management three years later.

On 11 March 2016, Emerson died by suicide from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to his head. On 7 December, Lake died from cancer.

In October 2021, Rocket 88 Books released &quot;Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer&quot;, the first official book about the band that was made in co-operation with Palmer and Emerson and Lake&#x27;s families, with Palmer as executive editor. It was available in three editions, Classic, Signature, and Ultimate, all containing rare and previously unpublished interviews and photographs.

==Influence and appraisal==
A 2016 retrospective review in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; listed &quot;10 Essential Songs by EL&amp;P&quot; and noted, &quot;ELP became one of rock&#x27;s first supergroups upon forming in 1970…The result was a stretch of albums…that turned prog from a black-light-in-the-basement listening experience into a stadium-filling phenomenon. At their heart was Emerson, whose eternal quest for a bigger, grander sound (thanks to a bank of organs and synthesizers that grew to resemble a fortress onstage) helped make ELP one of the most accomplished and absorbing bands rock ever birthed.&quot; Koji Kondo, Nintendo&#x27;s first video game composer, cited ELP as a major influence on his work. Nobuo Uematsu, best known for scoring the majority of titles in the &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; series, cites ELP as one of his influences. The trio are described as &quot;genuinely classically aware, and openly demonstrated their respect for classical music.&quot; They are said to have &quot;formed a genuine fusion between rock and jazz&quot; and were noted for their &quot;virtuosity and their uninhibited aggression.&quot;

Despite their success and influence, ELP received criticism from some music critics, one citing a popular joke from the 1970s: &quot;How do you spell pretentious? E-L-P.&quot; Robert Christgau said of the band in &quot;Rock Albums of the Seventies&quot; (1981), &quot;these guys are as stupid as their most pretentious fans&quot;, also calling them the &quot;world&#x27;s most overweening &#x27;progressive&#x27; group&quot;. John Kelman of &quot;All About Jazz&quot; noted that an &quot;overbearing sense of self-importance turned ELP from one of the 1970s&#x27; most exciting new groups into the definition of masturbatory excess and self-aggrandizement in only a few short years.&quot; Kelman also stated that &quot;in their fall from grace, [ELP] represented everything wrong with progressive rock.&quot; Paul Stump, in his &quot;History of Progressive Rock&quot;, likewise attributed ELP&#x27;s infamy to their decadent activities during progressive rock&#x27;s fall from favour: &quot;What prompted ELP to do what they did to their listeners, their critics and ultimately themselves in 1977 can only be guessed at. What is certain is that it consigned them to eternal rock notoriety. Even discounting Punk, had not the musical climate changed enough to convince them that epics were out of fashion, both on record and in concert?&quot; DJ John Peel went so far as to describe the band as &quot;a tragic waste of talent and electricity&quot;. In an appraisal of the band&#x27;s legacy, &quot;PopMatters&quot; journalist Sean Murphy said ELP &quot;wore immoderation like a badge of courage&quot;, regardless of whether they were loved or loathed:
==Discography==
Main studio and live discography
*&quot;Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer&quot; (1970)
*&quot;Tarkus&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; (1971, live)
*&quot;Trilogy&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Works Volume 1&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Works Volume 2&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Love Beach&quot; (1978)
*&quot;Black Moon&quot; (1992)
*&quot;In the Hot Seat&quot; (1994)
== Band members ==

* Keith Emerson – piano, Clavinet, Hammond organ C3 and L100, Moog modular, Minimoog, pipe organ, celesta, accordion (1970–1979, 1991–1998, 2010, 2010–2011; died 2016)
* Greg Lake – bass, double bass, acoustic and electric guitar, Appalachian dulcimer, harmonica, vocals (1970–1979, 1991–1998, 2010, 2010–2011; died 2016)
* Carl Palmer – drums, percussion, hammered dulcimer (1970–1979, 1991–1998, 2010, 2010–2011)

==References==
Sources

==Further reading==
*
*
* (Musical scores for vocals, piano and guitar)

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="0" end="26" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="48" end="51" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="ELP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="69" end="85" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="86" end="96" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q319751" start="145" end="158" title="Keith Emerson" label="Keith Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q900864" start="174" end="182" title="The Nice" label="The Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="184" end="193" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="231" end="243" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q348277" start="249" end="260" title="Carl Palmer" label="Carl Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q757606" start="284" end="298" title="Atomic Rooster" label="Atomic Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="310" end="314" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="573" end="577" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="582" end="596" title="symphonic rock" label="symphonic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="657" end="670" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="672" end="688" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="824" end="846" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611073" start="906" end="918" title="E.G. Records" label="E.G. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="968" end="982" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="1010" end="1026" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="1065" end="1091" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer (album)" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q920627" start="1115" end="1121" title="Tarkus" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q769424" start="1220" end="1245" title="Pictures at an Exhibition (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q930723" start="1266" end="1273" title="Trilogy (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="1298" end="1317" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844913" start="1358" end="1375" title="Manticore Records" label="Manticore Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092972" start="1452" end="1466" title="Works Volume 1" label="Works Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121027" start="1490" end="1504" title="Works Volume 2" label="Works Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q581488" start="1531" end="1541" title="Love Beach" label="Love Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335550" start="1631" end="1657" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14341" start="1668" end="1679" title="Cozy Powell" label="Cozy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q726891" start="1730" end="1734" title="Asia (band)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q346123" start="1736" end="1748" title="Robert Berry" label="Robert Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456149" start="1799" end="1800" title="3 (1980s band)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q384180" start="1875" end="1885" title="Black Moon (album)" label="Black Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499736" start="1909" end="1924" title="In the Hot Seat" label="In the Hot Seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785549" start="2040" end="2061" title="High Voltage Festival" label="High Voltage Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q900864" start="2289" end="2297" title="the Nice" label="the Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q319751" start="2310" end="2323" title="Keith Emerson" label="Keith Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="2328" end="2340" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="2358" end="2367" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495868" start="2630" end="2643" title="Fillmore West" label="Fillmore West"/>
<link wikidata="Q862842" start="2671" end="2681" title="soundcheck" label="soundcheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q315225" start="3050" end="3064" title="Mitch Mitchell" label="Mitch Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="3115" end="3142" title="the Jimi Hendrix Experience" label="the Jimi Hendrix Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="3220" end="3232" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="3317" end="3327" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705335" start="3472" end="3483" title="Soho Square" label="Soho Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q585330" start="3509" end="3528" title="Tony Stratton Smith" label="Tony Stratton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q348277" start="3540" end="3551" title="Carl Palmer" label="Carl Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q757606" start="3555" end="3569" title="Atomic Rooster" label="Atomic Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q377770" start="3585" end="3616" title="the Crazy World of Arthur Brown" label="the Crazy World of Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q909770" start="4180" end="4194" title="Island Studios" label="Island Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="4198" end="4210" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q264315" start="4341" end="4356" title="Allegro barbaro (Bartók)" label="Allegro barbaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="4366" end="4377" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114210" start="4393" end="4406" title="The Barbarian (song)" label="The Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742757" start="4438" end="4458" title="Blue Rondo à la Turk" label="Blue Rondo à la Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597" start="4468" end="4480" title="Dave Brubeck" label="Dave Brubeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070396" start="4555" end="4565" title="Nut Rocker" label="Nut Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q724981" start="4596" end="4621" title="Pictures at an Exhibition" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="4631" end="4648" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677901" start="4752" end="4765" title="Take a Pebble" label="Take a Pebble"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="4888" end="4912" title="Moog modular synthesizer" label="Moog modular synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26407160" start="5028" end="5046" title="Plymouth Guildhall" label="Plymouth Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="5172" end="5188" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="5194" end="5197" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="5420" end="5442" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="5678" end="5694" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611073" start="5860" end="5872" title="E.G. Records" label="E.G. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="5912" end="5918" title="Island Records" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998569" start="5933" end="5942" title="Cotillion Records" label="Cotillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="5960" end="5976" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q352760" start="6055" end="6068" title="Ahmet Ertegun" label="Ahmet Ertegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="6471" end="6496" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer (album)" label="Emerson Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686815" start="6507" end="6523" title="Advision Studios" label="Advision Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q987604" start="6605" end="6616" title="Eddy Offord" label="Eddy Offord"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="6737" end="6747" title="Knife-Edge (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer song)" label="Knife-Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q113286" start="6792" end="6803" title="Sinfonietta (Janáček)" label="Sinfonietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="6813" end="6825" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q214305" start="6834" end="6843" title="Allemande" label="Allemande"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6847" end="6876" title="French Suites (Bach)#Structure" label="French Suite No. 1 in D minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="6880" end="6901" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="6933" end="6937" title="Tank (song)" label="Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q588570" start="6999" end="7008" title="Lucky Man (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer song)" label="Lucky Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7414" end="7438" title="Moog modular#Models" label="Moog modular synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661445" start="7542" end="7556" title="Lyceum Theatre, London" label="Lyceum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="7671" end="7684" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q920627" start="7843" end="7849" title="Tarkus" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981144" start="8220" end="8231" title="Tarkus (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="8314" end="8323" title="cover art" label="cover art"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016051" start="8369" end="8381" title="William Neal" label="William Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783983" start="8593" end="8606" title="Thiel College" label="Thiel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181726" start="8610" end="8634" title="Greenville, Pennsylvania" label="Greenville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q769424" start="8772" end="8797" title="Pictures at an Exhibition (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017384" start="8932" end="8951" title="Newcastle City Hall" label="Newcastle City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849138" start="9450" end="9466" title="Nonesuch Records" label="Nonesuch Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016231" start="9629" end="9639" title="Scott Muni" label="Scott Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957237" start="9668" end="9675" title="WNEW-FM" label="WNEW-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q930723" start="9933" end="9940" title="Trilogy (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q724003" start="10098" end="10114" title="Storm Thorgerson" label="Storm Thorgerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819178" start="10119" end="10132" title="Aubrey Powell (designer)" label="Aubrey Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q846392" start="10136" end="10145" title="Hipgnosis" label="Hipgnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="10208" end="10221" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505609" start="10317" end="10335" title="From the Beginning (song)" label="From the Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754462" start="10642" end="10664" title="Mar y Sol Pop Festival" label="Mar y Sol Pop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q674599" start="10668" end="10674" title="Manatí, Puerto Rico" label="Manatí"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158484" start="10789" end="10799" title="Concert 10" label="Concert 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813430" start="10812" end="10840" title="Pocono International Raceway" label="Pocono International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673100" start="10844" end="10867" title="Long Pond, Pennsylvania" label="Long Pond, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844913" start="11098" end="11115" title="Manticore Records" label="Manticore Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="11182" end="11188" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="11261" end="11280" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q943742" start="11313" end="11328" title="Olympic Studios" label="Olympic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="11442" end="11445" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107111" start="11488" end="11500" title="Chris Kimsey" label="Chris Kimsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q471967" start="11558" end="11572" title="Peter Sinfield" label="Peter Sinfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="11604" end="11615" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11718" end="11727" title="And did those feet in ancient time#Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer version" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q767833" start="11766" end="11777" title="Moog Apollo" label="Moog Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466256" start="11791" end="11813" title="polyphonic synthesizer" label="polyphonic synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q311389" start="11915" end="11932" title="Alberto Ginastera" label="Alberto Ginastera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813109" start="12086" end="12097" title="Karn Evil 9" label="Karn Evil 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933988" start="12436" end="12459" title="California Jam" label="California Jam Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663312" start="12467" end="12489" title="Ontario Motor Speedway" label="Ontario Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="12884" end="12892" title="Guitar feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q309926" start="12938" end="12953" title="Lemmy" label="Lemmy Kilmister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852030" start="13185" end="13261" title="Welcome Back, My Friends, to the Show That Never Ends ~ Ladies and Gentlemen" label="Welcome Back, My Friends, to the Show That Never Ends ~ Ladies and Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="13298" end="13307" title="triple album" label="triple LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315524" start="13520" end="13529" title="tax exile" label="tax exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092972" start="13801" end="13815" title="Works Volume 1" label="Works Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q834164" start="13825" end="13841" title="Mountain Studios" label="Mountain Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q69354" start="13845" end="13853" title="Montreux" label="Montreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="13871" end="13882" title="EMI Studios" label="EMI Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747891" start="14142" end="14162" title="Piano Concerto No. 1 (Emerson)" label="Piano Concerto No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="14286" end="14302" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433763" start="14348" end="14374" title="Fanfare for the Common Man (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer song)" label="Fanfare for the Common Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629948" start="14412" end="14428" title="Fanfare for the Common Man" label="orchestral piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="14432" end="14445" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121027" start="14763" end="14777" title="Works Volume 2" label="Works Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747779" start="15091" end="15111" title="Tiger in a Spotlight" label="Tiger in a Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="15668" end="15689" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q285467" start="15739" end="15754" title="Olympic Stadium (Montreal)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057115" start="15962" end="15999" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer in Concert" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="16969" end="16975" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="16983" end="16990" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q581488" start="17010" end="17020" title="Love Beach" label="Love Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q600140" start="17041" end="17062" title="Compass Point Studios" label="Compass Point Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276015" start="17463" end="17492" title="Fantasía para un gentilhombre" label="Fantasía para un gentilhombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q151084" start="17519" end="17534" title="Joaquín Rodrigo" label="Joaquín Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="17661" end="17674" title="coming of age" label="coming of age"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17705" end="17717" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q426843" start="17792" end="17815" title="Salt Cay, Turks Islands" label="Salt Cay, Turks Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335550" start="18719" end="18745" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005" start="18758" end="18765" title="Rainbow (rock band)" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14341" start="18774" end="18785" title="Cozy Powell" label="Cozy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q726891" start="18868" end="18872" title="Asia (band)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312797" start="18894" end="18906" title="Bill Bruford" label="Bill Bruford"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="18953" end="18965" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327333" start="18970" end="18980" title="Earthworks (band)" label="Earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935603" start="19017" end="19042" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Powell (album)" label="Emerson Lake &amp;amp; Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q868813" start="19230" end="19256" title="Mainstream Rock (chart)" label="Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q346123" start="19401" end="19413" title="Robert Berry" label="Robert Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456149" start="19431" end="19432" title="3 (1980s band)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071792" start="19464" end="19485" title="To the Power of Three" label="To the Power of Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="19623" end="19639" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845275" start="19650" end="19661" title="Phil Carson" label="Phil Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q384180" start="20594" end="20604" title="Black Moon (album)" label="Black Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="20860" end="20877" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q266377" start="20959" end="20988" title="Live at the Royal Albert Hall (Emerson, Lake and Palmer album)" label="Live at the Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638632" start="21101" end="21128" title="The Return of the Manticore" label="The Return of the Manticore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499736" start="21375" end="21390" title="In the Hot Seat" label="In the Hot Seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544144" start="21514" end="21525" title="Tin Machine" label="Tin Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="21530" end="21533" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082441" start="21603" end="21614" title="Keith Olsen" label="Keith Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911429" start="21855" end="21864" title="Bill Wray (composer)" label="Bill Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="22208" end="22230" title="carpal tunnel syndrome" label="carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="22391" end="22404" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="22540" end="22551" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="22718" end="22731" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="22805" end="22831" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="22998" end="23009" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q162586" start="23014" end="23027" title="Dream Theater" label="Dream Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660138" start="24230" end="24248" title="A Time and a Place" label="A Time and a Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996697" start="24359" end="24391" title="Live at Nassau Coliseum &amp;#x27;78" label="Live at Nassau Coliseum &amp;#x27;78"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656857" start="24408" end="24447" title="Live at the Mar Y Sol Festival &amp;#x27;72" label="Live at the Mar Y Sol Festival &amp;#x27;72"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785549" start="24728" end="24749" title="High Voltage Festival" label="High Voltage Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q429540" start="24767" end="24780" title="Victoria Park, London" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757385" start="24867" end="24879" title="High Voltage (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="High Voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="26705" end="26729" title="Sony Music Entertainment" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299616" start="26804" end="26819" title="Razor &amp;amp; Tie" label="Razor &amp;amp; Tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="26879" end="26900" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG Rights Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="27496" end="27509" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q356782" start="28048" end="28058" title="Koji Kondo" label="Koji Kondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q312327" start="28147" end="28160" title="Nobuo Uematsu" label="Nobuo Uematsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12391356" start="28221" end="28234" title="Final Fantasy" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="28750" end="28766" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28793" end="28821" title="Christgau&amp;#x27;s Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies" label="Rock Albums of the Seventies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722580" start="29021" end="29035" title="All About Jazz" label="All About Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="29781" end="29785" title="Punk rock" label="Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="29919" end="29928" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="30071" end="30081" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q845639" start="30281" end="30307" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer (album)" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q920627" start="30328" end="30334" title="Tarkus" label="Tarkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q769424" start="30355" end="30380" title="Pictures at an Exhibition (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q930723" start="30407" end="30414" title="Trilogy (Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer album)" label="Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="30435" end="30454" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092972" start="30475" end="30489" title="Works Volume 1" label="Works Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121027" start="30510" end="30524" title="Works Volume 2" label="Works Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q581488" start="30545" end="30555" title="Love Beach" label="Love Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q384180" start="30576" end="30586" title="Black Moon (album)" label="Black Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499736" start="30607" end="30622" title="In the Hot Seat" label="In the Hot Seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q319751" start="30658" end="30671" title="Keith Emerson" label="Keith Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="30681" end="30689" title="Clavinet" label="Clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="30691" end="30704" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="30718" end="30730" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog modular"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="30732" end="30740" title="Minimoog" label="Minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="30742" end="30752" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q320341" start="30754" end="30761" title="celesta" label="celesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="30763" end="30772" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="30826" end="30835" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="30857" end="30865" title="Acoustic guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145031" start="30887" end="30907" title="Appalachian dulcimer" label="Appalachian dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q348277" start="30980" end="30991" title="Carl Palmer" label="Carl Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588017" start="31013" end="31030" title="hammered dulcimer" label="hammered dulcimer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52726" wikidata="Q47871" url="?curid=52726" title="Green Day">
<text>Green Day is an American rock band formed in Rodeo, California, in 1987 by lead vocalist and guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong and bassist and backing vocalist Mike Dirnt, with drummer Tré Cool joining in 1990. In 1994, their major-label debut &quot;Dookie&quot;, released through Reprise Records, became a breakout success and eventually shipped over 20 million copies in the U.S. Alongside fellow California punk bands Bad Religion, the Offspring, Rancid, NOFX, Pennywise and Social Distortion, Green Day is credited with re-popularizing mainstream interest in punk rock in the U.S.

Before taking its current name in 1989, the band was named Blood Rage, then Sweet Children. They were part of the late 1980s/early 1990s Bay Area punk scene that emerged from the 924 Gilman Street club in Berkeley, California. The band&#x27;s early releases were with the independent record label Lookout! Records, including their first album, &quot;39/Smooth&quot; (1990). For most of the band&#x27;s career, they have been a power trio with Cool, who replaced John Kiffmeyer in 1990 before the recording of the band&#x27;s second studio album, &quot;Kerplunk&quot; (1991). Though the albums &quot;Insomniac&quot; (1995), &quot;Nimrod&quot; (1997) and &quot;Warning&quot; (2000) did not match the success of &quot;Dookie&quot;, they were still successful, with &quot;Insomniac&quot; and &quot;Nimrod&quot; reaching double platinum status, while &quot;Warning&quot; achieved gold. Green Day&#x27;s seventh album, a rock opera called &quot;American Idiot&quot; (2004), found popularity with a younger generation, selling six million copies in the U.S. Their next album, &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot;, was released in 2009 and achieved the band&#x27;s best chart performance. It was followed by a trilogy of albums, &quot;¡Uno!&quot;, &quot;¡Dos!&quot;, and &quot;¡Tré!&quot;, released in September, November, and December 2012, respectively. The trilogy did not perform as well as expected commercially, in comparison to their previous albums, largely due to a lack of promotion and Armstrong entering rehab. They were followed by &quot;Revolution Radio&quot; (2016), which became their third to debut at No. 1 on the &quot; Billboard&quot; 200, &quot;Father of All Motherfuckers&quot; (2020) and &quot;Saviors&quot; (2024).

In 2010, a stage adaptation of &quot;American Idiot&quot; debuted on Broadway. The musical was nominated for three Tony Awards: Best Musical, Best Scenic Design and Best Lighting Design, winning the latter two. The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2015, their first year of eligibility. Members of the band have collaborated on the side projects Pinhead Gunpowder, the Network, Foxboro Hot Tubs, the Longshot and the Coverups. They have also worked on solo careers.

Green Day has sold roughly 75 million records worldwide as of 2024, making them one of the best-selling music artists. The group has been nominated for 20 Grammy Awards and won five of them, with Best Alternative Album for &quot;Dookie&quot;, Best Rock Album for &quot;American Idiot&quot; and &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot;, Record of the Year for &quot;Boulevard of Broken Dreams&quot;, and Best Musical Show Album for &quot;American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording&quot;.

== History ==

=== 1987–1993: Formation and Lookout! years ===

In 1987, friends and guitarists Billie Joe Armstrong and Mike Dirnt, 15 years old at the time, along with bassist Sean Hughes and drummer Raj Punjabi, a fellow student from Pinole Valley High School, formed band &quot;Blood Rage&quot;, the name taken from the eponymous film, and played together in Punjabi&#x27;s father&#x27;s house garage at Rodeo, California; a few months later, the band renamed to Sweet Children. One of their first songs written together was &quot;Best Thing in Town&quot;. The group&#x27;s first live performance under the name Sweet Children took place on October 17, 1987, at Rod&#x27;s Hickory Pit in Vallejo, California. In 1988, Armstrong and Dirnt began working with former Isocracy drummer John Kiffmeyer, also known as &quot;Al Sobrante&quot;, who replaced original drummer Raj Punjabi. It was around this time that bassist Sean Hughes also left the band, causing Dirnt to switch from guitar to bass. Armstrong cites the band Operation Ivy (which featured Tim Armstrong and Matt Freeman, who would later contact Armstrong to fill in as a possible second guitarist for their band Rancid) as a major influence and a group that inspired him to form a band.

In 1988, Larry Livermore, owner of Lookout! Records, saw the band play an early show and signed them to his label. In April 1989, the band released its debut extended play, &quot;1,000 Hours&quot;. Shortly before the EP&#x27;s release, the group dropped the name Sweet Children; according to Livermore, this was done to avoid confusion with another local band, Sweet Baby. Sweet Children adopted the name Green Day, instead, due to the members&#x27; fondness for cannabis. The phrase &quot;green day&quot; was slang in the Bay Area, where the band originated, for spending a day doing nothing but smoking marijuana. Armstrong once admitted in 2001 that he considered it to be &quot;the worst band name in the world&quot;.

Lookout! released Green Day&#x27;s debut studio album, &quot;39/Smooth&quot;, in early 1990. Green Day recorded two extended plays later that year, &quot;Slappy&quot; and &quot;Sweet Children&quot;, the latter of which included older songs the band had recorded for the Minneapolis independent record label Skene! Records. In 1991, Lookout! Records re-released &quot;39/Smooth&quot; as &quot;1,039/Smoothed Out Slappy Hours&quot; and added the songs from the band&#x27;s first two EPs, &quot;Slappy&quot; and &quot;1,000 Hours&quot;. In late 1990, shortly after the band&#x27;s first nationwide tour, Kiffmeyer left the East Bay area to attend Humboldt State University in Arcata, California. The Lookouts&#x27; drummer Tré Cool began filling in temporarily and later permanently, a situation which Kiffmeyer &quot;graciously accepted&quot;. The band went on tour for most of 1992 and 1993 and played a number of shows overseas in Europe. By then, the band&#x27;s second studio album, &quot;Kerplunk&quot;, had sold 50,000 copies in the U.S. Green Day supported another California punk band, Bad Religion, as an opening act for their &quot;Recipe for Hate&quot; Tour for most of 1993.

=== 1993–1995: Signing with Reprise Records and breakthrough success ===


&quot;Kerplunk&quot;&#x27;s underground success led to interest from major record labels and a bidding war to sign Green Day. The band eventually left Lookout! and signed with Reprise Records after attracting the attention of producer Rob Cavallo. The group was impressed by his work with fellow Californian band the Muffs and later remarked that Cavallo &quot;was the only person we could talk to and connect with&quot;. Reflecting on this period, Armstrong told &quot;Spin&quot; magazine in 1999, &quot;I couldn&#x27;t go back to the punk scene, whether we were the biggest success in the world or the biggest failure ... The only thing I could do was get on my bike and go forward.&quot; After signing with Reprise, the band began recording its major-label debut, &quot;Dookie&quot;. On September 3, 1993, Green Day played their last show at 924 Gilman under the pseudonym Blair Hess before being banned permanently because of their major label signing.

Recorded in three weeks and released in February 1994, &quot;Dookie&quot; became a commercial success, helped by extensive MTV airplay for the videos of the songs &quot;Longview&quot;, &quot;Basket Case&quot;, and &quot;When I Come Around&quot;, all of which reached the number one position on the Modern Rock Tracks charts. The album went on to sell over 10 million copies in the US. At a performance on September 9, 1994, at Hatch Memorial Shell in Boston, mayhem broke out during the band&#x27;s set (cut short to seven songs), and by the end of the rampage, 100 people were injured and 45 arrested. The band also joined the lineups of both the Lollapalooza festival and Woodstock &#x27;94, where at the latter the group started an infamous mud fight. During the concert, a security guard mistook bassist Mike Dirnt for a stage-invading fan and punched out some of his teeth. Viewed by millions by pay-per-view television, the Woodstock 1994 performance further aided Green Day&#x27;s growing publicity and recognition. In 1995, &quot;Dookie&quot; won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album, and the band was nominated for nine MTV Video Music Awards, including Video of the Year. In the band&#x27;s homestead of the East Bay following &quot;Dookie&quot;&#x27;s success, the band felt a sense of hostility. Billie Joe Armstrong recalled aggressive glares and furtive whispers. The band&#x27;s success would trickle onto other East Bay bands such as Jawbreaker, a local favorite of Armstrong&#x27;s, which garnered accusations of selling out during a concert attended by Armstrong.

=== 1995–2002: Middle years and decline in popularity ===

In 1995, a single titled &quot;J.A.R.&quot; for the &quot;Angus&quot; soundtrack was released and debuted at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart. The band&#x27;s fourth studio album, &quot;Insomniac&quot;, was released in Fall 1995. Compared to the more melodic &quot;Dookie,&quot; &quot;Insomniac&quot; was a much darker and heavier response to the band&#x27;s newfound popularity. The album opened to warm critical reception, earning 4 of 5 stars from &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, which said &quot;In punk, the good stuff unfolds and gains meaning as you listen without sacrificing any of its electric, haywire immediacy. And Green Day are as good as this stuff gets.&quot; The singles released from &quot;Insomniac&quot; were &quot;Geek Stink Breath&quot;, &quot;Stuck with Me&quot;, &quot;Brain Stew/Jaded&quot;, and &quot;Walking Contradiction&quot;.

Though the album did not approach the success of &quot;Dookie&quot;, it sold three million copies in the United States. The album earned the band award nominations for Favorite Artist, Favorite Hard Rock Artist, and Favorite Alternative Artist at the 1996 American Music Awards, and the video for &quot;Walking Contradiction&quot; earned the band nominations for Best Video, Short Form, at the Grammy&#x27;s, in addition to Best Special Effects at the MTV Video Music Awards. After that, the band abruptly canceled a European tour, citing exhaustion.

Following a brief hiatus in 1996, Green Day began work on its next album in 1997. From the outset, Cavallo and the band agreed the album had to be different from Green Day&#x27;s previous albums. The result was &quot;Nimrod&quot;, an experimental deviation from the band&#x27;s standard melodic punk rock. The album was released in October 1997 and provided a variety of music, from punk, pop, hardcore, folk, surf rock, ska, to the acoustic ballad &quot;Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)&quot;. &quot;Nimrod&quot; entered the charts at Number 10. The mainstream success of &quot;Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)&quot; won the band an MTV Video Award for Best Alternative Video. The song was used in the second clip show episode of &quot;Seinfeld&quot; and two episodes of &quot;ER&quot;. The other singles released from &quot;Nimrod&quot; were &quot;Nice Guys Finish Last&quot;, &quot;Hitchin&#x27; a Ride&quot;, and &quot;Redundant&quot;. The band made a guest appearance in an episode of &quot;King of the Hill&quot; in 1997. In late 1997 and most of 1998, Green Day embarked on a tour in support of &quot;Nimrod&quot;. In 1999, Jason White began supporting the band during concerts as guitarist.

In 2000, Green Day released their folk-punk-inspired sixth studio album, &quot;Warning&quot;, and, in support, participated in that year&#x27;s Warped Tour. In November 2000, in a show produced by Ian Brennan, the band performed for free on the steps on San Francisco&#x27;s City Hall to protest the eviction of artists from the city. The band also launched an independent tour to support the album &quot;Warning&quot; in 2001. Critics&#x27; reviews of the album were varied. AllMusic gave it 4.5/5, saying, &quot;&quot;Warning&quot; may not be an innovative record per se, but it&#x27;s tremendously satisfying.&quot; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; was more critical, giving it 3/5 and saying, &quot;&quot;Warning ...&quot; invites the question: Who wants to listen to songs of faith, hope and social commentary from what used to be snot core&#x27;s biggest-selling band?&quot; Though it produced the hit &quot;Minority&quot; and smaller hit &quot;Warning&quot;, some observers were coming to the conclusion that the band was losing relevance, and a decline in popularity followed. While all of Green Day&#x27;s previous albums had reached at least triple platinum sales, &quot;Warning&quot; was only certified gold.

At the 2001 California Music Awards, Green Day won all eight of the awards for which it was nominated. The group won awards for Outstanding Album (&quot;Warning&quot;), Outstanding Punk Rock/Ska Album (&quot;Warning&quot;), Outstanding Group, Outstanding Male Vocalist, Outstanding Bassist, Outstanding Drummer, Outstanding Songwriter, and Outstanding Artist.

The release of two compilation albums, &quot;International Superhits!&quot; and &quot;Shenanigans&quot;, followed &quot;Warning&quot;. &quot;International Superhits!&quot; had a companion collection of music videos ved &quot;International Supervideos!&quot; &quot;Shenanigans&quot; contained collected B-sides, including &quot;Espionage&quot;, which was featured in the 1999 film &quot;Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me&quot; and nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance.

In Spring 2002, Green Day co-headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Blink-182, documented on the DVD &quot;Riding in Vans with Boys&quot;.

=== 2003–2006: &quot;American Idiot&quot; and renewed success ===


In the Summer and Fall of 2002, the band wrote and recorded material for an album tentatively titled &quot;Cigarettes and Valentines&quot;, set to release in August 2003. Dirnt said the album was written and recorded in six months, and the official track list consisted of 16 songs. He also said two or three additional songs were recorded, and were something &quot;worth chasing&quot; after turning in the record. The band got together, and thought the additional songs were really good. Instead of releasing &quot;Cigarettes and Valentines&quot;, the band decided to make an album with those additional songs, which lead to the creation of &quot;American Idiot&quot;:
However, the band has stated multiple times that when the album was nearly finished, the master recordings were stolen from the studio. Instead of re-recording the stolen tracks, the band decided to abandon the entire project and start over, considering the taken material to be unrepresentative of the band&#x27;s best work. It was then revealed that a band called The Network was signed to Armstrong&#x27;s record label Adeline Records with little fanfare and information. After the band, who concealed their identities with masks and costumes, released an album called &quot;Money Money 2020&quot; in September 2003, it was rumored that The Network was a Green Day side project, due to similarities in the bands&#x27; sounds. However, these rumors were never addressed by the band or Adeline Records, except for a statement on the Adeline website discussing an ongoing dispute between the two bands. The bands &quot;feuded&quot; via press releases and statements from Armstrong. Several journalists openly referred to the group as a Green Day side project, although it was not confirmed as such until 2013.
Green Day collaborated with Iggy Pop on two tracks for his album &quot;Skull Ring&quot; in November 2003. On February 1, 2004, a cover of &quot;I Fought the Law&quot; (originally performed by The Crickets) made its debut on a commercial for iTunes during NFL Super Bowl XXXVIII.
Finally, &quot;American Idiot&quot; was released in September 2004 and debuted at number one on the Billboard charts. Backed by the success of the album&#x27;s first single &quot;American Idiot&quot;, it was the band&#x27;s first album to reach this pinnacle. &quot;American Idiot&quot; was labeled a &quot;punk rock opera&quot; and follows the journey of the fictitious &quot;Jesus of Suburbia&quot;. The album depicts modern American life under the control of an idiot ruler who lets people be misinformed by the media and a &quot;redneck agenda&quot;. It gives different angles on an everyman, modern icons, and leaders. Released two months before U.S. President George W. Bush was reelected, the album became protest art. The album went on to sell 6 million copies in the US.
&quot;American Idiot&quot; won the 2005 Grammy for Best Rock Album and was nominated in six other categories, including Album of the Year. The album helped Green Day win seven of the eight awards it was nominated for at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards; the &quot;Boulevard of Broken Dreams&quot; video won six of those awards. A year later, &quot;Boulevard of Broken Dreams&quot; won a Grammy Award for Record of the Year. In 2009, &quot;Kerrang!&quot; named &quot;American Idiot&quot; the best album of the decade, &quot;NME&quot; ranked it number 60 in a similar list, and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked it 22nd. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; also listed &quot;Boulevard of Broken Dreams&quot; and &quot;American Idiot&quot; among the 100 best songs of the 2000s, at number 65 and 47, respectively. In 2005, the album was ranked number 420 in &quot;Rock Hard&quot; magazine&#x27;s book &quot;The 500 Greatest Rock &amp; Metal Albums of All Time&quot;. In 2012, the album was ranked number 225 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;&#x27;s list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.
While touring for &quot;American Idiot&quot;, the group filmed and recorded the two concerts at the Milton Keynes National Bowl in England. These recordings were released as a live CD and DVD set called &quot;Bullet in a Bible&quot; on November 15, 2005. The DVD featured behind-the-scenes footage of the band and showed how its members prepared to put on the show. The final shows of the 2005 world tour were in Sydney, and Melbourne, Australia, on December 14 and 17, respectively.

On August 1, 2005, Green Day announced it had rescinded the master rights to its pre-&quot;Dookie&quot; material from Lookout Records, citing a continuing breach of contract regarding unpaid royalties, a complaint shared with other Lookout! bands. On January 10, 2006, the band was awarded People&#x27;s Choice Award for favorite musical group or band.

=== 2007–2011: &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; and &quot;American Idiot&quot;″s stage adaptation ===

Green Day engaged in many other smaller projects in the time following the success of &quot;American Idiot&quot;. In 2008, the group released a garage rock-inspired album under the name Foxboro Hot Tubs, titled &quot;Stop Drop and Roll!!!&quot;. The Foxboro Hot Tubs went on a mini tour during the same year to promote the record, hitting tiny Bay Area venues such as the Stork Club in Oakland and Toot&#x27;s Tavern in Crockett, California.
In an interview with Carson Daly, Garbage lead singer Shirley Manson revealed that the band&#x27;s drummer Butch Vig would be producing Green Day&#x27;s forthcoming album. The span of nearly five years between &quot;American Idiot&quot; and &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; was the longest gap between studio albums in Green Day&#x27;s career. The band had been working on new material since January 2006. By October 2007, Armstrong had 45 songs written, but the band showed no further signs of progress until October 2008, when two videos showing the band recording with producer Butch Vig were posted on YouTube. The writing and recording process, spanning three years and four recording studios, was finally finished in April 2009.

&quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; was released on May 15, 2009. The album received a mainly positive reception from critics, getting an average rating between 3 and 4 stars. The album reached number one in fourteen countries, being certified gold or platinum in each. &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; achieved Green Day&#x27;s best chart performance to date. The band started playing shows in California in April and early May. These were the group&#x27;s first live shows in about three years. Green Day went on a world tour that started in North America in July 2009 and continued around the world throughout the rest of 2009 and early 2010. The album won Grammy Award for Best Rock Album at the 52nd Grammy Awards on January 31, 2010. As of December 2010, &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; has sold 1,005,000 copies in the US.

Walmart refused to carry the album as it contains a Parental Advisory sticker and requested that Green Day release a censored edition. The band members did not wish to change any lyrics on the album and responded by stating, &quot;There&#x27;s nothing dirty about our record... They want artists to censor their records in order to be carried in there. We just said no. We&#x27;ve never done it before. You feel like you&#x27;re in 1953 or something.&quot;

In 2009, the band met with award-winning director Michael Mayer and many cast and crew members of the Tony Award-winning musical &quot;Spring Awakening&quot; to create a stage version of the album &quot;American Idiot&quot;. &quot;American Idiot&quot; opened in the Berkeley Repertory Theatre during the end of 2009. The show features an expanded story of the original album, with new characters such as Will, Extraordinary Girl, and Favorite Son. On April 20, 2010, &quot;American Idiot&quot; opened on Broadway, and Green Day released the soundtrack to the musical, featuring a new song by Green Day titled &quot;When It&#x27;s Time&quot;. In June 2010 iTunes released &quot;When It&#x27;s Time&quot; as a single.
During the Spike TV Video Game Awards 2009, it was announced that Green Day was set to have its own &quot;Rock Band&quot; video game titled &quot;Green Day: Rock Band&quot; (2010), as a follow-up to the last band specific &quot;Rock Band&quot; game, &quot;The Beatles: Rock Band&quot; (2009). The game features the full albums of &quot;Dookie&quot;, &quot;American Idiot&quot;, and &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; as well as select songs from the rest of Green Day&#x27;s discography.

During the second leg of the 21st Century Breakdown World Tour, the band members stated that they were writing new material. In an interview with &quot;Kerrang!&quot; magazine, Armstrong spoke about the possible new album: &quot;We did some demos in Berlin, some in Stockholm, some just outside of Glasgow, and some in Amsterdam. We wanted get [the songs] down in some early form.&quot; The band members also stated that the group was recording a live album of the tour, featuring the previously unreleased song &quot;Cigarettes and Valentines&quot;. In October 2010, Dirnt was interviewed by Radio W, mentioning that the group had completed the writing process of the ninth studio album. In the interview, Dirnt also mentioned that a new live album would &quot;most likely&quot; be released. The live CD/DVD and CD/Blu-ray titled &quot;Awesome as Fuck&quot; was released on March 22, 2011.

=== 2011–2014: &quot;¡Uno! ¡Dos! ¡Tré!&quot; ===

During the end of 2011, the band played several secret shows (under the name Foxboro Hot Tubs) whose setlists consisted almost entirely of previously unheard songs. Green Day entered the studio and began recording new material in February 2012, later announcing a trilogy of albums titled &quot;¡Uno!&quot;, &quot;¡Dos!&quot;, and &quot;¡Tré!&quot; which would be released in fall 2012. The trilogy featured longtime touring guitarist Jason White joining the band in the studio as an additional musician. This marks the first time that White had played guitar on a Green Day album. That summer, Green Day played several festivals and promotional shows, including the Rock en Seine festival in France, the Rock am See festival in Germany, and the Reading Festival in the United Kingdom.
&quot;¡Uno!&quot;, &quot;¡Dos!&quot;, and &quot;¡Tré!&quot; were released on September 21, November 9, and December 7, 2012, respectively, and were met with generally positive reviews from critics, though fans were more lukewarm towards the albums. On January 22, 2013, the band announced that &quot;¡Cuatro!&quot;, a documentary about the making of &quot;¡Uno!, ¡Dos!&quot; and &quot;¡Tré!&quot;, would premiere on January 26 in Aspen, Colorado as part of the X Games FILM showcase, and would be released on DVD April 9, 2013. Another documentary was announced called &quot;Broadway Idiot&quot; which focuses on the creation on the American Idiot musical and Armstrong&#x27;s run as playing the character of St. Jimmy. On March 10, 2013, Green Day began its 99 Revolutions Tour to support the trilogy. In June, Green Day broke Emirates Stadium attendance record with 60,000 tickets sold. The band played &quot;Dookie&quot; from start to finish on several dates on the tour&#x27;s European leg, including during the Reading Festival 2013 headline show.

&quot;Demolicious&quot;, a compilation album that contains alternate versions and demos of songs from &quot;¡Uno!&quot;, &quot;¡Dos!&quot; and &quot;¡Tré!&quot; recorded during the studio sessions of these albums, was released on April 19, 2014, for Record Store Day. It also contains a previously unreleased song called &quot;State of Shock&quot; and an acoustic version of &quot;Stay the Night&quot;, from &quot;¡Uno!&quot;.

=== 2014–2018: Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and &quot;Revolution Radio&quot; ===

Green Day performed their first concert in a year on April 16, 2015. The group first played a set as Sweet Children with John Kiffmeyer, followed by a set as Green Day. On April 18, 2015, Green Day were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Fall Out Boy.

On April 24, 2015, Rob Cavallo revealed Green Day were recording a twelfth studio album. Cavallo claimed to have heard &quot;five new songs that Billie has written and demoed&quot;, and that the fans should be &quot;sure that when they do return, the music will be amazing&quot;. On December 24, 2015, Green Day released a Christmas song, &quot;Xmas Time of the Year&quot;.

On August 11, 2016, Green Day released the first single, &quot;Bang Bang&quot;, from the group&#x27;s twelfth studio album, &quot;Revolution Radio&quot;, which was released on October 7, 2016. The band went on a world tour supporting the album. In November 2016, the band performed at the American Music Awards in Los Angeles and made a political statement about the then-recent US election of Donald Trump by chanting &quot;No Trump, No KKK, No Fascist USA&quot; during their rendition of &quot;Bang Bang&quot;.

Aaron Burgess at &quot;Alternative Press&quot; observed, &quot;It&#x27;s the first time in years Green Day haven&#x27;t had all the answers. But as a statement on how it feels to fight, it&#x27;s the closest to the truth they&#x27;ve ever gotten.&quot; Gwilym Mumford of &quot;The Guardian&quot; stated &quot;[after their last few albums] the band have decided to get back to basics: &quot;Revolution Radio&quot; is their most focused work in years. Lead single &quot;Bang Bang&quot; sets the tone, with a caustic consideration of the fame-hungry psychosis of a mass shooter.

The band released their second greatest hits compilation, &quot;God&#x27;s Favorite Band&quot;, on November 17, 2017. It contains 20 of their hits, along with two new tracks: a different version of the &quot;Revolution Radio&quot; track &quot;Ordinary World&quot;, featuring country singer Miranda Lambert, and a previously unreleased song titled &quot;Back in the USA&quot;.

=== 2019–2023: &quot;Father of All Motherfuckers&quot; ===

On April 13, 2019, for Record Store Day, the band released their Woodstock 1994 performance on vinyl for the first time. It contains all 9 songs they played live, as well as audio of the ensuing mud fight. On September 10, 2019, the band announced the Hella Mega Tour with Fall Out Boy and Weezer as headliners alongside themselves, with the Interrupters as the opening act. They also released the single, &quot;Father of All...&quot; off their thirteenth album, &quot;Father of All Motherfuckers&quot;. The same day, in an interview with KROQ, Armstrong announced the band would be parting ways with Reprise after the album&#x27;s release, as they were off their contract with Warner. On September 30, 2019, Green Day signed a two-year agreement with the National Hockey League (NHL). The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Fire, Ready, Aim&quot;, was released on October 9, 2019. The album&#x27;s third single, &quot;Oh Yeah!&quot;, was released on January 16, 2020. The album was released on February 7, 2020. The album&#x27;s fourth single, &quot;Meet Me on the Roof&quot;, was released on the same day as the album.

On April 6, 2020, Armstrong revealed that he had written six songs intending to record new music with the band once the COVID-19 pandemic had passed. On May 21, 2020, the band released a cover of Blondie&#x27;s &quot;Dreaming&quot;.
On October 30, 2020, the band&#x27;s secret side project, the Network, teased upcoming activity with a video titled &quot;The Prophecy&quot; and mentioned their upcoming sequel album. Then on November 2, 2020, the Network released a music video for their first song in 17 years, named &quot;Ivankkka Is a Nazi&quot;. After a couple of weeks of small hints on social media, as well as Green Day claiming they were not the Network, the band released an EP on November 20, 2020, titled &quot;Trans Am&quot;. On December 4, 2020, the Network released their second album, &quot;Money Money 2020 Part II: We Told Ya So!&quot;.

In February 2021, Green Day announced a single, titled &quot;Here Comes the Shock&quot;, which was later released on February 21, 2021. The band would release a remastered version of &quot;Insomniac&quot; in March for the belated 25th anniversary of the album&#x27;s release, with bonus live tracks. On May 17, 2021, Green Day released the single &quot;Pollyanna&quot;. The reshuffled Hella Mega Tour would take place in the United States from July to September 2021, and the United Kingdom in June and July 2022. Between legs, on November 5, 2021, the band released the single &quot;Holy Toledo!&quot;. This song was also in the soundtrack of the 2021 film &quot;Mark, Mary &amp; Some Other People&quot;.

&quot;BBC Sessions&quot;, the fourth live album by Green Day, was released on December 10, 2021. Eight days later, they put out a teaser video with the captions &quot;RAK Studios. London, England. Green Day. 1972&quot;.

In 2022, Green Day played a handful of major festivals in the United States, including Lollapalooza, and Outside Lands. The band also played a surprise Lollapalooza aftershow set at Metro Chicago on July 29, a set that was mostly improvised. The set included their first performances of &quot;Church on Sunday&quot;, and &quot;Warning&quot; since 2001, and also included fan favorite deep tracks &quot;Whatsername&quot;, &quot;Letterbomb&quot;, and &quot;Murder City&quot;. On October 26, 2022, Green Day was announced as a headliner for the fifth annual Innings Festival in Arizona.

=== 2023–present: &quot;Saviors&quot; ===
In November 2022, the band stated they were recording for a new studio album. The album was produced by Rob Cavallo, marking his first album working with the band since &quot;¡Tré!&quot; (2012). Prior to the album&#x27;s release, the band played a new song titled &quot;1981&quot; during their live performance at Festival d&#x27;été de Québec on July 16, 2023. On September 30, 2023, Green Day was announced as the halftime show at the 110th Grey Cup. The following day, the band launched a new website with the name &quot;The American Dream Is Killing Me&quot;. Included on the website was a video appearing to tease new music, and a circled date of October 24, 2023, leading some news outlets to believe that it is related to their next album. Before the album&#x27;s release, they played the first song, &quot;The American Dream Is Killing Me&quot;, during a live show in Las Vegas, Nevada, on October 19, 2023, and announced a US tour for the summer 2024 with the Smashing Pumpkins, Rancid, and the Linda Lindas. They played another song, titled &quot;Look Ma, No Brains!&quot;, from the upcoming album during the When We Were Young Festival on October 22, 2023.
On October 24, 2023, the title of the new album was announced as &quot;Saviors&quot;, and the album&#x27;s first single, &quot;The American Dream Is Killing Me&quot;, was released. The album was released on January 19, 2024. The second single, &quot;Look Ma, No Brains!&quot;, was released on November 2, 2023. A third single, &quot;Dilemma&quot;, was announced on December 4, 2023, and released three days later on December 7, 2023. On New Year&#x27;s Eve, Green Day performed &quot;American Idiot&quot; on the television special &quot;Dick Clark&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Rockin&#x27; Eve&quot;. Armstrong replaced the line &quot;I&#x27;m not a part of a redneck agenda&quot; with &quot;I&#x27;m not a part of the MAGA agenda&quot;, a reference to Donald Trump&#x27;s Make America Great Again slogan, in criticism of Trump. The album&#x27;s fourth single, &quot;One Eyed Bastard&quot;, was released on January 5, 2024. On the evening of January 16, 2024, the band appeared in a surprise performance in the 47th–50th Streets–Rockefeller Center station of the New York subway system, with late-night host Jimmy Fallon joining them on tambourine to help draw attention to the upcoming album and tour, and played several songs, including the recent single &quot;Look Ma, No Brains&quot;, &quot;Basket Case&quot;, and &quot;American Idiot&quot;; this time, Armstrong left space to let the subway crowd sing out the song&#x27;s revised line &quot;I&#x27;m not a part of the MAGA agenda.&quot; The album, and a music video for &quot;Bobby Sox&quot;, were both released simultaneously on January 19, 2024. A music video for &quot;Corvette Summer&quot; was released on July 23, 2024.

Green Day opened for the FireAid benefit concert on January 30, 2025; it was hosted by both Intuit Dome, and the Kia Forum. The band opened with a duet of &quot;Last Night on Earth&quot; with Billie Eilish, followed by &quot;Still Breathing&quot;, and &quot;When I Come Around&quot;.

== Musical style and influences ==
Green Day&#x27;s sound is described as &quot;often hard-driving and aggressive&quot;, and is often compared to first wave American and British punk rock bands such as the Ramones, Sex Pistols, the Clash, the Dickies, and Buzzcocks. The band is primarily known for its heavy use of power chords combined with &quot;strong pop melodic sensibility&quot;. Several publications have characterized the band as punk rock, skate punk, melodic punk, alternative rock, and power pop. Critics have disputed the qualification of the band as power pop. The band has casually explored other musical styles, including post-punk and pop-rock with &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot;, and garage rock on &quot;¡Dos!&quot; and &quot;Father of All..&quot;. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described Green Day as &quot;punk revivalists who recharged the energy of speedy, catchy three-chord punk-pop songs.&quot; Among the labels of the band by critics, members Billie Joe Armstrong and Tre Cool have stated in interviews with &quot;Livewire&quot; and &quot;Kerrang!&quot; self-describing Green Day as just a punk rock band.

While Armstrong is the band&#x27;s primary songwriter, he looks to the other band members for organizational help. Billie Joe Armstrong has mentioned that some of his biggest influences are seminal hardcore punk bands Hüsker Dü and the Replacements, and that their influence is particularly noted in the band&#x27;s chord changes in songs. Green Day has covered Hüsker Dü&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t Want to Know If You Are Lonely&quot; as a B-side to the &quot;Warning&quot; single, and the character &quot;Mr. Whirly&quot; in the group&#x27;s song &quot;Misery&quot; is a reference to the Replacements song of the same name. Southern California-based hardcore bands Social Distortion and Bad Religion have also been cited as influences. Green Day would cover the former&#x27;s song &quot;Another State of Mind&quot; from their 1983 debut release, &quot;Mommy&#x27;s Little Monster&quot; as a bonus track for &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot;.

Outside of their punk influences, Green Day have also cited hard rock bands the Kinks, the Who, and Cheap Trick. In August 1996, Billie Joe Armstrong told &quot;Guitar World&quot; he &quot;can remember a few different instances&quot; of when he first discovered punk rock: &quot;There were these two guys who introduced me to things like D.O.A. and the Dead Kennedys. Then, in the seventh grade, there was a girl at school who would bring in records like T.S.O.L. and say, &#x27;Here, listen to this.&#x27;&quot; Armstrong said he thinks he &quot;really started getting into&quot; punk rock &quot;in 1987 with &quot;Turn It Around!&quot;, a double seven-inch compilation record put out by [punk fanzine] &quot;Maximumrocknroll&quot;.&quot; Armstrong cited &quot;Turn It Around!&quot; as an influence, calling it &quot;a pretty big record&quot; for him. Armstrong would also cite fellow East Bay punk bands Operation Ivy, Jawbreaker, and Crimpshrine as influences. Tré Cool has stated that the band is influenced by music that they did not like, naming artists like Hall &amp; Oates, Cyndi Lauper and other 1980s music.

Although Green Day has been compared to Buzzcocks, the Ramones and the Clash, Mike Dirnt said he had never heard Buzzcocks when Green Day began. Dirnt said: &quot;First off, you can&#x27;t sound like any of those bands. And secondly, those are probably the last ones in my record collection.&quot; Armstrong responded to Dirnt, saying: &quot;Mine too. Those are all bands I got into later.&quot; The Dickies is another band Green Day has been compared to. Dirnt said he &quot;never owned a Dickies album, although&quot; he &quot;did see&quot; the Dickies live &quot;around the time of&quot; &quot;Kerplunk!&quot;. Dirnt said &quot;by that time, we&#x27;d played so many shows it had no bearing.&quot; Armstrong referred to the Dickies as &quot;just another Ramones rip-off&quot;. Although in August 1996, Armstrong said bands like the Ramones are bands he listened to later, in June 2010, Armstrong cited the Ramones as an influence. He also said his &quot;range of favorite songwriters goes anywhere from the Sex Pistols to Lennon–McCartney.&quot; During the &quot;American Idiot&quot; and &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; era of Green Day, the band was influenced by the Who, U2, Motown albums, and musicals such as &quot;Grease&quot;.

Billie Joe Armstrong regularly invites musicians at Green Day concerts onstage to substitute for the band members on guitar, bass and drums, often letting the guest musicians keep the instruments they used during their guest spots. Armstrong explains, &quot;I remember being a kid and seeing Van Halen play. I was, like, 12, and Eddie would come out, and I&#x27;d go, &#x27;God, it would be so cool to be up there and do what he&#x27;s doing. So I was always keeping that in mind, subconsciously that&#x27;s basically what ended up happening, breaking down the barrier between the band and the audience.&quot;

== Legacy ==
The band&#x27;s 1991 album &quot;Kerplunk&quot; is one of the bestselling independent albums of all time, selling over 4.5 million copies worldwide. It was also listed in a 2007 ranking of the 100 greatest indie albums by Blender.

Green Day is credited (alongside Bad Religion, the Offspring, NOFX, Social Distortion, and Rancid) with popularizing mainstream interest in punk rock in the United States, particularly with the album &quot;Dookie&quot;, which was cited by Fuse as the most important pop-punk album of all time, the best alternative album of 1994 by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, and as one of the best punk rock albums of all time by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, &quot;Kerrang!&quot;, &quot;Revolver&quot;, and &quot;LA Weekly&quot;. It was also placed on the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&#x27;s &quot;Definitive 200&quot; list of 200 classic albums. Both &quot;Dookie&quot; and &quot;American Idiot&quot; appeared on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. In 2011, they were voted best punk rock band of all time by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;. Diffuser.fm listed &quot;Dookie&quot; as the greatest album of the 90s.

Green Day has sold roughly 75 million records worldwide as of 2024, making them one of the highest-selling artists of all time. The group has been nominated for 20 Grammy awards and has won five of them with Best Alternative Album for &quot;Dookie&quot;, Best Rock Album for &quot;American Idiot&quot; and &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot;, Record of the Year for &quot;Boulevard of Broken Dreams&quot;, and Best Musical Show Album for &quot;American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording&quot;.

In 2010, a stage adaptation of &quot;American Idiot&quot; debuted on Broadway. The musical was nominated for three Tony Awards. The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in April 2015, their first year of eligibility.

The band has been cited as an influence by a variety of artists, including Alkaline Trio, Avril Lavigne, AFI, Fall Out Boy, Blink-182, Joyce Manor, Lady Gaga, Wavves, Fidlar, Tegan and Sara, the Menzingers, New Found Glory, Prince Daddy &amp; the Hyena, Bowling for Soup, Billie Eilish, and Sum 41.

== Related projects ==
Since 1991, members of the band have branched out past Green Day, starting other projects with various musicians. Notable projects related to Green Day include Billie Joe Armstrong&#x27;s Pinhead Gunpowder with Jason White and the Longshot with Jeff Matika, the Frustrators with Mike Dirnt, and the Network, a collaboration between Green Day and friends in which all members play under fake stage names. Green Day has also released an album titled &quot;Stop Drop and Roll!!!&quot; on May 20, 2008, under the name Foxboro Hot Tubs, which the band uses to book secret shows. In late December 2011, Armstrong formed a family band called the Boo which recorded a one-off Christmas record for their friends and family making a few copies available in a local store. Since January 2018, Armstrong, Dirnt and White have played in the band the Coverups along with Green Day audio engineer Chris Dugan and tour manager Bill Schneider. The band sporadically performs one-off shows, usually in small clubs, and cover the songs of classic rock and alternative rock bands such as Cheap Trick, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, the Clash, and Nirvana.

In September 2006, Green Day collaborated with U2 and producer Rick Rubin to record a cover of the song &quot;The Saints Are Coming&quot;, originally recorded by the Skids, with an accompanying video. The song was recorded to benefit Music Rising, an organization to help raise money for musicians&#x27; instruments lost during Hurricane Katrina, and to bring awareness on the eve of the one-year anniversary of the disaster. In December 2006, Green Day and NRDC opened a web site in partnership to raise awareness on America&#x27;s dependency on oil.

Green Day released a cover of the John Lennon song &quot;Working Class Hero&quot;, which was featured on the album &quot;Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur&quot;. The band performed the song on the season finale of &quot;American Idol&quot;. The song was nominated for a Grammy Award in 2008 but lost to the White Stripes&#x27; &quot;Icky Thump&quot;. That summer, the band appeared in a cameo role in &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot;, where the band performed a rock version of the show&#x27;s theme song. Their version of it was released as a single on July 23, 2007.

In 2009, the band collaborated with theater director Michael Mayer to adapt the group&#x27;s rock opera &quot;American Idiot&quot; into a one-act stage musical that premiered at the Berkeley Rep on September 15, 2009. The show then moved to Broadway on April 20, 2010. The reviews of &quot;American Idiot: The Musical&quot; have been positive to mixed. Charles Isherwood of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote an enthusiastic review for the Broadway production. He called the show &quot;a pulsating portrait of wasted youth that invokes all the standard genre conventions ... only to transcend them through the power of its music and the artistry of its execution, the show is as invigorating and ultimately as moving as anything I&#x27;ve seen on Broadway this season. Or maybe for a few seasons past.&quot; Jed Gottlieb of the &quot;Boston Herald&quot; enjoyed the premise of the show but found that &quot;the music and message suffer in a setting where the audience is politely, soberly seated&quot;.

Michael Kuchiwara of the Associated Press found the show to be &quot;visually striking [and] musically adventurous&quot;, but noted that &quot;the show has the barest wisp of a story and minimal character development&quot;. Paul Kolnik in &quot;USA Today&quot; enjoyed the contradiction that Green Day&#x27;s &quot;massively popular, starkly disenchanted album ... would be the feel-good musical of the season&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s Richard Zoglin opined that the score &quot;is as pure a specimen of contemporary punk rock as Broadway has yet encountered, [yet] there&#x27;s enough variety. ... Where the show falls short is as a fully developed narrative.&quot; He concluded that &quot;&quot;American Idiot&quot;, despite its earnest huffing and puffing, remains little more than an annotated rock concert. ... Still, [it] deserves at least two cheers—for its irresistible musical energy and for opening fresh vistas for that odd couple, rock and Broadway.&quot; Peter Travers from &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, in his review of &quot;American Idiot&quot;, wrote &quot;Though &quot;American Idiot&quot; carries echoes of such rock musicals as &quot;Tommy&quot;, &quot;Hair&quot;, &quot;Rent&quot; and &quot;Spring Awakening&quot;, it cuts its own path to the heart. You won&#x27;t know what hit you. &quot;American Idiot&quot; knows no limits—it&#x27;s a global knockout.&quot; The musical has been nominated for three Tony Awards, including Best Musical and Best Scenic Design. It was also nominated for several Drama Desk Awards and Outer Critics Circle Awards.

In October 2009, a Green Day art project was exhibited at StolenSpace Gallery in London. The exhibition showed artworks created for each of the songs on &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot;, was supported by the band, and led by the group&#x27;s manager Pat Magnarella. He explained in an interview that &quot;[Artists are] basically like rock bands. Most are creating their art, but don&#x27;t know how to promote it.&quot; For Billie Joe Armstrong, &quot;Many of the artists... show their work on the street, and we feel a strong connection to that type of creative expression.&quot;

On April 13, 2011, a film version of &quot;American Idiot&quot; was confirmed. Michael Mayer, director of the Broadway musical, would have directed the film. It will be produced by Green Day, Pat Magnarella (Green Day&#x27;s manager who also produced &quot;Bullet in a Bible&quot;, &quot;Awesome as Fuck&quot;, and &quot;Heart Like a Hand Grenade&quot;), Playtone (Tom Hanks and Gary Goetzman) and Tom Hulce. However, in February 2020, Billie Joe Armstrong revealed to &quot;NME&quot; that plans for a film adaptation of the stage musical had been &quot;pretty much scrapped&quot;, without providing anymore details as to the reason.

On January 23, 2013, it was announced that a documentary showing Armstrong&#x27;s journey from punk rock to Broadway was to be released. Called &quot;Broadway Idiot&quot; and showing a lot of behind-the-scenes of the &quot;American Idiot&quot; musical production, the movie was directed by Doug Hamilton, veteran television journalist for CBS News&#x27; &quot;60 Minutes&quot; and PBS documentaries such as &quot;Nova&quot;, &quot;Frontline&quot; and &quot;American Masters&quot;. A trailer was released on January 30, 2013. The documentary premiered at the South by Southwest Film Festival on March 15, 2013.

Green Day served as executive producers of &quot;Turn It Around: The Story of East Bay Punk&quot; (2017), an extensive documentary film about the San Francisco Bay area punk scene from the late 1970s to the 1990s.

===&quot;New Years Rev&quot;===
On February 10, 2024, Live Nation Productions announced a comedy film titled &quot;New Years Rev&quot;, which was described as a &quot;coming-of-age tale&quot;, inspired by the true exploits of the band prior to their mainstream breakthrough in 1994. Production of the film was said to be underway in the US state of Oklahoma. Lee Kirk was announced as the film&#x27;s writer and director. As of February 11, a release date had not been announced. Live Nation Productions, the film and TV arm of Live Nation Entertainment, was said to be producing the film. Green Day guitarist and vocalist Billie Joe Armstrong, bassist Mike Dirnt, and drummer Tré Cool were announced as the film&#x27;s producers, in collaboration with Tim Perell. The band members were also confirmed to be making an appearance in the film themselves. Ryan Kroft, Michael Rapino, Jonathan Daniel were announced as the film&#x27;s executive producers. Mason Thames, Kylr Coffman and Ryan Foust were announced as the film&#x27;s stars. Jenna Fischer, who portrayed the character Pam Beesley in the American sitcom &quot;The Office&quot;, was confirmed to have a role in the film. Angela Kinsey, who acted in the same series, was also confirmed to have a role in the film. The film&#x27;s logline read, “Their roadtrip is a rowdy and mischievous jaunt across the country filled with adventures, based on the exploits of Green Day and their years of living in a tour van.” According to Ryan Kroft of Live Nation Productions, the film &quot;[tells] the story of three friends as they travel across the United States after mistakenly thinking they’ll be opening for a Green Day New Years concert in Los Angeles.&quot; Billie Joe Armstrong said, &quot;Van days rule. You will drive all night on no sleep then play a show for 10 kids in a basement of a friend of a friend’s house 50 miles east of anywhere you’ve ever heard of. But you’ll do it again the next day, and the one after that. Because you’re doing it with your bandmates who become your family and it’s unlike anything you’ve ever known. It’s electric. Let the music and mischief ensue.&quot; Lee Kirk had previously worked with Billie Joe Armstrong on the 2016 &quot;Ordinary World&quot;, which the latter had made an appearance in. Kirk had also previously directed an episode of The Office, and is also the spouse of Jenna Fischer.

== Controversies ==
===Music style===
Green Day has generated controversy over whether their musical style and major-label status constitutes &quot;true punk&quot;. In reaction to both the style of music and the background of the band, John Lydon, former frontman of the 1970s punk band the Sex Pistols commented, &quot;So there we are fending off all that and it pisses me off that years later a wank outfit like Green Day hop in and nick all that and attach it to themselves. They didn&#x27;t earn their wings to do that and if they were true punk they wouldn&#x27;t look anything like they do.&quot; However, others in the punk rock scene would come to the defense of the band on their punk status. Bad Religion lead guitarist Brett Gurewitz and founder of the independent punk label Epitaph Records would state, &quot;They [Green Day] are a punk band, but you know, punk is the legacy of rock and roll, and Green Day are the biggest band in the genre.&quot;

Armstrong has discussed the group&#x27;s status of being a punk band on a major record label, saying, &quot;Sometimes I think we&#x27;ve become redundant because we&#x27;re this big band now; we&#x27;ve made a lot of money—we&#x27;re not punk rock anymore. But then I think about it and just say, &#x27;You can take us out of a punk rock environment, but you can&#x27;t take the punk rock out of us. In 2021, Armstrong condemned the band&#x27;s labeling as &quot;pop-punk&quot; by critics in a Vulture magazine interview, stating, &quot;I never really liked that term (pop punk), it turned into sort of a genre. I never thought of myself as a pop artist. I&#x27;ve always been left of center. To say you&#x27;re a pop-punker ... it never sat well with me.&quot; Armstrong acknowledged the band&#x27;s more melodic punk style compared to other bands from the Bay Area scene it emerged from, but also brought up the band&#x27;s performance alongside East Bay hardcore bands like Neurosis, Engage, Spitboy, Blatz, and Filth.

In 2006, English rock musician Noel Gallagher of the Britpop band Oasis complained about the band semi-jokingly, claiming that the band had ripped off his song &quot;Wonderwall&quot; with &quot;Boulevard of Broken Dreams&quot;.

===2012 iHeartRadio Festival incident===
On September 21, 2012, while Green Day was performing at the iHeartRadio music festival, Armstrong stopped while performing &quot;Basket Case&quot;, because he believed the group&#x27;s time was being shortened, possibly to extend R&amp;B artist Usher&#x27;s performance. Angered, Armstrong began ranting while a screen in the rear of the audience was labeled &quot;1 Minutes [Left]&quot;, saying &quot;You&#x27;re gonna give me one fucking minute? You&#x27;ve gotta be fucking kidding me!&quot; He also told the crowd he &quot;was not Justin Bieber&quot; and labeled the festival as a &quot;joke&quot;. When the screen went blank, Armstrong smashed his guitar, while bassist Mike Dirnt smashed his bass. Armstrong then gave the finger, and declared that Green Day would be back before throwing his microphone down and walking off the stage. Two days later, the band&#x27;s representative apologized for the incident on the group&#x27;s behalf stating that &quot;Green Day would like everyone to know that their set was not cut short by Clear Channel and to apologize to those they offended at the iHeartRadio Festival in Las Vegas&quot;, also adding that Armstrong would be headed to rehab, for abuse of alcohol and prescription pills. However, Dirnt would later say in an interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; that he agreed with what Armstrong meant by his rant. The band later made amends with the company and played an album release party for their 2016 release, &quot;Revolution Radio&quot;. They also returned to the festival in 2019 supporting the album &quot;Father of All Motherfuckers&quot;.

===Mad Cool incident===
On July 7, 2017, about 20 minutes before Green Day headlined Mad Cool, a festival in Madrid, an acrobat fell about from a cage above the stage and died. Some fans were upset at the band and festival organizers for continuing the show, which was attended by about 35,000 people. On their website, Armstrong said the band did not know about the accident before their set, and likely would not have played if they had.

===Oracle Park incident===
On September 20, 2024, Green Day performed a show in San Francisco at Oracle Park. During the concert, Billie Joe Armstrong expressed his anger over the A&#x27;s leaving Oakland, repeatedly cursing Las Vegas and called it &quot;the worst shithole in America&quot;. He also criticized A&#x27;s owner John Fisher, saying &quot;We don&#x27;t take shit from people like fucking John Fisher… I hate Las Vegas.&quot; In protest of Armstrong&#x27;s comments, two Las Vegas radio stations (KOMP 92.3 and X107.5) banned all Green Day music from their playlists.

== Members ==
Current members
* Billie Joe Armstrong – lead vocals, guitar (1987–present); harmonica (1997–present); keyboards (2008–present)
* Mike Dirnt – bass (1988–present); backing and occasional lead vocals (1987–present); guitar (1987–1988)
* Tré Cool – drums, percussion, occasional backing and lead vocals and guitar (1990–present)

Current touring musicians
* Jason White – guitar, backing vocals (1999–present; &quot;session member in 2012&quot;)
* Jason Freese – keyboards, accordion, saxophone, trombone, backing vocals, occasional acoustic guitar (2004–present; hiatus in 2024; &quot;session member from 2003–2004, 2008–2009&quot;)
* Kevin Preston – guitar, backing vocals (2019–present)

Former members
* Raj Punjabi – drums, percussion, backing vocals (1987–1988)
* Sean Hughes – bass (1987–1988)
* John Kiffmeyer – drums, percussion, backing vocals (1988–1990; one-off guest appearance in 2015)
Former touring musicians
* Dave &quot;E.C.&quot; Henwood – drums, backing vocals (1990)
* Garth Schultz – trombone, trumpet (1997–1999)
* Gabrial McNair – trombone, saxophone (1999–2001; &quot;session member in 1997&quot;)
* Kurt Lohmiller – trumpet, backing vocals, percussion (1999–2005)
* Mike Pelino – guitar, backing vocals (2004, 2005)
* Ronnie Blake – trumpet, backing vocals, percussion (2005; &quot;session member from 2015–2016&quot;)
* Bobby Schneck – guitar, backing vocals (2004–2005)
* Jeff Matika – guitar, backing vocals (2009–2019)
* Coley O&#x27;Toole – keyboards, backing vocals (2024; substitute for Jason Freese)
===Timeline===
=== Touring musicians timeline ===
== Awards and nominations ==
Green Day has earned 214 award nominations and 92 wins.

==Discography==
Studio albums

* &quot;39/Smooth&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Kerplunk&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Dookie&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Insomniac&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Nimrod&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Warning&quot; (2000)
* &quot;American Idiot&quot; (2004)
* &quot;21st Century Breakdown&quot; (2009)
* &quot;¡Uno!&quot; (2012)
* &quot;¡Dos!&quot; (2012)
* &quot;¡Tré!&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Revolution Radio&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Father of All Motherfuckers&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Saviors&quot; (2024)

== Tours ==

* 39/Smooth Tour (1990–1991)
* European Tour &#x27;91 (1991)
* Kerplunk Tour (1991–1993)
* Dookie Tour (1994)
* Insomniac Tour (1995–1996)
* Nimrod Tour (1997–1998)
* Life Without Warning Tour (1999–2000)
* Pop Disaster Tour (2002)
* American Idiot World Tour (2004–2005)
* 21st Century Breakdown World Tour (2009–2010)
* 99 Revolutions Tour (2013)
* Revolution Radio Tour (2016–2017)
* Hella Mega Tour (2021–2022)
* The Saviors Tour (2024–2025)
==See also==

* &quot;Green Day: Rock Band&quot;
* List of best-selling albums in the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Spitz, Marc. &quot;Nobody Likes You: Inside the Turbulent Life, Times, and Music of Green Day&quot;. New York: Hyperion, 2006. 
* The Green Day Story (Broadcast on Radio 1 Mon June 20, 2005) (Alternate Link (rpm. file))

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="0" end="9" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="25" end="29" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094336" start="45" end="62" title="Rodeo, California" label="Rodeo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q712592" start="103" end="123" title="Billie Joe Armstrong" label="Billie Joe Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q713286" start="157" end="167" title="Mike Dirnt" label="Mike Dirnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q660106" start="182" end="190" title="Tré Cool" label="Tré Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="247" end="253" title="Dookie" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="278" end="293" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="418" end="430" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="432" end="445" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="447" end="453" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q265222" start="455" end="459" title="NOFX" label="NOFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q754051" start="461" end="470" title="Pennywise (band)" label="Pennywise"/>
<link wikidata="Q976882" start="475" end="492" title="Social Distortion" label="Social Distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="560" end="569" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="642" end="652" title="Green Day" label="Blood Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="659" end="673" title="Green Day" label="Sweet Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q226031" start="697" end="739" title="Punk rock in California" label="late 1980s/early 1990s Bay Area punk scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551121" start="762" end="779" title="924 Gilman Street" label="924 Gilman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="788" end="808" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q430070" start="880" end="896" title="Lookout! Records" label="Lookout! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q727773" start="933" end="942" title="39/Smooth" label="39/Smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016626" start="1010" end="1020" title="power trio" label="power trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q378925" start="1045" end="1059" title="John Kiffmeyer" label="John Kiffmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188194" start="1135" end="1143" title="Kerplunk (album)" label="Kerplunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214708" start="1182" end="1191" title="Insomniac (Green Day album)" label="Insomniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q217018" start="1212" end="1218" title="Nimrod (album)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q213694" start="1242" end="1249" title="Warning (Green Day album)" label="Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="1498" end="1508" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="1522" end="1536" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="1658" end="1680" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q205603" start="1808" end="1813" title="¡Uno!" label="¡Uno!"/>
<link wikidata="Q136658" start="1827" end="1832" title="¡Dos!" label="¡Dos!"/>
<link wikidata="Q497814" start="1850" end="1855" title="¡Tré!" label="¡Tré!"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257715" start="2124" end="2140" title="Revolution Radio" label="Revolution Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2205" end="2231" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot; Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q67384982" start="2239" end="2266" title="Father of All Motherfuckers" label="Father of All Motherfuckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123173833" start="2290" end="2297" title="Saviors (album)" label="Saviors"/>
<link wikidata="Q465082" start="2324" end="2370" title="American Idiot (musical)" label="stage adaptation of &amp;quot;American Idiot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="2428" end="2439" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="2441" end="2453" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13449461" start="2455" end="2473" title="Tony Award for Best Scenic Design" label="Best Scenic Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821796" start="2478" end="2498" title="Tony Award for Best Lighting Design" label="Best Lighting Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="2555" end="2581" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073468" start="2683" end="2700" title="Pinhead Gunpowder" label="Pinhead Gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187591" start="2702" end="2713" title="the Network" label="the Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003262" start="2715" end="2731" title="Foxboro Hot Tubs" label="Foxboro Hot Tubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807787" start="2733" end="2745" title="The Longshot (band)" label="the Longshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q84607013" start="2750" end="2762" title="the Coverups" label="the Coverups"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="2895" end="2921" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling music artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2959" end="2972" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="3000" end="3022" title="Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="3047" end="3062" title="Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="3073" end="3087" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="3104" end="3126" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="3134" end="3152" title="Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641812" start="3163" end="3189" title="Boulevard of Broken Dreams (Green Day song)" label="Boulevard of Broken Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113385" start="3201" end="3224" title="Best Musical Show Album" label="Best Musical Show Album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3235" end="3287" title="American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording" label="American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196401" start="3533" end="3558" title="Pinole Valley High School" label="Pinole Valley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927667" start="3616" end="3634" title="Blood Rage" label="the eponymous film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094336" start="3704" end="3721" title="Rodeo, California" label="Rodeo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="3988" end="4007" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085543" start="4064" end="4072" title="Isocracy (band)" label="Isocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q378925" start="4081" end="4095" title="John Kiffmeyer" label="John Kiffmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="4277" end="4283" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165846" start="4318" end="4331" title="Operation Ivy (band)" label="Operation Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="4348" end="4361" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q661662" start="4366" end="4378" title="Matt Freeman" label="Matt Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="4471" end="4477" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226536" start="4556" end="4571" title="Larry Livermore" label="Larry Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q430070" start="4582" end="4598" title="Lookout! Records" label="Lookout! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="4705" end="4718" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q976888" start="4726" end="4737" title="1,000 Hours" label="1,000 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309934" start="4908" end="4918" title="Sweet Baby (band)" label="Sweet Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="5010" end="5018" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="5070" end="5078" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q727773" start="5331" end="5340" title="39/Smooth" label="39/Smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049690" start="5424" end="5430" title="Slappy" label="Slappy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768794" start="5447" end="5461" title="Sweet Children (EP)" label="Sweet Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="5540" end="5551" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534558" start="5577" end="5591" title="Skene! Records" label="Skene! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123314" start="5662" end="5693" title="1,039/Smoothed Out Slappy Hours" label="1,039/Smoothed Out Slappy Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q624560" start="5914" end="5939" title="Humboldt State University" label="Humboldt State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q631752" start="5943" end="5961" title="Arcata, California" label="Arcata, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q769682" start="5963" end="5975" title="The Lookouts" label="The Lookouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q660106" start="5990" end="5998" title="Tré Cool" label="Tré Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q188194" start="6261" end="6269" title="Kerplunk (album)" label="Kerplunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="6362" end="6374" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447954" start="6410" end="6425" title="Recipe for Hate" label="Recipe for Hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499526" start="6626" end="6637" title="bidding war" label="bidding war"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="6707" end="6722" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q950350" start="6766" end="6777" title="Rob Cavallo" label="Rob Cavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462602" start="6844" end="6853" title="the Muffs" label="the Muffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="7001" end="7005" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="7304" end="7310" title="Dookie" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q545545" start="7658" end="7666" title="Longview (song)" label="Longview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750952" start="7680" end="7691" title="Basket Case (song)" label="Basket Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784130" start="7709" end="7727" title="When I Come Around" label="When I Come Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="7787" end="7805" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681035" start="7916" end="7936" title="Hatch Memorial Shell" label="Hatch Memorial Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="8137" end="8149" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q933410" start="8163" end="8181" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94"/>
<link wikidata="Q713286" start="8297" end="8307" title="Mike Dirnt" label="Mike Dirnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="8390" end="8402" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="8548" end="8560" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="8565" end="8587" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="8625" end="8646" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q624538" start="8946" end="8956" title="Jawbreaker (band)" label="Jawbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q933794" start="9169" end="9175" title="J.A.R." label="J.A.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q329145" start="9196" end="9201" title="Angus (film)" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="9287" end="9305" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q214708" start="9356" end="9365" title="Insomniac (Green Day album)" label="Insomniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9627" end="9640" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603308" start="9900" end="9917" title="Geek Stink Breath" label="Geek Stink Breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q684617" start="9931" end="9944" title="Stuck with Me" label="Stuck with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721833" start="9958" end="9974" title="Brain Stew/Jaded" label="Brain Stew/Jaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373043" start="9992" end="10013" title="Walking Contradiction" label="Walking Contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="10278" end="10299" title="American Music Awards" label="American Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q217018" start="10791" end="10797" title="Nimrod (album)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="10968" end="10976" title="Hardcore punk" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="10978" end="10982" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q220830" start="10984" end="10993" title="surf rock" label="surf rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="10995" end="10998" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089388" start="11029" end="11062" title="Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)" label="Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="11313" end="11321" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q207375" start="11354" end="11356" title="ER (TV series)" label="ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q544333" start="11426" end="11447" title="Nice Guys Finish Last" label="Nice Guys Finish Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505282" start="11461" end="11481" title="Hitchin&amp;#x27; a Ride (Green Day song)" label="Hitchin&amp;#x27; a Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721942" start="11499" end="11508" title="Redundant (song)" label="Redundant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135966" start="11572" end="11588" title="King of the Hill" label="King of the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q349101" start="11707" end="11718" title="Jason White (Green Day guitarist)" label="Jason White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425661" start="11810" end="11819" title="folk punk" label="folk-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213694" start="11855" end="11862" title="Warning (Green Day album)" label="Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q971625" start="11920" end="11931" title="Warped Tour" label="Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q27983591" start="11973" end="11984" title="Ian Brennan (music producer)" label="Ian Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="12252" end="12260" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="12401" end="12414" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453229" start="12683" end="12691" title="Minority (Green Day song)" label="Minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q259302" start="12720" end="12727" title="Warning (Green Day song)" label="Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753019" start="13396" end="13420" title="International Superhits!" label="International Superhits!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349854" start="13437" end="13448" title="Shenanigans (album)" label="Shenanigans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753019" start="13576" end="13602" title="International Supervideos!" label="International Supervideos!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13737" end="13774" title="Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me" label="Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542186" start="13801" end="13852" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q834587" start="13898" end="13915" title="Pop Disaster Tour" label="Pop Disaster Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="13921" end="13930" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="13950" end="13953" title="DVD-Video" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q654435" start="14168" end="14193" title="Cigarettes and Valentines" label="Cigarettes and Valentines"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="14709" end="14723" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048111" start="14820" end="14836" title="master recording" label="master recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187591" start="15097" end="15108" title="The Network" label="The Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q355175" start="15153" end="15168" title="Adeline Records" label="Adeline Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406843" start="15309" end="15325" title="Money Money 2020" label="Money Money 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="15869" end="15877" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935254" start="15912" end="15922" title="Skull Ring" label="Skull Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q692708" start="15985" end="16001" title="I Fought the Law" label="I Fought the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143703" start="16033" end="16045" title="The Crickets" label="The Crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="16082" end="16088" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="16096" end="16099" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="16100" end="16118" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="Super Bowl XXXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="16135" end="16149" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q241339" start="16299" end="16313" title="American Idiot (song)" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="16427" end="16442" title="rock opera" label="punk rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q182051" start="16497" end="16514" title="Jesus of Suburbia" label="Jesus of Suburbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="16786" end="16800" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542327" start="16935" end="16946" title="47th Grammy Awards" label="2005 Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="16951" end="16966" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="17020" end="17037" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="17129" end="17151" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="17286" end="17321" title="Grammy Award for Record of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="17338" end="17346" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="17422" end="17425" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="17481" end="17494" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="17749" end="17758" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="17941" end="17972" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="18074" end="18087" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785297" start="18088" end="18101" title="National Bowl" label="National Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q217023" start="18183" end="18200" title="Bullet in a Bible" label="Bullet in a Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="18387" end="18393" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="18399" end="18408" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q430070" start="18577" end="18592" title="Lookout Records" label="Lookout Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="18614" end="18632" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="18749" end="18775" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="19062" end="19073" title="garage rock" label="garage rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003262" start="19104" end="19120" title="Foxboro Hot Tubs" label="Foxboro Hot Tubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553912" start="19135" end="19156" title="Stop Drop and Roll!!!" label="Stop Drop and Roll!!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430009" start="19338" end="19358" title="Crockett, California" label="Crockett, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739748" start="19381" end="19392" title="Carson Daly" label="Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q485673" start="19394" end="19401" title="Garbage (band)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q234104" start="19414" end="19428" title="Shirley Manson" label="Shirley Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="19467" end="19476" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="19607" end="19629" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631056" start="20616" end="20626" title="21st Century Breakdown World Tour" label="world tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="20759" end="20791" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349100" start="20799" end="20817" title="52nd Grammy Awards" label="52nd Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="20933" end="20940" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455930" start="20985" end="21002" title="Parental Advisory" label="Parental Advisory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094087" start="21441" end="21454" title="Michael Mayer (director)" label="Michael Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="21493" end="21503" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q579927" start="21526" end="21542" title="Spring Awakening (musical)" label="Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q465082" start="21622" end="21636" title="American Idiot (musical)" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892089" start="21657" end="21683" title="Berkeley Repertory Theatre" label="Berkeley Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21932" end="21942" title="American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614079" start="22006" end="22025" title="When It&amp;#x27;s Time" label="When It&amp;#x27;s Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="22046" end="22052" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q609310" start="22118" end="22149" title="Spike Video Game Awards" label="Spike TV Video Game Awards 2009"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22253" end="22273" title="Green Day: Rock Band" label="Green Day: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22363" end="22385" title="The Beatles: Rock Band" label="The Beatles: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="22443" end="22449" title="Dookie (album)" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="22463" end="22477" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="22495" end="22517" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631056" start="22625" end="22658" title="21st Century Breakdown World Tour" label="21st Century Breakdown World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="22748" end="22756" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="22846" end="22852" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="22862" end="22871" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="22894" end="22901" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="22915" end="22924" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q791715" start="23433" end="23448" title="Awesome as Fuck" label="Awesome as Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003262" start="23615" end="23631" title="Foxboro Hot Tubs" label="Foxboro Hot Tubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205603" start="23833" end="23838" title="¡Uno!" label="¡Uno!"/>
<link wikidata="Q136658" start="23852" end="23857" title="¡Dos!" label="¡Dos!"/>
<link wikidata="Q497814" start="23875" end="23880" title="¡Tré!" label="¡Tré!"/>
<link wikidata="Q349101" start="23973" end="23984" title="Jason White (Green Day guitarist)" label="Jason White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079699" start="24205" end="24218" title="Rock en Seine" label="Rock en Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="24284" end="24300" title="Reading Festival" label="Reading Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q13478742" start="24624" end="24632" title="¡Cuatro!" label="¡Cuatro!"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="24754" end="24759" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="24761" end="24769" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q465082" start="24957" end="24979" title="American Idiot (musical)" label="American Idiot musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13431479" start="25083" end="25102" title="99 Revolutions Tour" label="99 Revolutions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q163995" start="25152" end="25168" title="Emirates Stadium" label="Emirates Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="25340" end="25356" title="Reading Festival" label="Reading Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915098" start="25384" end="25395" title="Demolicious" label="Demolicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="25628" end="25644" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q378925" start="26007" end="26021" title="John Kiffmeyer" label="John Kiffmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="26107" end="26133" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="26137" end="26149" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075269" start="26497" end="26518" title="Xmas Time of the Year" label="Xmas Time of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262643" start="26590" end="26599" title="Bang Bang (Green Day song)" label="Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257715" start="26657" end="26673" title="Revolution Radio" label="Revolution Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q27055681" start="26739" end="26770" title="Revolution Radio Tour" label="world tour supporting the album"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="26816" end="26837" title="American Music Awards" label="American Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="26921" end="26933" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268417" start="27064" end="27081" title="Alternative Press (music magazine)" label="Alternative Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="27318" end="27330" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302105" start="27682" end="27706" title="God&amp;#x27;s Favorite Band" label="God&amp;#x27;s Favorite Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q231233" start="27908" end="27923" title="Miranda Lambert" label="Miranda Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="28078" end="28094" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085770" start="28120" end="28134" title="Woodstock 1994 (Green Day album)" label="Woodstock 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q67385311" start="28307" end="28322" title="Hella Mega Tour" label="Hella Mega Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="28328" end="28340" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="28345" end="28351" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451312" start="28393" end="28409" title="The Interrupters (band)" label="the Interrupters"/>
<link wikidata="Q67915600" start="28467" end="28483" title="Father of All... (song)" label="Father of All..."/>
<link wikidata="Q67384982" start="28524" end="28551" title="Father of All Motherfuckers" label="Father of All Motherfuckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191043" start="28594" end="28598" title="KROQ-FM" label="KROQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="28656" end="28663" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="28733" end="28739" title="Warner Records" label="Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="28811" end="28833" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790354" start="28973" end="28981" title="Oh Yeah! (Green Day song)" label="Oh Yeah!"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="29296" end="29313" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="29372" end="29379" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q518254" start="29393" end="29401" title="Dreaming (Blondie song)" label="Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187591" start="29467" end="29478" title="the Network" label="the Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q122495503" start="29898" end="29906" title="Trans Am (EP)" label="Trans Am"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29982" end="30022" title="Money Money 2020 Part II: We Told Ya So!" label="Money Money 2020 Part II: We Told Ya So!"/>
<link wikidata="Q214708" start="30220" end="30229" title="Insomniac (Green Day album)" label="Insomniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846554" start="30695" end="30729" title="Mark, Mary &amp;amp; Some Other People" label="Mark, Mary &amp;amp; Some Other People"/>
<link wikidata="Q110078325" start="30744" end="30756" title="BBC Sessions (Green Day album)" label="BBC Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993389" start="30905" end="30916" title="RAK Studios" label="RAK Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="30918" end="30924" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="31046" end="31058" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112952" start="31064" end="31077" title="Outside Lands (festival)" label="Outside Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824526" start="31141" end="31154" title="Metro Chicago" label="Metro Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q259302" start="31286" end="31293" title="Warning (Green Day song)" label="Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="31534" end="31541" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q950350" start="31690" end="31701" title="Rob Cavallo" label="Rob Cavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070109" start="31900" end="31929" title="Festival d&amp;#x27;été de Québec" label="Festival d&amp;#x27;été de Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q902899" start="32002" end="32015" title="halftime show" label="halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q96359604" start="32023" end="32037" title="110th Grey Cup" label="110th Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q123371931" start="32400" end="32432" title="The American Dream Is Killing Me" label="The American Dream Is Killing Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="32462" end="32471" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="32473" end="32479" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="32551" end="32572" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="32574" end="32580" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q107014885" start="32586" end="32602" title="the Linda Lindas" label="the Linda Lindas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123367203" start="32643" end="32662" title="Look Ma, No Brains!" label="Look Ma, No Brains!"/>
<link wikidata="Q110800067" start="32705" end="32732" title="When We Were Young (festival)" label="When We Were Young Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123173833" start="32825" end="32832" title="Saviors (album)" label="Saviors"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944694" start="33087" end="33094" title="Dilemma (Green Day)" label="Dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q241339" start="33238" end="33252" title="American Idiot (song)" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q406497" start="33291" end="33341" title="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Rockin&amp;#x27; Eve" label="Dick Clark&amp;#x27;s New Year&amp;#x27;s Rockin&amp;#x27; Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q20871878" start="33467" end="33471" title="Make America Great Again" label="MAGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="33501" end="33513" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q124242406" start="33615" end="33631" title="One Eyed Bastard" label="One Eyed Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="33856" end="33868" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750952" start="34043" end="34054" title="Basket Case (song)" label="Basket Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q131374836" start="34279" end="34288" title="Bobby Sox" label="Bobby Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001362" start="34454" end="34461" title="FireAid" label="FireAid"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958436" start="34521" end="34532" title="Intuit Dome" label="Intuit Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="34542" end="34551" title="Kia Forum" label="Kia Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="34590" end="34609" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="Last Night on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564107" start="34621" end="34634" title="Billie Eilish" label="Billie Eilish"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451860" start="34654" end="34669" title="Still Breathing (Green Day song)" label="Still Breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784130" start="34687" end="34705" title="When I Come Around" label="When I Come Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="34920" end="34927" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="34929" end="34940" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="34942" end="34951" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261942" start="34953" end="34964" title="the Dickies" label="the Dickies"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="34970" end="34979" title="Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="35030" end="35042" title="power chords" label="power chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="35153" end="35162" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q828305" start="35164" end="35174" title="skate punk" label="skate punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q542703" start="35176" end="35188" title="melodic punk" label="melodic punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="35190" end="35206" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="35212" end="35221" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="35352" end="35361" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="35366" end="35374" title="pop-rock" label="pop-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="35420" end="35431" title="garage rock" label="garage rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="35486" end="35509" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="35513" end="35521" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="35551" end="35563" title="punk revival" label="punk revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339820" start="35765" end="35773" title="Livewire (magazine)" label="Livewire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="35790" end="35798" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="36056" end="36069" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q862223" start="36076" end="36085" title="Hüsker Dü" label="Hüsker Dü"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066024" start="36090" end="36106" title="The Replacements (band)" label="the Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292052" start="36243" end="36284" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Want to Know If You Are Lonely" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Want to Know If You Are Lonely"/>
<link wikidata="Q976882" start="36522" end="36539" title="Social Distortion" label="Social Distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="36544" end="36556" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034087" start="36644" end="36665" title="Another State of Mind (song)" label="Another State of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935683" start="36709" end="36736" title="Mommy&amp;#x27;s Little Monster (album)" label="Mommy&amp;#x27;s Little Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="36861" end="36870" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="36877" end="36886" title="the Kinks" label="the Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="36888" end="36895" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="36901" end="36912" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="36962" end="36974" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q923253" start="37139" end="37145" title="D.O.A. (band)" label="D.O.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="37154" end="37167" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003617" start="37256" end="37264" title="T.S.O.L." label="T.S.O.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q4000676" start="37417" end="37432" title="Turn It Around!" label="Turn It Around!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914259" start="37511" end="37527" title="Maximumrocknroll" label="Maximumrocknroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q624538" start="37722" end="37732" title="Jawbreaker (band)" label="Jawbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002661" start="37738" end="37749" title="Crimpshrine" label="Crimpshrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="37866" end="37882" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="37884" end="37896" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261942" start="38317" end="38328" title="The Dickies" label="The Dickies"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="38946" end="38962" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="38987" end="39001" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="39018" end="39040" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="39101" end="39103" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="39105" end="39111" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q611626" start="39147" end="39153" title="Grease (musical)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="40051" end="40063" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="40065" end="40078" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q265222" start="40080" end="40084" title="NOFX" label="NOFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q976882" start="40086" end="40103" title="Social Distortion" label="Social Distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="40109" end="40115" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="40224" end="40230" title="Dookie (album)" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142959" start="40257" end="40261" title="Fuse (TV channel)" label="Fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="40284" end="40292" title="pop-punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="40556" end="40582" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="40752" end="40783" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="41153" end="41175" title="Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="41186" end="41192" title="Dookie (album)" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="41200" end="41215" title="Best Rock Album" label="Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="41226" end="41240" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="41257" end="41279" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="41287" end="41305" title="Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641812" start="41316" end="41342" title="Boulevard of Broken Dreams (Green Day song)" label="Boulevard of Broken Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113385" start="41354" end="41377" title="Best Musical Show Album" label="Best Musical Show Album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41388" end="41440" title="American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording" label="American Idiot: The Original Broadway Cast Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q465082" start="41460" end="41506" title="American Idiot (musical)" label="stage adaptation of &amp;quot;American Idiot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="41564" end="41575" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142703" start="41759" end="41772" title="Alkaline Trio" label="Alkaline Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q30449" start="41774" end="41787" title="Avril Lavigne" label="Avril Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q292061" start="41789" end="41792" title="AFI (band)" label="AFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="41794" end="41806" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="41808" end="41817" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297575" start="41819" end="41830" title="Joyce Manor" label="Joyce Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="41832" end="41841" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406448" start="41843" end="41849" title="Wavves" label="Wavves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038524" start="41851" end="41857" title="Fidlar" label="Fidlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q734756" start="41859" end="41873" title="Tegan and Sara" label="Tegan and Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23665197" start="41875" end="41889" title="the Menzingers" label="the Menzingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q850645" start="41891" end="41906" title="New Found Glory" label="New Found Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794511" start="41908" end="41936" title="Prince Daddy &amp;amp; the Hyena" label="Prince Daddy &amp;amp; the Hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q895463" start="41938" end="41954" title="Bowling for Soup" label="Bowling for Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564107" start="41956" end="41969" title="Billie Eilish" label="Billie Eilish"/>
<link wikidata="Q483558" start="41975" end="41981" title="Sum 41" label="Sum 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073468" start="42195" end="42212" title="Pinhead Gunpowder" label="Pinhead Gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807787" start="42234" end="42246" title="The Longshot (band)" label="the Longshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q747812" start="42265" end="42280" title="the Frustrators" label="the Frustrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187591" start="42302" end="42313" title="the Network" label="the Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553912" start="42461" end="42482" title="Stop Drop and Roll!!!" label="Stop Drop and Roll!!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003262" start="42521" end="42537" title="Foxboro Hot Tubs" label="Foxboro Hot Tubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84607013" start="42840" end="42852" title="the Coverups" label="the Coverups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106444" start="42889" end="42900" title="Chris Dugan" label="Chris Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910786" start="42918" end="42932" title="Bill Schneider (musician)" label="Bill Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="43075" end="43086" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="43088" end="43119" title="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="43121" end="43130" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="43136" end="43143" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="43193" end="43195" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="43209" end="43219" title="Rick Rubin" label="Rick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q584286" start="43256" end="43277" title="The Saints Are Coming" label="The Saints Are Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q547438" start="43312" end="43317" title="Skids (band)" label="Skids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941636" start="43380" end="43392" title="Music Rising" label="Music Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="43474" end="43491" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="43604" end="43608" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="NRDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="43733" end="43744" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q958795" start="43756" end="43774" title="Working Class Hero" label="Working Class Hero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43820" end="43884" title="Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur" label="Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="43950" end="43963" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518357" start="44000" end="44020" title="50th Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="44033" end="44050" title="the White Stripes" label="the White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076297" start="44063" end="44073" title="Icky Thump" label="Icky Thump"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="44137" end="44155" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585271" start="44210" end="44232" title="The Simpsons Theme" label="show&amp;#x27;s theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094087" start="44351" end="44364" title="Michael Mayer (director)" label="Michael Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="44391" end="44401" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q465082" start="44450" end="44457" title="American Idiot (musical)" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892089" start="44480" end="44492" title="Berkeley Rep" label="Berkeley Rep"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="44678" end="44696" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="45134" end="45147" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="45329" end="45345" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="45549" end="45558" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="45727" end="45731" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="46311" end="46324" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q372055" start="46469" end="46474" title="Tommy (The Who album)" label="Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="46488" end="46492" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q553890" start="46506" end="46510" title="Rent (musical)" label="Rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q579927" start="46527" end="46543" title="Spring Awakening (musical)" label="Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="46739" end="46750" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="46762" end="46774" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13449461" start="46779" end="46797" title="Tony Award for Best Scenic Design" label="Best Scenic Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="46833" end="46850" title="Drama Desk Awards" label="Drama Desk Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111970" start="46855" end="46881" title="Outer Critics Circle Award" label="Outer Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q465082" start="47513" end="47527" title="American Idiot (musical)" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q217023" start="47727" end="47744" title="Bullet in a Bible" label="Bullet in a Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q791715" start="47758" end="47773" title="Awesome as Fuck" label="Awesome as Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="47791" end="47816" title="Heart Like a Hand Grenade" label="Heart Like a Hand Grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="47835" end="47844" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098559" start="47849" end="47862" title="Gary Goetzman" label="Gary Goetzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q315039" start="47868" end="47877" title="Tom Hulce" label="Tom Hulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="48444" end="48452" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="48465" end="48475" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="48486" end="48489" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="48518" end="48522" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894569" start="48536" end="48545" title="Frontline (U.S. TV series)" label="Frontline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="48562" end="48578" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="48663" end="48695" title="South by Southwest Film Festival" label="South by Southwest Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48765" end="48807" title="Turn It Around: The Story of East Bay Punk" label="Turn It Around: The Story of East Bay Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061903" start="48985" end="49008" title="Live Nation Productions" label="Live Nation Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="49021" end="49032" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="49280" end="49288" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061903" start="49459" end="49484" title="Live Nation Entertainment" label="Live Nation Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q712592" start="49554" end="49574" title="Billie Joe Armstrong" label="Billie Joe Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q713286" start="49584" end="49594" title="Mike Dirnt" label="Mike Dirnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q660106" start="49608" end="49616" title="Tré Cool" label="Tré Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q64746233" start="49796" end="49810" title="Michael Rapino" label="Michael Rapino"/>
<link wikidata="Q112334777" start="49883" end="49895" title="Mason Thames" label="Mason Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q238877" start="49966" end="49979" title="Jenna Fischer" label="Jenna Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027359" start="50009" end="50020" title="Pam Beesley" label="Pam Beesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="50050" end="50060" title="The Office (US)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669971" start="50110" end="50123" title="Angela Kinsey" label="Angela Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="50625" end="50636" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18703138" start="51154" end="51168" title="Ordinary World (film)" label="Ordinary World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="51433" end="51451" title="Selling out" label="major-label status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="51475" end="51479" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="51558" end="51568" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="51613" end="51624" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="52024" end="52036" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q506558" start="52052" end="52066" title="Brett Gurewitz" label="Brett Gurewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q726153" start="52109" end="52124" title="Epitaph Records" label="Epitaph Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="52214" end="52227" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="52779" end="52786" title="New York (magazine)" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q334093" start="53262" end="53270" title="Neurosis (band)" label="Neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578283" start="53280" end="53287" title="Spitboy" label="Spitboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925532" start="53289" end="53294" title="Blatz (band)" label="Blatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449251" start="53300" end="53305" title="Filth (band)" label="Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="53339" end="53353" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="53374" end="53379" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045517" start="53474" end="53484" title="Wonderwall (song)" label="Wonderwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641812" start="53502" end="53528" title="Boulevard of Broken Dreams (Green Day song)" label="Boulevard of Broken Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750952" start="53708" end="53719" title="Basket Case (song)" label="Basket Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="53824" end="53829" title="Usher (entertainer)" label="Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="54114" end="54127" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q713286" start="54254" end="54264" title="Mike Dirnt" label="Mike Dirnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137711" start="54303" end="54313" title="the finger" label="the finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="54763" end="54768" title="Drug rehabilitation" label="rehab"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="54873" end="54886" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28148606" start="55270" end="55278" title="Mad Cool" label="Mad Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="55294" end="55300" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q123925178" start="55698" end="55702" title="The Saviors Tour" label="show"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="55706" end="55719" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q298585" start="55723" end="55734" title="Oracle Park" label="Oracle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="55851" end="55860" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194058" start="55952" end="55963" title="John Fisher (businessman)" label="John Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q712592" start="56239" end="56259" title="Billie Joe Armstrong" label="Billie Joe Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q713286" start="56351" end="56361" title="Mike Dirnt" label="Mike Dirnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q660106" start="56457" end="56465" title="Tré Cool" label="Tré Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q349101" start="56577" end="56588" title="Jason White (Green Day guitarist)" label="Jason White"/>
<link wikidata="Q946528" start="56667" end="56679" title="Jason Freese" label="Jason Freese"/>
<link wikidata="Q378925" start="57022" end="57036" title="John Kiffmeyer" label="John Kiffmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246460" start="57257" end="57271" title="Gabrial McNair" label="Gabrial McNair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419627" start="57463" end="57475" title="Ronnie Blake" label="Ronnie Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q727773" start="57928" end="57937" title="39/Smooth" label="39/Smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188194" start="57959" end="57967" title="Kerplunk (album)" label="Kerplunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="57989" end="57995" title="Dookie" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q214708" start="58017" end="58026" title="Insomniac (Green Day album)" label="Insomniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q217018" start="58048" end="58054" title="Nimrod (album)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q213694" start="58076" end="58083" title="Warning (Green Day album)" label="Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q151714" start="58105" end="58119" title="American Idiot" label="American Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207502" start="58141" end="58163" title="21st Century Breakdown" label="21st Century Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q205603" start="58185" end="58190" title="¡Uno!" label="¡Uno!"/>
<link wikidata="Q136658" start="58212" end="58217" title="¡Dos!" label="¡Dos!"/>
<link wikidata="Q497814" start="58239" end="58244" title="¡Tré!" label="¡Tré!"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257715" start="58266" end="58282" title="Revolution Radio" label="Revolution Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q67384982" start="58304" end="58331" title="Father of All Motherfuckers" label="Father of All Motherfuckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123173833" start="58353" end="58360" title="Saviors (album)" label="Saviors"/>
<link wikidata="Q834587" start="58595" end="58612" title="Pop Disaster Tour" label="Pop Disaster Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q944561" start="58622" end="58647" title="American Idiot World Tour" label="American Idiot World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631056" start="58662" end="58695" title="21st Century Breakdown World Tour" label="21st Century Breakdown World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13431479" start="58710" end="58729" title="99 Revolutions Tour" label="99 Revolutions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q27055681" start="58739" end="58760" title="Revolution Radio Tour" label="Revolution Radio Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q67385311" start="58775" end="58790" title="Hella Mega Tour" label="Hella Mega Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q123925178" start="58805" end="58821" title="The Saviors Tour" label="The Saviors Tour"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58856" end="58876" title="Green Day: Rock Band" label="Green Day: Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q468514" start="58885" end="58933" title="List of best-selling albums in the United States" label="List of best-selling albums in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="59139" end="59146" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52727" wikidata="Q3416463" url="?curid=52727" title="Radiant Silvergun">
<text>is a shoot &#x27;em up video game developed and published by Treasure. It was originally released in Japanese arcades in 1998 and subsequently ported to the Sega Saturn later that year. The story follows a team of fighter pilots in the far future who are battling waves of enemies summoned by a mysterious crystal dug up from the Earth. The player hosts an arsenal of six different types of shots to choose from, and a sword to destroy nearby targets. The stages are tightly designed to present players with scenarios that can be approached differently with the various weapon types.

Treasure was primarily known for developing action and platform games for home consoles before &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot;. Despite the company&#x27;s concerns about the financial viability of arcade games and the shooter genre, they felt they had a good premise for a game and decided to pursue it. &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; was developed by ten people, with Gonzo outsourced for animated cutscenes. The game was developed for the ST-V arcade board first and later ported to the architecturally similar Sega Saturn. Towards the end of development, the team recruited professional gamers that held high scores in shooters to play test the game.

&quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; was first released in Japanese arcades in May 1998. Treasure president Masato Maegawa went in person to arcades to gauge the reaction of players. The Saturn port was released two months later in Japan. Despite its region exclusivity, &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; was imported by Western critics and received critical acclaim. Journalists agreed that the game revived the shoot &#x27;em up genre, which had fallen by the wayside after the rise in popularity of arcade fighting games in the 1990s. In retrospect, it is considered one of the greatest shooters and Sega Saturn games of all time. It received a spiritual sequel in the form of &quot;Ikaruga&quot; (2001), and was ported worldwide to the Xbox 360 in 2011, to the Nintendo Switch in 2022 and to Windows in 2023.

==Gameplay==

&quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; is a vertically scrolling shoot &#x27;em up. The player is given a wide arsenal from the start of the game featuring three primary weapons: strong forward laser, weak homing projectiles, and a spread gun which fires pairs of exploding projectiles at a wide angle. Combining any of these weapons with another will result in one of three new types of attack: a rear firing laser (laser + spread), an auto-targeting plasma beam (laser + homing), and a close range missile targeting system (homing + spread). Using all 3 weapons together activates a sword that can be swung around the ship to damage nearby enemies and defensively absorb a common type of enemy projectile. Absorbing enemy fire charges up the sword for a screen-clearing special attack. The stages are methodically and tightly paced with carefully crafted scenarios that can be approached differently with the varying weapons.

The game&#x27;s scoring system is based on enemy color. All enemies are one of three colors: red, blue, or yellow. Destroying three enemies of the same color in a row starts a bonus scoring chain. Destroying another set of the same color continues the chain and increases the bonus, while shooting another color resets it. Unlike Ikaruga, switching colors between sets breaks the chain. In addition to gaining a higher score, chains contribute to leveling up the weapon being used, increasing its effectiveness. The weapons stay powered up for the remainder of the game. The player can also obtain extra points by destroying bosses more methodically. Each boss has different segments and appendages that can be destroyed before targeting their weak spot. If all these segments are destroyed first, the player will earn a greater bonus. There are also hidden dogs that when shot, will give the player bonus points and unlock more game options.

==Plot==
The story of &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; is told non-linearly through animated videos and scripted dialogue between stages. In the year 2520, scientists on Earth have unearthed a giant crystal along with an ancient robot bearing the same serial number as another robot called &quot;Creator&quot; on the Tetra spaceship orbiting around Earth. The crystal creates a massive explosion, engulfing the Earth and killing all humans except for the remaining four on the spaceship. One year later, exhausted of supplies, they return to Earth in fighter jets known as Silverguns, fighting through hordes of enemies until they reach the crystal, which is referred to as “the Stone-Like”. After battling the Stone-Like and failing to destroy it, it brings the last two remaining pilots 100,000 years into the past, and tells them that it is the guardian of the Earth and destroyed humans in order to protect the planet, before destroying the last two humans in another explosion. 20 years later, still in the distant past, the Creator uses DNA from the pilots of the Silverguns to create clones and start humanity anew before the Creator finally breaks down for good, bringing the story into a loop.

== Development ==
=== Background ===
Since the company&#x27;s inception, Treasure had primarily been a developer of action and platform games for home consoles. Sega had repeatedly asked the company to develop an arcade game for them, but Treasure president Masato Maegawa was concerned the shrinking arcade business would be too risky from a business perspective and arcade goers would not appreciate the effort placed into their game. Despite this concern the team had wanted to develop a 2D arcade style shoot &#x27;em up for some time. Much of the staff were fans of the genre, having grown up during the genre&#x27;s golden age, but entering their careers after fighting games started filling arcades. Director Hiroshi Iuchi was especially passionate about starting the project. Although the team was eager to develop the game, there were still concerns. Maegawa believed that the shoot &#x27;em up genre was dying, and was risky from a sales perspective. Iuchi was also concerned there would be no place for a 2D shooter in an arcade space that was advancing more towards large and specialized 3D game machines. In the face of these concerns about commercial viability, the team felt they had a good concept and pushed forth.

Iuchi thought arcade developers of the era were not innovating enough and only settling for rehashes of old ideas. He thought shooting games at the time were most commonly in the style of Toaplan-developed vertical shooters, but he remembered in the past when developers like Konami and Irem had distinct shooter styles. In response to this, Iuchi&#x27;s first thought was to develop a non-Toaplan style shooter. He claimed to have the idea for &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; long before it was released, not pulling any influence from games of the era. The key philosophies he carried was to make a classic style game, but make it unlike anything else. He was a big fan of Irem&#x27;s &quot;Image Fight&quot; (1988), and believes that some of that inspiration is reflected in &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot;.

The Treasure team wanted to develop the game for home console in addition to arcades. They agreed the game had to be released in arcades first, as a console exclusive shooter may be a hard sell. They hoped the game would appeal to shooting fans in the arcades while also convincing home console players that shooters were still fun. Maegawa thought it would be best to keep the arcade and console portions of the development cycle separate, because arcades and consoles are so different. Iuchi treated the arcade version as the &quot;test version&quot; with the console version released soon after that. He believed that if the team was not successful with the console port, the 2D shoot &#x27;em up genre would soon die.

=== Production ===

Development on &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; started in late 1997, and progressed smoothly as opposed to past projects where they had to scrap ideas and restart from scratch. The title is in reference to an early concept that had people flying through the sky holding silver guns in each hand. Some of the staff thought the name was difficult to remember, but Iuchi believed that if it was hard to remember, it was hard to forget. Only ten people worked on the game, including three programmers, four artists, and one sound designer. They chose to develop for the Sega ST-V arcade board because Treasure had normally developed games for Sega and it was similar to the Sega Saturn home console, which they were planning on porting the game to. The team had knowledge of the Sega Saturn&#x27;s hardware from developing previous games for it, so they believed it would be easier this time around. They did not use any expensive hardware, just conventional computers. They used LightWave for the 3D objects and freeware downloaded from the internet to make the 2D graphics. The programmers and designers worked hard to use every bit of power from Sega&#x27;s hardware.

Iuchi did not include power-ups in &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; because he felt they were distracting, and he often found himself dying when trying to manage different weapons and items. To combat this, he made the game progress simply through shooting and dodging, and mapped weapons to individual buttons and button combinations instead of needing to press a button to cycle through weapons. The team also made the bullets deliberately slow to appeal to a wider playing audience. The team recruited animation studio Gonzo to create movie sequences with deeper story elements for the Saturn version. These sequences were not included in the arcade version because players there do not want to wait through story sequences. Gonzo had previously done animation for Treasure&#x27;s &quot;Silhouette Mirage&quot; (1997) and Iuchi was happy with the outcome of their work on &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot;. The game&#x27;s music was composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto.

Towards the end of development, Maegawa could not finish the game to properly debug it because it was too difficult. He brought in skilled players who held national records at shooters to debug the game.

=== Release ===
&quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; was released in Japanese arcades on May 28, 1998. The team was anxious about whether it was going to be received well in arcades since it was such a unique shooter and their first arcade game, so Maegawa went in person to arcades to gauge the player reaction. He later said they observed people playing the game for a very long time, which made them happy. The game was released at retail for the Sega Saturn on July 23, 1998, and sold around 50,000 copies.

== Reception ==
In July 1998, &quot;Game Machine&quot; listed the game as being the fifth most popular arcade game in Japan at the time.

The Sega Saturn port of &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; received critical acclaim, with some calling it one of the best shoot &#x27;em ups ever made. Critics agreed that Treasure successfully revived and redefined the shooter genre following a period of stagnation in the wake of the advent of fighting games during the 16-bit era.

Several journalists commented on the game&#x27;s visuals. &quot;Edge&quot; wrote the game was &quot;arguably the finest technical showcase the Saturn has ever played host to.&quot; They praised the parallax backdrops, Mode 7 style distortion effects, and use of 3D polygons to create imaginative bosses. They felt the game was a successful attempt to push the Sega Saturn&#x27;s graphical capabilities to its limits, calling it &quot;a wonder to behold.&quot; &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; also thought the game had some of the most impressive Sega Saturn graphics, and highlighted the great mix of 2D and 3D graphics. &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; thought the game outclassed graphics capable on the PlayStation or Nintendo 64. &quot;Arcade&quot; called it a &quot;gorgeous&quot; and &quot;sense-pummeling&quot; shooter with spectacular explosions and visual effects.

Critics also praised &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot;&#x27;s gameplay, and most commonly highlighted its replayability thanks to the depth of its scoring system and hidden bonuses. &quot;Arcade&quot; called it &quot;the kind of repeat play magnetism that makes you wonder why 2D shoot &#x27;em ups fell from grace in the first place.&quot; &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; argued that there are role-playing games with less depth than &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot;. &quot;Edge&quot; claimed that Treasure&#x27;s commitment to &quot;old school&quot; gaming principles paid off, and praised the game&#x27;s hardcore appeal. Both &quot;Edge&quot; and &quot;Sega Saturn Magazine&quot; shared positive thoughts on the game&#x27;s weapon systems, and also agreed that it was satisfyingly difficult, although &quot;Edge&quot; complained that sometimes it sacrificed fairness for visual flair. &quot;GameSpot&quot; concluded their thoughts saying: &quot;This game is an absolute must-buy. Never has a shooter combined relentless, thoughtfully-designed action with such stunning graphics and sound...&quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; makes you feel as if you&#x27;ve never really played a shooter before. It&#x27;s a whole new experience.&quot;

== Legacy ==
In retrospective reviews, &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; is considered one of the greatest shooters of all time, and one of the best Sega Saturn games. &quot;IGN&quot; called &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; a &quot;milestone in shooter design&quot; and in 2008 listed it as their number one classic shoot &#x27;em up. In 2005, &quot;IGN&quot; also compiled all their reader&#x27;s review ratings of the 31,000 games in their database, among which &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; reached the twelfth spot. Because of the game&#x27;s limited availability, it soon became an expensive and sought after collector&#x27;s item, selling for at least by 2011.

The game received a spiritual successor in the form of &quot;Ikaruga&quot; (2001), which was originally subtitled &quot;Radiant Silvergun 2&quot;. It was first released on the Sega NAOMI arcade platform until later being ported to the Dreamcast and GameCube. Like its predecessor, &quot;Ikaruga&quot; gained a reputation as one of the greatest shooters ever made. It was rereleased in 2008 on the Xbox 360.

=== Xbox 360 port ===
Following &quot;Ikaruga&quot;&#x27;s rerelease, fans began asking Treasure why &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; had not been rereleased as well, so Treasure began work on a port. At first, the port was being developed solely by Katsuhiro Sanjo at Treasure until others assisted. Development lasted two and a half years. Sanjo stated that bringing &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; to the Xbox 360 was more difficult than anticipated. He had difficulties recreating some of the backgrounds and the Saturn&#x27;s special effects. In October 2010, Microsoft announced the game was coming to the Xbox Live Arcade in 2011, marking the game&#x27;s first official release in the West.

The port features online and offline cooperative play, leaderboards, downloadable replays, and an option to play with updated graphics. There is also an option for a scoring system based on &quot;Ikaruga&quot;. It was released on 14 September 2011 garnering &quot;generally favorable&quot; reviews according to ratings aggregator Metacritic. Critics praised the new high-resolution graphics options and new online modes and enhancements. They also appreciated the rerelease for giving more people the opportunity to play it given the Saturn version&#x27;s expensive cost on second hand markets.

The Xbox 360 version was ported and released to the Nintendo Switch in September 2022. It was briefly pulled from the online store in North America at release due to a change in the game&#x27;s content rating, but was added back six days later. The game was released on Steam in November 2023.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* (archived) 
* &quot;Radiant Silvergun&quot; at MobyGames</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="5" end="22" title="shoot &amp;#x27;em up" label="shoot &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188050" start="61" end="69" title="Treasure (company)" label="Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="110" end="117" title="Amusement arcade" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="143" end="149" title="Porting" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="157" end="168" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="629" end="635" title="Action game" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="640" end="648" title="Platform game" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="951" end="956" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="1023" end="1027" title="ST-V" label="ST-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203549" start="1216" end="1225" title="play test" label="play test"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="1735" end="1748" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658068" start="1912" end="1919" title="Ikaruga" label="Ikaruga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="1966" end="1974" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="1991" end="2006" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2022" end="2029" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049225" start="2089" end="2109" title="Vertically scrolling video game" label="vertically scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="2110" end="2127" title="shoot &amp;#x27;em up" label="shoot &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335090" start="2251" end="2257" title="Homing (missile guidance)" label="homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q522344" start="2990" end="2997" title="Score (game)" label="scoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="3599" end="3605" title="Boss (video gaming)" label="bosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="4085" end="4090" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="4958" end="4961" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188050" start="5192" end="5200" title="Treasure (company)" label="Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="5235" end="5241" title="Action game" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="5246" end="5254" title="Platform game" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="5626" end="5643" title="shoot &amp;#x27;em up" label="shoot &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="5786" end="5799" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291232" start="6540" end="6547" title="Toaplan" label="Toaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="6628" end="6634" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q617752" start="6639" end="6643" title="Irem" label="Irem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148872" start="7043" end="7054" title="Image Fight" label="Image Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="7829" end="7833" title="Porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="8472" end="8476" title="ST-V" label="ST-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="8571" end="8582" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q857341" start="8877" end="8886" title="LightWave 3D" label="LightWave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107094" start="9091" end="9099" title="power-up" label="power-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="9588" end="9593" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483868" start="9856" end="9873" title="Silhouette Mirage" label="Silhouette Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196596" start="10010" end="10026" title="Hitoshi Sakimoto" label="Hitoshi Sakimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="10107" end="10112" title="Debugging" label="debug"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="11169" end="11182" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="11195" end="11205" title="Fourth generation of video game consoles" label="16-bit era"/>
<link wikidata="Q793975" start="11272" end="11276" title="Edge (magazine)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q119906" start="11406" end="11414" title="Parallax scrolling" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351825" start="11426" end="11432" title="Mode 7" label="Mode 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154597" start="11470" end="11481" title="Polygon mesh" label="3D polygons"/>
<link wikidata="Q972783" start="11674" end="11694" title="Sega Saturn Magazine" label="Sega Saturn Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="11836" end="11860" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="11919" end="11930" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="11934" end="11945" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="12480" end="12498" title="Role-playing video game" label="role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="12977" end="12985" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="13488" end="13491" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658068" start="14040" end="14047" title="Ikaruga" label="Ikaruga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="14155" end="14165" title="SEGA NAOMI" label="Sega NAOMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="14214" end="14223" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="14228" end="14236" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="14376" end="14384" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q49612" start="14994" end="15010" title="Xbox Live Arcade" label="Xbox Live Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="15070" end="15078" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="15411" end="15421" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="15729" end="15744" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q612975" start="16065" end="16074" title="MobyGames" label="MobyGames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52729" wikidata="Q341392" url="?curid=52729" title="OIC (disambiguation)">
<text>OIC or &quot;Organisation of Islamic Cooperation&quot; is an international organisation of Muslim nations.

OIC may also refer to:
* Offer in compromise, an agreement to reduce debt to the United States Internal Revenue Service
* Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence, an office of the United States Department of Energy
* Officer in Charge (Philippines), the specific status of a temporary head of a local government or agency in the Philippines
* Officer in Command, primarily used in the United States Uniformed Services as well as police and sheriff&#x27;s departments
* Two incarnations of the Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference: Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference (1914–1928), Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference (1974–1997)
* Opportunities Industrialization Center, a nonprofit adult education and job training organisation headquartered in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States.
* Open Interconnect Consortium
* Opioid-induced constipation
* Order of the Imitation of Christ, a monastic order in the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church
* Orkney Islands Council, the local government authority for Orkney, Scotland, United Kingdom
* OIC, the IATA code for Lt. Warren Eaton Airport in Norwich, New York, United States
* Octahydroindole-2-carboxylic Acid (Oic)
* Office of the Independent Counsel, an office of the U.S. Department of Justice
* Outline in Color, a rock band from Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States
* Opioid intervention courts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="0" end="3" title="OIC" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="91" end="105" title="Muslim nations" label="Muslim nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079077" start="133" end="152" title="Offer in compromise" label="Offer in compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q431120" start="230" end="276" title="Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence" label="Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790329" start="332" end="363" title="Officer in Charge (Philippines)" label="Officer in Charge (Philippines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="458" end="476" title="Commanding officer" label="Officer in Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097115" start="645" end="692" title="Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference (1914–1928)" label="Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference (1914–1928)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097121" start="694" end="741" title="Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference (1974–1997)" label="Oklahoma Intercollegiate Conference (1974–1997)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053853" start="744" end="782" title="Opportunities Industrialization Center" label="Opportunities Industrialization Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589795" start="904" end="932" title="Open Interconnect Consortium" label="Open Interconnect Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="935" end="962" title="Opioid-induced constipation" label="Opioid-induced constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686906" start="965" end="997" title="Order of the Imitation of Christ" label="Order of the Imitation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11994103" start="1056" end="1078" title="Orkney Islands Council" label="Orkney Islands Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694759" start="1173" end="1197" title="Lt. Warren Eaton Airport" label="Lt. Warren Eaton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863164" start="1278" end="1311" title="United States Department of Justice Office of Special Counsel" label="Office of the Independent Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22130441" start="1359" end="1375" title="Outline in Color" label="Outline in Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q122212232" start="1427" end="1452" title="Opioid intervention court" label="Opioid intervention court"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52731" wikidata="Q132711" url="?curid=52731" title="Pope Paul V">
<text>Pope Paul V (; ) (17 September 1550 – 28 January 1621), born Camillo Borghese, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 16 May 1605 to his death, in January 1621. In 1611, he honored Galileo Galilei as a member of the papal Accademia dei Lincei and supported his discoveries. In 1616, Pope Paul V instructed Cardinal Robert Bellarmine to inform Galileo that the Copernican theory could not be taught as fact, but Bellarmine&#x27;s certificate allowed Galileo to continue his studies in search for evidence and use the geocentric model as a theoretical device. That same year Paul V assured Galileo that he was safe from persecution so long as he, the Pope, should live. Bellarmine&#x27;s certificate was used by Galileo for his defense at the trial of 1633.

Trained in jurisprudence, Borghese was made Cardinal-Priest of Sant&#x27;Eusebio and the Cardinal Vicar of Rome by Pope Clement VIII. He was elected as Pope in 1605, following the death of Pope Leo XI. Pope Paul V was known for being stern and unyielding, defending the privileges of the Church. He met with Galileo Galilei in 1616 and was involved in the controversy over heliocentrism. He canonized and beatified several individuals during his papacy and created 60 cardinals in ten consistories.

His insistence on ecclesiastical jurisdiction led to conflicts with secular governments, notably with Venice, which resulted in an interdict on the city in 1606. This disagreement was eventually mediated by France and Spain in 1607. Pope Paul V&#x27;s diplomacy also strained relations with England, as his actions were perceived as undermining moderate Catholics in the country.

In Rome, he financed the completion of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, improved the Vatican Library, and restored the ancient Roman aqueduct Aqua Traiana. Pope Paul V established the Banco di Santo Spirito in 1605 and is also known for fostering the rise of the Borghese family through nepotism. He died on 28 January 1621, after suffering from a series of strokes and was succeeded by Pope Gregory XV.

==Early life==
Camillo Borghese was born in Rome on 17 September 1550 into the Borghese family of Siena which had recently established itself in Rome. He was the eldest of seven sons of the lawyer and Sienese patrician Marcantonio Borghese and his Flaminia Astalli, a Roman noblewoman. Camillo was carefully trained in jurisprudence at Perugia and Padua, and became a canonist of marked ability.

===Cardinal===
In June 1596 Camillo was made the Cardinal-Priest of Sant&#x27;Eusebio and the Cardinal Vicar of Rome by Pope Clement VIII, and had as his secretary Niccolò Alamanni. He then opted for other titular churches like San Crisogono and Santi Giovanni e Paolo.

Clement VIII also bestowed upon him episcopal consecration in 1597 after his appointment as Bishop of Jesi; the co-consecrators were Cardinal Silvio Savelli (former Latin Patriarch of Constantinople) and Cardinal Francesco Cornaro (former Bishop of Treviso). Bishop Borghese retained the diocese of Iesi until 1599. He held aloof from all parties and factions, devoting all his spare time to his law-books.

==Papacy==

===Election===

When Pope Leo XI died, 1605, Cardinal Borghese became pope over a number of candidates including Caesar Baronius and Robert Bellarmine; his neutrality in the factional times made him an ideal compromise candidate. 

In character he was very stern and unyielding, a lawyer rather than diplomat, who defended the privileges of the Church to his utmost. His first act was to send home to their sees the bishops who were sojourning in Rome, for the Council of Trent had insisted that every bishop reside in his diocese.

===Theology===
Paul met with Galileo Galilei in 1616 after Cardinal Bellarmine had, on his orders, warned Galileo not to hold or defend the heliocentric ideas of Copernicus. Whether there was also an order not to teach those ideas in any way has been a matter for controversy. A letter from Bellarmine to Galileo states only the injunction that the heliocentric ideas could not be defended or held; this letter was written expressly to enable Galileo to defend himself against rumors concerning what had happened in the meeting with Bellarmine.

In 1618, a &quot;Decreto de Nuestro Sanctissimo Padre el Papa Paulo V. en favor dela Immaculada Concepción dela Sanctissima Virgen Madre de Dios y Señora Nuestra&quot; (Decree of our most holy father Pope Paul V in favor of the Immaculate Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary..) was published in Lima, Peru. 

===Canonisations and beatifications===
Paul V canonised Charles Borromeo on 1 November 1610 and Frances of Rome on 29 May 1608. He also canonized Pompejanus in 1615 and canonized Cardinal Albert de Louvain on 9 August 1621.

He also beatified a number of individuals which included Ignatius Loyola (27 July 1609), Philip Neri (11 May 1615), Teresa of Avila (24 April 1614), Aloysius Gonzaga (10 October 1605), and Francis Xavier (25 October 1619).

===Consistories===

The pope created 60 cardinals in ten consistories held during his pontificate. He named his nephew Scipione Borghese as a cardinal (continuing the trend of nepotism) and also named Alessandro Ludovisi, who would become his immediate successor, Pope Gregory XV, as a cardinal.

===Foreign relations===
====Ecclesiastical jurisdiction====

Paul&#x27;s insistence of ecclesiastical jurisdiction led to a number of quarrels between the Church and the secular governments of various states, notably Venice, where patricians, such as Ermolao Barbaro (1548–1622) of the noble Barbaro family, argued in favor of the exemption of the clergy from the jurisdiction of the civil courts. Venice passed two laws obnoxious to Paul, one forbidding the alienation of real estate in favour of the clergy, the second demanding approval of the civil power for the building of new churches. Two priests charged by the Venetian state with cruelty, wholesale poisoning, murder and licentiousness, were arrested by the Venetian Senate and put in dungeons for trial. Having been found guilty, they were committed to prison.

Paul V insisted that they be released to the Church. He demanded the release of the priests as not being amenable to the secular law. When this was refused, the Pope threatened an interdict on account of the property laws and the imprisonment of ecclesiastics, which threat was presented to the Senate on Christmas 1605. The Venetian position was ably defended by a canon lawyer, Paolo Sarpi, who extended the matter to general principles defining separate secular and ecclesiastical spheres. In April 1606 the Pope excommunicated the entire government of Venice and placed an interdict on the city. Father Sarpi strongly advised the Venetian government to refuse to receive the Pope&#x27;s interdict, and to reason with him while opposing force by force. The Venetian Senate willingly accepted this advice and Fra Paolo presented the case to Paul V, urging from history that the Pope&#x27;s claim to intermeddle in civil matters was a usurpation; and that in these matters the Republic of Venice recognized no authority but that of God. The rest of the Catholic clergy sided with the city, with the exception of the Jesuits, the Theatines, and the Capuchins. The dissenting clergy were forthwith expelled from Venetian territories. Masses continued to be said in Venice, and the feast of Corpus Christi was celebrated with displays of public pomp and &quot;magnificence&quot;, in defiance of the Pope. Within a year (March 1607) the disagreement was mediated by France and Spain. The Most Serene Republic refused to retract the laws, but asserted that Venice would conduct herself &quot;with her &quot;accustomed piety&quot;.&quot; The Jesuits, which Venice considered subversive Papal agents, remained banned. No more could be expected. Paul withdrew his censure.

The Venetian Republic rewarded Fra Paulo Sarpi, its successful canon lawyer, with the distinction of state counsellor in jurisprudence and the liberty of access to the state archives, which infuriated Pope Paul. In September 1607, after unsuccessfully attempting to lure Father Sarpi to Rome, the Pope responded by putting out a contract on his life. Father Sarpi was the target of at least two assassination plots in September and October. Stabbed three times with a stiletto, Fra Sarpi somehow managed to recover, while the assassins found refuge in the Papal States.

====Relations with England====
Paul V&#x27;s hard-edged Catholic diplomacy cut the ground from under moderate Catholics in England. His letter of 9 July 1606 to congratulate James I on his accession to the throne was three years late and seemed to English eyes merely a preamble to what followed, and his reference to the Gunpowder Plot, made against the life of the monarch and all the members of Parliament the previous November, was unfortunate for the Papal cause, for Papal agents were considered by the English to have been involved (the effigy of Pope Paul V is still burnt every year during the Lewes Bonfire celebrations). However, the Pope in that letter pleaded with James not to make the innocent Catholics suffer for the crime of a few, and Paul V also promised to exhort all the Catholics of the realm to be submissive and loyal to their sovereign—in all things not opposed to the honour of God. The oath of allegiance James demanded of his subjects, however contained clauses to which no 17th-century Catholic could in conscience subscribe: the oath of allegiance was solemnly condemned in a brief published a matter of weeks later (22 September 1606, extended 23 August 1607). This condemnation served only to divide English Catholics. The other irritant (to the papacy) in English relations was Cardinal Bellarmine&#x27;s letter to the English archpriest George Blackwell, reproaching him for having taken the oath of allegiance in apparent disregard of his duty to the Pope. The letter received enough circulation to be referred to in one of James&#x27;s theological essays (1608), and Bellarmine was soon fencing in a pamphlet exchange with the king of England.
====Relations with Japan====

In November 1615, Paul V welcomed the embassy of the Japanese samurai Hasekura Tsunenaga in Rome.

Hasekura gave the Pope a letter (from Date Masamune) which requested a trade treaty between Japan and New Spain. The letter also asked for Christian missionaries to be sent to Japan. The Pope agreed to the dispatch of missionaries, but left the decision for trade to the King of Spain.

===Constructions===
In Rome, the pope financed the completion of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, and improved the Vatican Library, separating out the Vatican Apostolic Archives. He restored the Aqua Traiana, an ancient Roman aqueduct (named after him &quot;Acqua Paola&quot;), bringing water to the rioni located on right bank of the Tiber (Trastevere and Borgo) using materials from his demolition of the Forum of Nerva. He had always encouraged Guido Reni. Like many Popes of the time he was also allegedly guilty of nepotism, and his nephew Scipione Borghese wielded enormous power on his behalf, consolidating the rise of the Borghese family.

Paul V also established the Bank of the Holy Spirit in 1605.

===Death===
Paul V died on 28 January 1621 of a stroke in the Quirinal Palace and was succeeded as pope by Pope Gregory XV. The pope had been ill for more than three months following a series of strokes, and died six hours following his last stroke the morning of his death. He was interred in the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore.

===Episcopal succession===
==See also==
* Borghese
* Cardinals created by Paul V
* Flight of the Earls

==Notes==

==References==
* James I, &quot;De Triplici Nodo, Triplex Cuneus&quot;, (his anonymous pamphlet encouraging loyalty to the Crown, accompanied by letters from Paul V about the Catholic Church&#x27;s opinion of the Oath of Allegiance, and James&#x27; responses to them).
* Stephen A. Coston, &quot;King James VI &amp; I and Papal Opposition&quot;, 1998.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="0" end="11" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="61" end="77" title="Pope Paul V" label="Camillo Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="95" end="110" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="128" end="140" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="209" end="224" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q338432" start="250" end="270" title="Accademia dei Lincei" label="Accademia dei Lincei"/>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="343" end="360" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="388" end="405" title="Copernican theory" label="Copernican theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="544" end="560" title="geocentric model" label="geocentric model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517983" start="769" end="782" title="Galileo affair" label="trial of 1633"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785642" start="848" end="865" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Eusebio" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Eusebio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729117" start="874" end="888" title="Cardinal Vicar" label="Cardinal Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="900" end="917" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q132716" start="974" end="985" title="Pope Leo XI" label="Pope Leo XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="1158" end="1171" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1387" end="1393" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778657" start="1416" end="1437" title="Venetian Interdict" label="interdict on the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="1492" end="1498" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="1503" end="1508" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1576" end="1583" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="1705" end="1730" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="1745" end="1760" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="1787" end="1801" title="Roman aqueduct" label="Roman aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q622956" start="1802" end="1814" title="Aqua Traiana" label="Aqua Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520872" start="1844" end="1866" title="Banco di Santo Spirito" label="Banco di Santo Spirito"/>
<link wikidata="Q241133" start="1923" end="1938" title="Borghese family" label="Borghese family"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="1947" end="1955" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="2047" end="2062" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2109" end="2113" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q241133" start="2144" end="2159" title="Borghese family" label="Borghese family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="2163" end="2168" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="2401" end="2408" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="2413" end="2418" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785642" start="2530" end="2547" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Eusebio" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Eusebio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729117" start="2556" end="2570" title="Cardinal Vicar" label="Cardinal Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="2582" end="2599" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557451" start="2626" end="2642" title="Niccolò Alamanni" label="Niccolò Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631638" start="2690" end="2703" title="San Crisogono" label="San Crisogono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586946" start="2708" end="2730" title="Santi Giovanni e Paolo, Rome" label="Santi Giovanni e Paolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="2769" end="2791" title="episcopal consecration" label="episcopal consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q135398" start="2825" end="2839" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Jesi" label="Bishop of Jesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296901" start="2898" end="2931" title="Latin Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Latin Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080943" start="2946" end="2963" title="Francesco Cornaro (1547–1598)" label="Francesco Cornaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q132716" start="3174" end="3185" title="Pope Leo XI" label="Pope Leo XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q317900" start="3266" end="3281" title="Caesar Baronius" label="Caesar Baronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="3286" end="3303" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="3560" end="3563" title="diocese" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="3614" end="3630" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="3715" end="3730" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="3826" end="3838" title="Heliocentrism" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="3848" end="3858" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216946" start="4599" end="4615" title="Charles Borromeo" label="Charles Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q239129" start="4639" end="4654" title="Frances of Rome" label="Frances of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392380" start="4731" end="4748" title="Albert de Louvain" label="Albert de Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="4825" end="4840" title="Ignatius Loyola" label="Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q217791" start="4857" end="4868" title="Philip Neri" label="Philip Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="4884" end="4899" title="Teresa of Avila" label="Teresa of Avila"/>
<link wikidata="Q310307" start="4917" end="4933" title="Aloysius Gonzaga" label="Aloysius Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="4957" end="4971" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q452570" start="5111" end="5128" title="Scipione Borghese" label="Scipione Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="5256" end="5271" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="5506" end="5512" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q807765" start="5581" end="5595" title="Barbaro family" label="Barbaro family"/>
<link wikidata="Q767590" start="6007" end="6022" title="Venetian Senate" label="Venetian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="6292" end="6301" title="interdict" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349158" start="6492" end="6503" title="Paolo Sarpi" label="Paolo Sarpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="6628" end="6642" title="excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778657" start="6689" end="6698" title="Venetian Interdict" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="7229" end="7236" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414924" start="7242" end="7251" title="Theatines" label="Theatines"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="7261" end="7270" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="7345" end="7349" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="7401" end="7415" title="Corpus Christi (feast)" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="7575" end="7581" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="7586" end="7591" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q971262" start="8347" end="8355" title="stiletto" label="stiletto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8560" end="8569" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="8573" end="8580" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="8624" end="8631" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="8772" end="8786" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="8848" end="8858" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536121" start="9053" end="9066" title="Lewes Bonfire" label="Lewes Bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074473" start="9364" end="9382" title="Oath of Allegiance (1606)" label="oath of allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537027" start="9822" end="9838" title="George Blackwell (priest)" label="George Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q244764" start="10231" end="10249" title="Hasekura Tsunenaga" label="Hasekura Tsunenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="10253" end="10257" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q311183" start="10298" end="10311" title="Date Masamune" label="Date Masamune"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="10362" end="10371" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="10531" end="10544" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="10612" end="10637" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="10656" end="10671" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q536580" start="10692" end="10717" title="Vatican Apostolic Archive" label="Vatican Apostolic Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q622956" start="10736" end="10748" title="Aqua Traiana" label="Aqua Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="10761" end="10775" title="Roman aqueduct" label="Roman aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q622956" start="10799" end="10810" title="Acqua Paola" label="Acqua Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="10841" end="10846" title="rione" label="rioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="10876" end="10881" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q914255" start="10883" end="10893" title="Trastevere" label="Trastevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q893556" start="10898" end="10903" title="Borgo (rione of Rome)" label="Borgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q686911" start="10948" end="10962" title="Forum of Nerva" label="Forum of Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q109061" start="10989" end="10999" title="Guido Reni" label="Guido Reni"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="11061" end="11069" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q452570" start="11086" end="11103" title="Scipione Borghese" label="Scipione Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520872" start="11218" end="11241" title="Bank of the Holy Spirit" label="Bank of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="11300" end="11306" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="11314" end="11329" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="11359" end="11374" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="11562" end="11582" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q241133" start="11627" end="11635" title="Borghese" label="Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q746598" start="11638" end="11665" title="Cardinals created by Paul V" label="Cardinals created by Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430504" start="11668" end="11687" title="Flight of the Earls" label="Flight of the Earls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52733" wikidata="Q2578201" url="?curid=52733" title="List of metropolitan areas in Spain">
<text>This is a list of the largest metropolitan areas in Spain by population.
Estimates are from the following sources: 
* the &quot;Functional Urban Areas&quot; (FUAs) of the Study on Urban Functions of the European Spatial Planning Observation Network (ESPON, 2007) 
* the &quot;Larger Urban Zone&quot; (LUZs) of Urban Audit project (2004), supported by the European Union. Not all cities were included in this survey. 
* calculations by Francisco Ruiz from data of the Instituto Nacional de Estadística (2008 estimates). As well as &quot;metropolitan area&quot; data, Ruiz has produced larger conurbation data for some areas. The &quot;conurbation&quot; figure is used where available, and is cited as such; otherwise, the &quot;metropolitan area&quot; figure is used.

The figures differ between the reports due to the difference in survey dates and differences in methodology. For example, ESPON considers Oviedo–Gijón–Avilés as a single FUA, while Urban Audit has separate LUZs for Oviedo and Gijón. Similarly, Vilanova i la Geltrú is included in Barcelona metropolitan area by ESPON, but as a separate conurbation by Ruiz.



==List==

==See also==
*Demographics of Spain
*List of cities (municipalities) of Spain
*List of metropolitan areas in Europe
*List of urban areas of the European Union

==References==
==External links==
* Largest Cities in Europe</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="30" end="48" title="metropolitan areas" label="metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="52" end="57" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147323" start="203" end="248" title="European Spatial Planning Observation Network" label="European Spatial Planning Observation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="355" end="369" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q845937" start="467" end="500" title="Instituto Nacional de Estadística (Spain)" label="Instituto Nacional de Estadística"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="591" end="602" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14317" start="906" end="912" title="Oviedo" label="Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273" start="913" end="918" title="Gijón" label="Gijón"/>
<link wikidata="Q14649" start="919" end="925" title="Avilés" label="Avilés"/>
<link wikidata="Q15553" start="1012" end="1032" title="Vilanova i la Geltrú" label="Vilanova i la Geltrú"/>
<link wikidata="Q249489" start="1048" end="1075" title="Barcelona metropolitan area" label="Barcelona metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987080" start="1152" end="1173" title="Demographics of Spain" label="Demographics of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17543138" start="1175" end="1215" title="List of municipalities of Spain" label="List of cities (municipalities) of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030300" start="1217" end="1253" title="List of metropolitan areas in Europe" label="List of metropolitan areas in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809955" start="1255" end="1296" title="List of urban areas of the European Union" label="List of urban areas of the European Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="52736" wikidata="Q512094" url="?curid=52736" title="History of Cape Verde">
<text>The recorded history of [[Cape Verde]] begins with the Portuguese discovery of the island in 1458. Possible early references to Cape Verde date back at least 2,000 years.

==Prehistory==
 
The first islands formed, around 40–50 million years ago, were present-day Sal and its eastern neighbors. The western islands were formed later, including São Nicolau (as early as 11.8 million years ago), São Vicente (nine million years ago), present-day Santiago and Fogo (four million years ago), and Brava (two to three million years ago). Millions of years after the seamounts rose above the Atlantic, the first lizards, insects and plants came to the archipelago, possibly on ocean currents from the African mainland when the ocean&#x27;s salinity was lower.

The archipelago experienced several large volcanic eruptions, including Praia Grande 4.5 million years ago, São Vicente (and, possibly, present-day Porto Grande) 300,000 years ago, Topo da Coroa 200,000 years ago, and east of present-day Fogo 73,000 years ago which inundated coastal Santiago Island and possibly Brava and part of the Barlavento Islands.

During the last Ice Age, the sea level dropped to about below its current level. Cape Verde&#x27;s islands were slightly larger, and there was a large island known as Northwest Island. Santo Antão was one kilometer northwest of the island; Boa Vista and Maio were one island, and another island known as Nola (Ilha da Nola, northwest of Santo Antão) was about meters above sea level. Before the end of the Ice Age, the Eastern Island (Ilha Occidental) split into three islands; one became submerged and is now the João Valente Reef, the Canal de São Vicente widened to provide separation from Santo Antão, Nola Island was submerged and again became a seamount, and eastern Northwest Island broke up into São Vicente, the smaller Santa Luzia, and the two islets of Branco and Raso.

== Possible classical references ==
Cape Verde may have been referenced in &quot;De choreographia&quot; by Pomponius Mela and &quot;Historia naturalis&quot; by Pliny the Elder. Mela and Pliny called the islands &quot;Gorgades&quot;, referring to the home of the mythical Gorgons killed by Perseus. In typical ancient euhemerism, they suggested the islands as the place where the Carthaginian Hanno the Navigator slew two female &quot;Gorillai&quot;.
Pliny, citing the Greek writer Xenophon of Lampsacus, placed the Gorgades at two days&#x27; travel from &quot;Hesperu Ceras&quot; (the westernmost part of the African continent, today called Cap-Vert). As quoted by Gaius Julius Solinus, he also said that the voyage from the Gorgades to the Hesperides took around 40 days. The Isles of the Blessed, written about by Marinus of Tyre and referenced by Ptolemy in his &quot;Geographia&quot;, may have been the Cape Verde islands.

== Portuguese discovery and colonisation ==


=== 15th and 16th centuries ===
In 1456, Alvise Cadamosto, Antoniotto Usodimare (Venetian and Genoese captains, respectively, in the service of Prince Henry the Navigator) and an unnamed Portuguese captain discovered some of the islands. During the next decade, Diogo Gomes and António de Noli (also captains in the service of Prince Henry) discovered the remaining islands of the archipelago. When they first landed in Cape Verde, the islands were barren of people but not of vegetation.

Prince Fernando, King Afonso V of Portugal&#x27;s brother, was granted the archipelago as a fiefdom.
The Portuguese established Ribeira Grande (present-day Cidade Velha) in 1462 on the island of São Tiago. This was the first permanent European settlement in the tropics. The first settlers included Portuguese, Genoese, and Flemish adventurers; reprieved convicts; and Sephardic Jews fleeing persecution. In 1466, with the settlement failing to attract enough settlers, Afonso gave the population trading rights in all of West Africa except Arguim. He rescinded this a few years later, when the monarchy began selling lucrative trade monopolies instead, but enterprising Cape Verdeans and Luso-Africans would still play a prominent role in the first centuries of European trade in the region, often in defiance of the Portuguese crown.

In Spain, the Reconquista was growing in its mission to conquer Iberia and expel the Muslims and Jews. In 1492, the Spanish Inquisition also emerged in its fullest expression of anti-Semitism. It spread to neighboring Portugal (as the Portuguese Inquisition), where King João II and Manuel I exiled thousands of Jews to São Tomé, Príncipe, and Cape Verde in 1496.

The Portuguese soon brought slaves from the West African coast. Positioned on trade routes between Africa, Europe, and the New World, the archipelago prospered from the transatlantic slave trade during the 16th century. Sao Tiago and Fogo hosted slave plantations growing sugar and cotton for shipment to Portugal, and producing &quot;panos&quot; (cotton cloth) for export to West Africa. Massive amounts of salt were produced on Maio, Boa Vista, and Sal, sold to cod fishermen. Horses were reared on Santiago and shipped to the African coast as well.

Settlements began to appear on other islands. São Filipe was founded in 1500; Ponta do Sol and Ribeira Grande were founded in the mid-16th century (when its first settlers also arrived in Madeira and Ribeira Brava on São Nicolau). Povoação Velha on Boa Vista, Furna, Nova Sintra on Brava, and Palmeira on Sal were later founded.

Cabo Verdean society at this period was deeply segregated and hierarchical. At the top were the peninsula-born Portuguese whites, mostly government officials, soldiers, and the upper clergy. The next group were the &quot;brancos da terra&quot;, the local whites, with the earliest settlers and their descendants, the &quot;morgados&quot;, chief among them. Free &quot;pardos&quot; (mulattos) and &quot;pretos&quot; (blacks) came next, and the &quot;escravos&quot; (slaves) were at the bottom.

The islands&#x27; prosperity encouraged sacking by pirates, particularly during the period of the Iberian Union 1580–1640, when Spain&#x27;s enemies, the British, French, and Dutch, raided Portuguese colonies. Sir Francis Drake sacked Ribeira Grande in 1582, captured the island in 1585 and raided Cidade Velha, Praia and São Domingos.

=== 17th and 18th centuries ===
During the 17th century, Algerian corsairs established a base on the Cape Verde islands. They raided Madeira in 1617, stealing the church bells and taking 1,200 people captive.

Given the scarcity of capital for the region&#x27;s development, the Portuguese Finance and Overseas Councils authorized the 1664 foundation of the Guinea Coast Company. The company aimed at the slave trade, ending individual tenancy and encouraging slave companies. The Company of Cacheu and Rivers and Commerce of Guinea, which operated between 1676 and 1682, was succeeded by the Company of Cacheu and Cape Verde in 1690.

Pico do Fogo erupted in 1680, which resulted in the movement of the population to Brava and other regions (including Brazil). For a few years, the volcano was a natural lighthouse for sailors. The latter decades of the 17th century also saw the first emigration flows from the islands to North America. Whales abounded in the waters around Cape Verde, and whaling ships from Massachusetts and Rhode Island recruited local crewmen who knew the currents and weather from the islands of Brava and Fogo. These outflows would continue for centuries.

As a result of the 1712 French Cassard expedition in which Ribeira Grande was destroyed, the capital was partially moved to Praia. With the Portuguese increasingly sidelined in Atlantic trade, Cape Verde became a poor backwater. By 1740, the island was a supply point for American slave ships and whalers. This began a stream of male immigration to the American colonies. Praia, with its natural harbor, became the permanent capital in 1770 as the plantation economy diminished in importance relative to trade and naval supply.

In 1747, the islands were hit with the first of several droughts and famines which have plagued them ever since at average five-year intervals. The situation was made worse by deforestation and overgrazing, which destroyed the ground vegetation that provided moisture. Three major droughts during the 18th and 19th centuries resulted in well over 100,000 people starving to death. The Portuguese government sent little relief during the droughts.

In 1758 the Grão Pará and Maranhão Company was granted a 20-year monopoly on all trade in Cape Verde and the West African coast. Its agents ruthlessly exploited the islands&#x27; inhabitants, commandeering panos, liquor, food, and other supplies regardless of droughts and famines. Many were recruited for service in Guinea. Construction of the Fortaleza de São José da Amura in Bissau cost more than 2,600 lives, most of them Cabo Verdean laborers. Textiles were smuggled and sold on the black market. Between 1766 and 1776, 95,000 &quot;barafulas&quot; (Cape Verdean textiles) were imported to the Guinean coast.

Pico do Fogo again erupted in 1769. This was the last time it erupted from the top, although it also erupted in 1785 and 1799. Another famine, affecting Brava and Fogo, began in 1774; 20,000 people starved. Fogo&#x27;s population dropped from 5,700 to 4,200 around 1777. The company&#x27;s mismanagement made the situation worse, as they sold desperately needed food and raised the prices of what little was available. In 1778 the monopoly ended, and the Portuguese created the province of Cabo Verde e Guine.

Although Portugal was neutral in the Anglo-French War and American Revolutionary War, British and French squadrons fought the Battle of Porto Praya off Praia on 16 April 1781.

=== 19th century ===
Mindelo (originally Nossa Senhora da Luz) was founded in 1795, Pedra de Lume on Sal in 1799, and Santa Maria in early 1830 on the same island. Praia (the colonial capital) was modernized in 1822, expanding northward.

In the aftermarth of the Liberal Revolution of 1820, slave trader Manuel António Martins used the unrest to form a junta with other leading civilians, driving the governor out and ruling the islands until 1823. Martins was officially appointed prefect of the province in 1833. Soon after he took office, he disbanded the &quot;branco&quot;-dominated militias. When, in 1835, some conservative officers in the local garrison mutinied, the disaffected &quot;brancos&quot; accused Martins of abetting the plot and arrested him. A new governor, Joaquim Pereira Marinho, arrived in September to restore order. He attempted to start local fishing companies, where previously Cape Verdean had been banned from owning boats for fear of slaves escaping, but his successor cancelled the project.

The British established a station in Mindelo to refuel ships with coal, water, and other supplies beginning in 1839, and the city flourished. Two attempts to move the colonial capital from Praia were made: a plan to move to Picos in 1831 when another famine struck Cape Verde, and Mindelo was proposed in 1838. Many people did not want to move the colonial capital, and it remained in Praia. Two submarine telegraph cables were linked in 1874 to Pernambuco, Brazil and to Cameroon via Bathurst in the Gambia in 1885.

The system of &quot;morgados&quot; was abolished in 1863, and slavery in 1864, but much of the population remained dependent on their former masters, renting or sharecropping land. The decline of the slave trade dealt a blow to Cape Verde&#x27;s economy. The shipping traffic at Mindelo, however, served as an important engine of economic activity. Ships plying the South Atlantic to and from Africa and Asia stopped at Mindelo for coal, salt, meat, water, and wine imported from Madeira and the Azores. In 1890 a total of 156 ships unloaded 657,633,588 metric tons of coal there, and the port was visited by 2,264 ships carrying 344,907 persons.

=== 20th century ===


Throughout much of the 20th century, the colonial government organized forced emigration to supply &quot;contract&quot; labor for Portugal&#x27;s tropical colonies. Between 1900 and 1970, particularly during periods of famine when people were desperate, some 80,000 Cabo Verdeans were shipped to the plantations of Sao Tome e Principe, and more than 7,000 to Angola and Mozambique.

Mindelo became the most-used transatlantic telegraph station in 1912. A total of 669 ships were refueled each year at the port, reaching 1,927 ships a decade later. When gasoline began to be used as fuel, however, Mindelo could not rival the improved port facilities of Las Palmas on Grand Canary or nearby Dakar in Senegal. The Suez Canal had also rerouted much of the maritime traffic out of the south Atlantic. The use of coal declined, leading to a coal strike in 1912 due to insufficient work. When the Great Depression began in 1930, ship activity ended.

Two of Cabo Verde&#x27;s worst-ever famines occurred in 1941-43 and 1947–48, killing an estimated 45,000 people. The massive disaster was not reported in the Portuguese press, and no food aid was sent, due to World War II. Half the population of Fogo perished. Portuguese authorities forbade reporting on the deaths or even the use of the word &quot;famine.&quot;

Espargos, in the centre of the island of Sal was founded in the late 1940s as the last Portuguese airport town. From 1950 to 1970, the number of flights increased. Espargos became an important stop for Alitalia&#x27;s Portuguese-Brazilian flights and South African Airways&#x27; (SAA) 1967 flights between London and Johannesburg. The airline had to use the airport because to the international boycott of South Africa due to its apartheid policy.

In 1952, the Portuguese government planned to transfer over 10,000 settlers to the island of São Tomé in São Tomé and Príncipe (another Portuguese colony) to work on plantations. Africans came primarily from the islands of São Nicolau, Santiago, Santo Antão, Fogo, and Brava. When the two colonies became independent, many people left for Europe and the United States, and few returned to Cape Verde. Several famines occurred at this time due to poor harvests, the Second World War, and a poor response from the Portuguese colonial administration. Until and during the Portuguese Colonial War, those planning and fighting in the armed conflict in Portuguese Guinea often linked the liberation of Guinea-Bissau to liberation in Cape Verde; in 1956, Amílcar and Luís Cabral founded the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde.

=== Independence movement ===
Although Cape Verde was neglected by Portugal, Portuguese treatment of Cape Verdeans was differed from their treatment of other colonized peoples; the people of Cape Verde fared slightly better than Africans in other Portuguese colonies because of their lighter skin. A small minority received an education, and Cape Verde was the first African-Portuguese colony to have an institution of higher education. By the time of independence, one-quarter of the population could read (compared to five percent in Portuguese Guinea, present-day Guinea-Bissau).

Literate Cape Verdeans became aware of the pressures for independence which were building on the mainland. The islands continued experiencing droughts, famines, epidemics and volcanic eruptions amid Portuguese government indifference. Thousands of people died of starvation during the first half of the 20th century. Although the nationalist movement appeared less fervent in Cape Verde than in Portugal&#x27;s other African holdings, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (Partido Africano da Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde, or PAIGC) was founded in 1956 by Amílcar Cabral and other pan-Africanists. Many Cape Verdeans fought for independence in Guinea-Bissau.

In 1926, Portugal had become a rightist dictatorship which regarded the colonies as an economic frontier to be developed in the interest of Portugal and the Portuguese. Famines, unemployment, poverty, and the failure of the Portuguese government to address those issues caused resentment, but Portuguese dictator António de Oliveira Salazar did not want to give up his colonies as easily as other European colonial powers had given up theirs.

After World War II, Portugal was intent on holding onto its former colonies (known since 1951 as overseas territories). When most former African colonies gained independence between 1957 and 1964, the Portuguese still held on. After the Pijiguiti Massacre, however, the people of Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau fought one of the longest African liberation wars.

Like other colonies, autonomy was granted in 1972 and Portuguese Cape Verde held its only parliamentary elections in 1973 in which only Portuguese citizens could vote. Only 25,521 people registered to vote out of a total population of 272,071, and a total of 20,942 people voted. The Portuguese constitution banned political parties at the time, and most of the candidates were put forward by the ruling People&#x27;s National Action movement; some civic associations, however, were allowed to nominate candidates.

After the 25 April 1974 Carnation Revolution, Cape Verde became more autonomous but continued to have an overseas governor until that post became a high commissioner. Widespread unrest forced the government to negotiate with the PAIGC, and agreements for an independent Cape Verde were on the table. Pedro Pires (at the time still in Algeria) signed an agreement at the end of August that year to give Portuguese Guinea and Cape Verde both paths to independence, with the islands planned to hold a referendum on such in the near future. However, such referendum never ended up being scheduled, with the PAIGC renouncing the agreement by the next February as they established their government on the islands, asking for immediate independence without a referendum instead. On 5 July in Praia, Portuguese Prime Minister Vasco Gonçalves transferred power to National Assembly President Abilio Duarte. The colonial history of Cape Verde ended when Cape Verde become independent, a negotiated transfer, and one of the few Portuguese African colonies to achieve independence without guerilla fighting within its borders.

== After independence (1975)==
=== One-party rule ===
Immediately after a November 1980 coup in Guinea-Bissau (Portuguese Guinea declared independence in 1973 and was granted &quot;de jure&quot; independence in 1974), relations between the two countries became strained. Cape Verde abandoned its hope for unity with Guinea-Bissau, and formed the African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde (PAICV).

Responding to growing pressure for a political opening, the PAICV called an emergency congress in February 1990 to discuss proposed constitutional changes to end one-party rule. Opposition groups came together to form the Movement for Democracy (MpD) in Praia in April of that year, and campaigned for the right to contest the presidential election scheduled for December 1990. The one-party state was abolished on 28 September of that year, and the first multi-party elections were held in January 1991.

=== End of one-party rule ===
The MpD won a majority of the seats in the National Assembly. MpD presidential candidate António Mascarenhas Monteiro defeated the PAICV candidate, 73.5 percent to 26.5 percent.
Legislative elections in December 1995 increased the MpD majority in the National Assembly, where the party held 50 of its 72 seats. A February 1996 presidential election returned Monteiro to office.

In the presidential election campaign of 2000 and 2001, two former prime ministers (Pedro Pires and Carlos Veiga) were the main candidates. Pires was prime minister during the PAICV regime; Veiga was prime minister during most of Monteiro&#x27;s presidency, stepping aside to campaign. In what might have been one of the closest races in electoral history, Pires won by 12 votes; he and Veiga each received nearly half the votes. Pires was narrowly re-elected in the 2006 elections.

Jorge Carlos Almeida Fonseca, President of Cape Verde since 2011, was re-elected in October 2016. Fonseca was supported by the Movement for Democracy (MpD). MpD leader Ulisses Correia e Silva has been prime minister since the 2016 elections, when his party ousted the ruling PAICV for the first time in 15 years. In April 2021, the ruling party, led by Prime Minister Jose Ulisses Correia e Silva, maintained its parliamentary majority in the election.

In October 2021, opposition candidate and former prime minister Jose Maria Neves of PAICV won Cape Verde&#x27;s presidential election. On 9 November of that year, Neves was sworn in as president.

On 2 February 2024, Cape Verde became the third African country to be free of malaria.

==See also==
*History of Africa
*History of Guinea-Bissau
*History of West Africa
*List of prime ministers of Cape Verde
*List of presidents of Cape Verde
*Politics of Cape Verde

== Footnotes ==
== External links ==
*Cape Verde Historical Timeline by Raymond Almeida. alternative site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512094" start="13" end="38" title="History of Cape Verde" label="history of [[Cape Verde]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q111989" start="264" end="267" title="Sal, Cape Verde" label="Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q492509" start="344" end="355" title="São Nicolau, Cape Verde" label="São Nicolau"/>
<link wikidata="Q112031" start="394" end="405" title="São Vicente, Cape Verde" label="São Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q108448" start="444" end="452" title="Santiago, Cape Verde" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q426555" start="457" end="461" title="Fogo, Cape Verde" label="Fogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q492528" start="492" end="497" title="Brava, Cape Verde" label="Brava"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="733" end="741" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237754" start="826" end="838" title="Praia Grande, Cape Verde" label="Praia Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671287" start="935" end="948" title="Topo da Coroa" label="Topo da Coroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q426555" start="992" end="996" title="Fogo, Cape Verde" label="Fogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="1121" end="1133" title="Last glacial period" label="last Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q112232" start="1295" end="1306" title="Santo Antão, Cape Verde" label="Santo Antão"/>
<link wikidata="Q110440" start="1350" end="1359" title="Boa Vista, Cape Verde" label="Boa Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q492551" start="1364" end="1368" title="Maio, Cape Verde" label="Maio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710210" start="1624" end="1641" title="João Valente (reef)" label="João Valente Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031056" start="1647" end="1667" title="Canal de São Vicente" label="Canal de São Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q492531" start="1839" end="1850" title="Santa Luzia, Cape Verde" label="Santa Luzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q498999" start="1874" end="1880" title="Ilhéu Branco" label="Branco"/>
<link wikidata="Q498958" start="1885" end="1889" title="Ilhéu Raso" label="Raso"/>
<link wikidata="Q297515" start="1999" end="2013" title="Pomponius Mela" label="Pomponius Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="2052" end="2067" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="2163" end="2169" title="Gorgon" label="Gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="2181" end="2188" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513013" start="2209" end="2219" title="euhemerism" label="euhemerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q296478" start="2284" end="2303" title="Hanno the Navigator" label="Hanno the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="2326" end="2333" title="Gorilla" label="Gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q216889" start="2533" end="2541" title="Cap-Vert" label="Cap-Vert"/>
<link wikidata="Q520487" start="2557" end="2577" title="Gaius Julius Solinus" label="Gaius Julius Solinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165938" start="2633" end="2643" title="Hesperides" label="Hesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336662" start="2669" end="2689" title="Isles of the Blessed" label="Isles of the Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q706319" start="2708" end="2723" title="Marinus of Tyre" label="Marinus of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2742" end="2749" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="2763" end="2773" title="Geographia (Ptolemy)" label="Geographia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360073" start="2907" end="2923" title="Alvise Cadamosto" label="Alvise Cadamosto"/>
<link wikidata="Q606364" start="2925" end="2945" title="Antoniotto Usodimare" label="Antoniotto Usodimare"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="2947" end="2955" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2960" end="2967" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="3010" end="3036" title="Prince Henry the Navigator" label="Prince Henry the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226846" start="3128" end="3139" title="Diogo Gomes" label="Diogo Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q496061" start="3144" end="3159" title="António de Noli" label="António de Noli"/>
<link wikidata="Q375141" start="3356" end="3371" title="Ferdinand, Duke of Viseu" label="Prince Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="3378" end="3398" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464913" start="3512" end="3524" title="Cidade Velha" label="Cidade Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q108448" start="3551" end="3560" title="Santiago, Cape Verde" label="São Tiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q651207" start="3897" end="3903" title="Arguim" label="Arguim"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="4207" end="4218" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="4278" end="4285" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="4309" end="4328" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="4371" end="4384" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="4411" end="4419" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="4428" end="4450" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="4459" end="4471" title="John II of Portugal" label="King João II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="4476" end="4484" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4485" end="4509" title="Jews of Bilad el-Sudan#Cape Verde" label="exiled thousands of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="4513" end="4521" title="São Tomé" label="São Tomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="4523" end="4531" title="Príncipe" label="Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="4602" end="4614" title="West African" label="West African"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="4681" end="4690" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="4727" end="4752" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q426555" start="4792" end="4796" title="Fogo, Cape Verde" label="Fogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q492551" start="4988" end="4992" title="Maio, Cape Verde" label="Maio"/>
<link wikidata="Q110440" start="4994" end="5003" title="Boa Vista, Cape Verde" label="Boa Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q111989" start="5009" end="5012" title="Sal, Cape Verde" label="Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="5022" end="5025" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q13957085" start="5157" end="5167" title="São Filipe, Cape Verde" label="São Filipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q768314" start="5189" end="5201" title="Ponta do Sol, Cape Verde" label="Ponta do Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122689" start="5206" end="5220" title="Ribeira Grande, Cape Verde" label="Ribeira Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136127" start="5311" end="5324" title="Ribeira Brava, Cape Verde" label="Ribeira Brava"/>
<link wikidata="Q501658" start="5342" end="5356" title="Povoação Velha" label="Povoação Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673349" start="5371" end="5376" title="Achada Furna" label="Furna"/>
<link wikidata="Q493634" start="5378" end="5389" title="Nova Sintra" label="Nova Sintra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679554" start="5404" end="5412" title="Palmeira, Cape Verde" label="Palmeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="6033" end="6046" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6063" end="6068" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="6149" end="6162" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209152" start="6194" end="6213" title="Capture of Santiago (1585)" label="captured the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718745" start="6257" end="6269" title="São Domingos, Cape Verde" label="São Domingos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="6329" end="6337" title="Ottoman Algeria" label="Algerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="6338" end="6346" title="Barbary pirates" label="corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="6405" end="6412" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6630" end="6650" title="Guinea Coast Company" label="Guinea Coast Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18477537" start="6753" end="6804" title="Company of Cacheu and Rivers and Commerce of Guinea" label="Company of Cacheu and Rivers and Commerce of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609177" start="6865" end="6897" title="Company of Cacheu and Cape Verde" label="Company of Cacheu and Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q499108" start="6908" end="6920" title="Pico do Fogo" label="Pico do Fogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7196" end="7209" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="7283" end="7296" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="7301" end="7313" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q492528" start="7392" end="7397" title="Brava, Cape Verde" label="Brava"/>
<link wikidata="Q426555" start="7402" end="7406" title="Fogo, Cape Verde" label="Fogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049265" start="7485" end="7503" title="Cassard expedition" label="Cassard expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751" start="7578" end="7583" title="Praia" label="Praia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251355" start="7735" end="7745" title="slave ship" label="slave ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="7751" end="7757" title="whaler" label="whaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457082" start="8031" end="8059" title="Famine in Cape Verde" label="several droughts and famines"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="8159" end="8172" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="8177" end="8188" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990305" start="8443" end="8473" title="Grão Pará and Maranhão Company" label="Grão Pará and Maranhão Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q10283638" start="8776" end="8806" title="Fortaleza de São José da Amura" label="Fortaleza de São José da Amura"/>
<link wikidata="Q576292" start="9595" end="9611" title="Fourth Anglo-Dutch War" label="Anglo-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="9616" end="9642" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="9644" end="9651" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="9656" end="9662" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732287" start="9684" end="9705" title="Battle of Porto Praya" label="Battle of Porto Praya"/>
<link wikidata="Q495547" start="9756" end="9763" title="Mindelo" label="Mindelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q486580" start="9819" end="9832" title="Pedra de Lume" label="Pedra de Lume"/>
<link wikidata="Q497445" start="9853" end="9864" title="Santa Maria, Cape Verde" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822923" start="9999" end="10025" title="Liberal Revolution of 1820" label="Liberal Revolution of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323945" start="10040" end="10062" title="Manuel António Martins" label="Manuel António Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q495547" start="10798" end="10805" title="Mindelo" label="Mindelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="11207" end="11217" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="11233" end="11241" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726" start="11246" end="11254" title="Banjul" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="11258" end="11268" title="the Gambia" label="the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="11759" end="11766" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="11775" end="11781" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="12265" end="12284" title="Sao Tome e Principe" label="Sao Tome e Principe"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="12309" end="12315" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="12320" end="12330" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974" start="12603" end="12613" title="Las Palmas" label="Las Palmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398424" start="12640" end="12645" title="Autonomous Port of Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="12649" end="12656" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="12662" end="12672" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q498968" start="13260" end="13268" title="Espargos" label="Espargos"/>
<link wikidata="Q111989" start="13301" end="13304" title="Sal, Cape Verde" label="Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153975" start="13462" end="13470" title="Alitalia" label="Alitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="13511" end="13532" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="13690" end="13699" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457082" start="14110" end="14125" title="Famine in Cape Verde" label="Several famines"/>
<link wikidata="Q609836" start="14278" end="14301" title="Portuguese Colonial War" label="Portuguese Colonial War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609193" start="14338" end="14352" title="Guinea-Bissau War of Independence" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002279" start="14356" end="14373" title="Portuguese Guinea" label="Portuguese Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="14405" end="14418" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q213416" start="14457" end="14464" title="Amílcar Cabral" label="Amílcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q311443" start="14469" end="14480" title="Luís Cabral" label="Luís Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q776352" start="14493" end="14552" title="African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde" label="African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="14802" end="14821" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="15122" end="15135" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q776352" start="15578" end="15637" title="African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde" label="African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q213416" start="15729" end="15743" title="Amílcar Cabral" label="Amílcar Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="15754" end="15765" title="pan-African" label="pan-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="16146" end="16173" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António de Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191299" start="16514" end="16532" title="Pijiguiti Massacre" label="Pijiguiti Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160609" start="16728" end="16759" title="1973 Portuguese Cape Verdean Legislative Assembly election" label="parliamentary elections in 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q954010" start="17042" end="17071" title="National Union (Portugal)" label="People&amp;#x27;s National Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="17178" end="17198" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q107431" start="17454" end="17465" title="Pedro Pires" label="Pedro Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q712532" start="17972" end="17987" title="Vasco Gonçalves" label="Vasco Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822163" start="18037" end="18050" title="Abilio Duarte" label="Abilio Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879646" start="18171" end="18198" title="Portuguese Africa (disambiguation)" label="Portuguese African colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q497464" start="18616" end="18664" title="African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde" label="African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951190" start="18897" end="18919" title="Movement for Democracy (Cape Verde)" label="Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586976" start="19125" end="19178" title="1991 Cape Verdean parliamentary election" label="first multi-party elections were held in January 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q336265" start="19300" end="19328" title="António Mascarenhas Monteiro" label="António Mascarenhas Monteiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586519" start="19522" end="19559" title="1996 Cape Verdean presidential election" label="A February 1996 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q107431" start="19674" end="19685" title="Pedro Pires" label="Pedro Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q500378" start="19690" end="19702" title="Carlos Veiga" label="Carlos Veiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="19740" end="19754" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500278" start="20057" end="20071" title="2006 Cape Verdean presidential election" label="2006 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57517" start="20074" end="20102" title="Jorge Carlos Fonseca" label="Jorge Carlos Almeida Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341517" start="20134" end="20138" title="2011 Cape Verdean presidential election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022180" start="20144" end="20154" title="2016 Cape Verdean presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951190" start="20201" end="20223" title="Movement for Democracy (Cape Verde)" label="Movement for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23899522" start="20242" end="20265" title="Ulisses Correia e Silva" label="Ulisses Correia e Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669623" start="20300" end="20314" title="2016 Cape Verdean parliamentary election" label="2016 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q84030075" start="20517" end="20525" title="2021 Cape Verdean parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57649" start="20592" end="20608" title="José Maria Neves" label="Jose Maria Neves"/>
<link wikidata="Q83965780" start="20653" end="20661" title="2021 Cape Verdean presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q501713" start="20713" end="20722" title="List of presidents of Cape Verde" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="20803" end="20810" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="20827" end="20844" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q940288" start="20846" end="20870" title="History of Guinea-Bissau" label="History of Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867197" start="20872" end="20894" title="History of West Africa" label="History of West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q510438" start="20896" end="20933" title="List of prime ministers of Cape Verde" label="List of prime ministers of Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q501713" start="20935" end="20967" title="List of presidents of Cape Verde" label="List of presidents of Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154719" start="20969" end="20991" title="Politics of Cape Verde" label="Politics of Cape Verde"/>
</links>
</doc>
