<doc id="53307" wikidata="Q28319" url="?curid=53307" title="Lepidoptera">
<text>Lepidoptera ( ) or lepidopterans is an order of winged insects which includes butterflies and moths. About 180,000 species of the Lepidoptera have been described, representing 10% of the total described species of living organisms, making it the second largest insect order (behind Coleoptera) with 126 families and 46 superfamilies, and one of the most widespread and widely recognizable insect orders in the world.

Lepidopteran species are characterized by more than three derived features. The most apparent is the presence of scales that cover the bodies, large triangular wings, and a proboscis for siphoning nectars. The scales are modified, flattened &quot;hairs&quot;, and give butterflies and moths their wide variety of colors and patterns. Almost all species have some form of membranous wings, except for a few that have reduced wings or are wingless. Mating and the laying of eggs is normally performed near or on host plants for the larvae. Like most other insects, butterflies and moths are holometabolous, meaning they undergo complete metamorphosis. The larvae are commonly called caterpillars, and are completely different from their adult moth or butterfly forms, having a cylindrical body with a well-developed head, mandible mouth parts, three pairs of thoracic legs and from none up to five pairs of prolegs. As they grow, these larvae change in appearance, going through a series of stages called instars. Once fully matured, the larva develops into a pupa. A few butterflies and many moth species spin a silk casing or cocoon for protection prior to pupating, while others do not, instead going underground. A butterfly pupa, called a chrysalis, has a hard skin, usually with no cocoon. Once the pupa has completed its metamorphosis, a sexually mature adult emerges.

Lepidopterans first appeared in fossil record in the Triassic-Jurassic boundary and have coevolved with flowering plants since the angiosperm boom in the Middle/Late Cretaceous. They show many variations of the basic body structure that have evolved to gain advantages in lifestyle and distribution. Recent estimates suggest the order may have more species than earlier thought, and is among the five most species-rich orders (each with over 100,000 species) along with Coleoptera (beetles), Diptera (flies), Hymenoptera (ants, bees, wasps and sawflies) and Hemiptera (cicadas, aphids and other true bugs). They have, over millions of years, evolved a wide range of wing patterns and coloration ranging from drab moths akin to the related order Trichoptera, to the brightly colored and complex-patterned butterflies. Accordingly, this is the most recognized and popular of insect orders with many people involved in the observation, study, collection, rearing of, and commerce in these insects. A person who collects or studies this order is referred to as a lepidopterist.

Butterflies and moths are mostly herbivorous (folivorous) as caterpillars and nectarivorous as adults. They play an important role in the natural ecosystem as pollinators and serve as primary consumers in the food chain; conversely, their larvae (caterpillars) are considered very problematic to vegetation in agriculture, as they consume large quantity of plant matter (mostly foliage) to sustain growth. In many species, the female may produce from 200 to 600 eggs, while in others, the number may approach 30,000 eggs in one day. The caterpillars hatching from these eggs can cause significant damage to crops within a very short period of time. Many moth and butterfly species are of economic interest by virtue of their role as pollinators, the silk in their cocoon, or for extermination as pest species.

== Etymology ==
The term Lepidoptera was used in 1746 by Carl Linnaeus in his &quot;Fauna Svecica&quot;. The word is derived from Greek , gen. (&quot;scale&quot;) and (&quot;wing&quot;). Sometimes, the term Rhopalocera is used for the clade of all butterfly species, derived from the Ancient Greek (&#x27;) and (&#x27;) meaning &quot;club&quot; and &quot;horn&quot;, respectively, coming from the shape of the antennae of butterflies.

The origins of the common names &quot;butterfly&quot; and &quot;moth&quot; are varied and often obscure. The English word butterfly is from Old English &#x27;, with many variations in spelling. Other than that, the origin is unknown, although it could be derived from the pale yellow color of many species&#x27; wings suggesting the color of butter. The species of Heterocera are commonly called moths. The origins of the English word moth are clearer, deriving from Old English &#x27; (cf. Northumbrian dialect &#x27;) from Common Germanic (compare Old Norse &#x27;, Dutch &#x27; and German &#x27; all meaning &quot;moth&quot;). Perhaps its origins are related to Old English &quot;&quot; meaning &quot;maggot&quot; or from the root of &quot;midge&quot;, which until the 16th century was used mostly to indicate the larva, usually in reference to devouring clothes.

The etymological origins of the word &quot;caterpillar&quot;, the larval form of butterflies and moths, are from the early 16th century, from Middle English , , probably an alteration of Old North French (from Latin , &quot;cat&quot; + , &quot;hairy&quot;).

== Distribution and diversity ==
The Lepidoptera are among the most successful groups of insects. They are found on all continents, except Antarctica, and inhabit all terrestrial habitats ranging from desert to rainforest, from lowland grasslands to mountain plateaus, but almost always associated with higher plants, especially angiosperms (flowering plants). Among the most northern dwelling species of butterflies and moths is the Arctic Apollo (&quot;Parnassius arcticus&quot;), which is found in the Arctic Circle in northeastern Yakutia, at an altitude of above sea level. In the Himalayas, various Apollo species such as &quot;Parnassius epaphus&quot; have been recorded to occur up to an altitude of above sea level.

Some lepidopteran species exhibit symbiotic, phoretic, or parasitic lifestyles, inhabiting the bodies of organisms rather than the environment. Coprophagous pyralid moth species, called sloth moths, such as &quot;Bradipodicola hahneli&quot; and &quot;Cryptoses choloepi&quot;, are unusual in that they are exclusively found inhabiting the fur of sloths, mammals found in Central and South America. Two species of &quot;Tinea&quot; moths have been recorded as feeding on horny tissue and have been bred from the horns of cattle. The larva of &quot;Zenodochium coccivorella&quot; is an internal parasite of the coccid &quot;Kermes&quot; species. Many species have been recorded as breeding in natural materials or refuse such as owl pellets, bat caves, honeycombs or diseased fruit.

As of 2007, there were roughly 174,250 lepidopteran species described, with butterflies and skippers estimated to comprise around 17,950, and moths making up the rest. The vast majority of Lepidoptera are to be found in the tropics, but substantial diversity exists on most continents. North America has over 700 species of butterflies and over 11,000 species of moths, while about 400 species of butterflies and 14,000 species of moths are reported from Australia. The diversity of Lepidoptera in each faunal region has been estimated by John Heppner in 1991 based partly on actual counts from the literature, partly on the card indices in the Natural History Museum (London) and the National Museum of Natural History (Washington), and partly on estimates:

== External morphology ==


Lepidoptera are morphologically distinguished from other orders principally by the presence of scales on the external parts of the body and appendages, especially the wings. Butterflies and moths vary in size from microlepidoptera only a few millimeters long, to conspicuous animals with a wingspan greater than , such as the Queen Alexandra&#x27;s birdwing and Atlas moth.
Lepidopterans undergo a four-stage life cycle: egg; larva or caterpillar; pupa or chrysalis; and imago (plural: imagines) / adult and show many variations of the basic body structure, which give these animals advantages for diverse lifestyles and environments.

=== Head ===

The head is where many sensing organs and the mouth parts are found. Like the adult, the larva also has a toughened, or sclerotized head capsule. Here, two compound eyes, and &quot;chaetosema&quot;, raised spots or clusters of sensory bristles unique to Lepidoptera, occur, though many taxa have lost one or both of these spots. The antennae have a wide variation in form among species and even between different sexes. The antennae of butterflies are usually filiform and shaped like clubs, those of the skippers are hooked, while those of moths have flagellar segments variously enlarged or branched. Some moths have enlarged antennae or ones that are tapered and hooked at the ends.

The maxillary galeae are modified and form an elongated proboscis. The proboscis consists of one to five segments, usually kept coiled up under the head by small muscles when it is not being used to suck up nectar from flowers or other liquids. Some basal moths still have mandibles, or separate moving jaws, like their ancestors, and these form the family Micropterigidae.

The larvae, called caterpillars, have a toughened head capsule. Caterpillars lack the proboscis and have separate chewing mouthparts. These mouthparts, called mandibles, are used to chew up the plant matter that the larvae eat. The lower jaw, or labium, is weak, but may carry a spinneret, an organ used to create silk. The head is made of large lateral lobes, each having an ellipse of up to six simple eyes.

=== Thorax ===
The thorax is made of three fused segments, the prothorax, mesothorax, and metathorax, each with a pair of legs. The first segment contains the first pair of legs. In some males of the butterfly family Nymphalidae, the forelegs are greatly reduced and are not used for walking or perching. The three pairs of legs are covered with scales. Lepidoptera also have olfactory organs on their feet, which aid the butterfly in &quot;tasting&quot; or &quot;smelling&quot; out its food. In the larval form there are 3 pairs of true legs, with up to 11 pairs of abdominal legs (usually eight) and hooklets, called apical crochets.

The two pairs of wings are found on the middle and third segments, or mesothorax and metathorax, respectively. In the more recent genera, the wings of the second segment are much more pronounced, although some more primitive forms have similarly sized wings of both segments. The wings are covered in scales arranged like shingles, which form an extraordinary variety of colors and patterns. The mesothorax has more powerful muscles to propel the moth or butterfly through the air, with the wing of this segment (forewing) having a stronger vein structure. The largest superfamily, the Noctuoidea, has their wings modified to act as tympanal or hearing organs.

The caterpillar has an elongated, soft body that may have hair-like or other projections, three pairs of true legs, with none to 11 pairs of abdominal legs (usually eight) and hooklets, called apical crochets. The thorax usually has a pair of legs on each segment. The thorax is also lined with many spiracles on both the mesothorax and metathorax, except for a few aquatic species, which instead have a form of gills.

=== Abdomen ===

The abdomen, which is less sclerotized than the thorax, consists of 10 segments with membranes in between, allowing for articulated movement. The sternum, on the first segment, is small in some families and is completely absent in others. The last two or three segments form the external parts of the species&#x27; sex organs. The genitalia of Lepidoptera are highly varied and are often the only means of differentiating between species. Male genitals include a valva, which is usually large, as it is used to grasp the female during mating. Female genitalia include three distinct sections.

The females of basal moths have only one sex organ, which is used for copulation and as an ovipositor, or egg-laying organ. About 98% of moth species have a separate organ for mating, and an external duct that carries the sperm from the male.

The abdomen of the caterpillar has four pairs of prolegs, normally located on the third to sixth segments of the abdomen, and a separate pair of prolegs by the anus, which have a pair of tiny hooks called crotchets. These aid in gripping and walking, especially in species that lack many prolegs (e. g. larvae of Geometridae). In some basal moths, these prolegs may be on every segment of the body, while prolegs may be completely absent in other groups, which are more adapted to boring and living in sand (e. g., Prodoxidae and Nepticulidae, respectively).

=== Scales ===
The wings, head, and parts of the thorax and abdomen of Lepidoptera are covered with minute scales, a feature from which the order derives its name. Most scales are lamellar, or blade-like, and attached with a pedicel, while other forms may be hair-like or specialized as secondary sexual characteristics.

The lumen or surface of the lamella has a complex structure. It gives color either by colored pigments it contains, or through structural coloration with mechanisms that include photonic crystals and diffraction gratings.

Scales function in insulation, thermoregulation, producing pheromones (in males only), and aiding gliding flight, but the most important is the large diversity of vivid or indistinct patterns they provide, which help the organism protect itself by camouflage or mimicry, and which act as signals to other animals including rivals and potential mates.
== Internal morphology ==

===Reproductive system===
In the reproductive system of butterflies and moths, the male genitalia are complex and unclear. In females the three types of genitalia are based on the relating taxa: &#x27;monotrysian&#x27;, &#x27;exoporian&#x27;, and &#x27;ditrysian&#x27;. In the monotrysian type is an opening on the fused segments of the sterna 9 and 10, which act as insemination and oviposition. In the exoporian type (in Hepialoidea and Mnesarchaeoidea) are two separate places for insemination and oviposition, both occurring on the same sterna as the monotrysian type, i.e. 9 and 10. The ditrysian groups have an internal duct that carries sperm, with separate openings for copulation and egg-laying. In most species, the genitalia are flanked by two soft lobes, although they may be specialized and sclerotized in some species for ovipositing in area such as crevices and inside plant tissue. Hormones and the glands that produce them run the development of butterflies and moths as they go through their life cycles, called the endocrine system. The first insect hormone prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH) operates the species life cycle and diapause. This hormone is produced by corpora allata and corpora cardiaca, where it is also stored. Some glands are specialized to perform certain task such as producing silk or producing saliva in the palpi. While the corpora cardiaca produce PTTH, the corpora allata also produces juvenile hormones, and the prothorocic glands produce moulting hormones.

===Digestive system===
In the digestive system, the anterior region of the foregut has been modified to form a pharyngeal sucking pump as they need it for the food they eat, which are for the most part liquids. An esophagus follows and leads to the posterior of the pharynx and in some species forms a form of crop. The midgut is short and straight, with the hindgut being longer and coiled. Ancestors of lepidopteran species, stemming from Hymenoptera, had midgut ceca, although this is lost in current butterflies and moths. Instead, all the digestive enzymes, other than initial digestion, are immobilized at the surface of the midgut cells. In larvae, long-necked and stalked goblet cells are found in the anterior and posterior midgut regions, respectively. In insects, the goblet cells excrete positive potassium ions, which are absorbed from leaves ingested by the larvae. Most butterflies and moths display the usual digestive cycle, but species with different diets require adaptations to meet these new demands. Some, like the luna moth, exhibit no digestive system whatsoever; they survive as adults from stored energy consumed as larvae and live for no longer than 7–10 days.

===Circulatory system===
In the circulatory system, hemolymph, or insect blood, is used to circulate heat in a form of thermoregulation, where muscles contraction produces heat, which is transferred to the rest of the body when conditions are unfavorable. In lepidopteran species, hemolymph is circulated through the veins in the wings by some form of pulsating organ, either by the heart or by the intake of air into the trachea.

===Respiratory system===
Air is taken in through spiracles along the sides of the abdomen and thorax supplying the trachea with oxygen as it goes through the lepidopteran&#x27;s respiratory system. Three different tracheaes supply and diffuse oxygen throughout the species&#x27; bodies. The dorsal tracheae supply oxygen to the dorsal musculature and vessels, while the ventral tracheae supply the ventral musculature and nerve cord, and the visceral tracheae supply the guts, fat bodies, and gonads.

== Polymorphism ==


Polymorphism is the appearance of forms or &quot;morphs&quot;, which differ in color and number of attributes within a single species. In Lepidoptera, polymorphism can be seen not only between individuals in a population, but also between the sexes as sexual dimorphism, between geographically separated populations in geographical polymorphism, and between generations flying at different seasons of the year (seasonal polymorphism or polyphenism). In some species, the polymorphism is limited to one sex, typically the female. This often includes the phenomenon of mimicry when mimetic morphs fly alongside nonmimetic morphs in a population of a particular species. Polymorphism occurs both at specific level with heritable variation in the overall morphological adaptations of individuals, as well as in certain specific morphological or physiological traits within a species.

Environmental polymorphism, in which traits are not inherited, is often termed as polyphenism, which in Lepidoptera is commonly seen in the form of seasonal morphs, especially in the butterfly families of Nymphalidae and Pieridae. An Old World pierid butterfly, the common grass yellow (&quot;Eurema hecabe&quot;) has a darker summer adult morph, triggered by a long day exceeding 13 hours in duration, while the shorter diurnal period of 12 hours or less induces a paler morph in the postmonsoon period. Polyphenism also occurs in caterpillars, an example being the peppered moth, &quot;Biston betularia&quot;.

Geographical isolation causes a divergence of a species into different morphs. A good example is the Indian white admiral &quot;Limenitis procris&quot;, which has five forms, each geographically separated from the other by large mountain ranges. An even more dramatic showcase of geographical polymorphism is the Apollo butterfly (&quot;Parnassius apollo&quot;). Because the Apollos live in small local populations, thus having no contact with each other, coupled with their strong stenotopic nature and weak migration ability, interbreeding between populations of one species practically does not occur; by this, they form over 600 different morphs, with the size of spots on the wings of which varies greatly.

Sexual dimorphism is the occurrence of differences between males and females in a species. In Lepidoptera, it is widespread and almost completely set by genetic determination. Sexual dimorphism is present in all families of the Papilionoidea and more prominent in the Lycaenidae, Pieridae, and certain taxa of the Nymphalidae. Apart from color variation, which may differ from slight to completely different color-pattern combinations, secondary sexual characteristics may also be present. Different genotypes maintained by natural selection may also be expressed at the same time. Polymorphic and/or mimetic females occur in the case of some taxa in the Papilionidae primarily to obtain a level of protection not available to the male of their species. The most distinct case of sexual dimorphism is that of adult females of many Psychidae species which have only vestigial wings, legs, and mouthparts as compared to the adult males that are strong fliers with well-developed wings and feathery antennae.

== Reproduction and development ==

Species of Lepidoptera undergo holometabolism or &quot;complete metamorphosis&quot;. Their life cycle normally consists of an egg, a larva, a pupa, and an imago or adult. The larvae are commonly called caterpillars, and the pupae of moths encapsulated in silk are called cocoons, while the uncovered pupae of butterflies are called chrysalides.

=== Lepidopterans in diapause ===

Unless the species reproduces year-round, a butterfly or moth may enter diapause, a state of dormancy that allows the insect to survive unfavorable environmental conditions.

=== Mating ===

Males usually start eclosion (emergence) earlier than females and peak in numbers before females. Both of the sexes are sexually mature by the time of eclosion. Butterflies and moths normally do not associate with each other, except for migrating species, staying relatively asocial. Mating begins with an adult (female or male) attracting a mate, normally using visual stimuli, especially in diurnal species like most butterflies. However, the females of most nocturnal species, including almost all moth species, use pheromones to attract males, sometimes from long distances. Some species engage in a form of acoustic courtship, or attract mates using sound or vibration such as the polka-dot wasp moth, &quot;Syntomeida epilais&quot;.

Adaptations include undergoing one seasonal generation, two or even more, called voltinism (Univoltism, bivoltism, and multivism, respectively). Most lepidopterans in temperate climates are univoltine, while in tropical climates most have two seasonal broods. Some others may take advantage of any opportunity they can get, and mate continuously throughout the year. These seasonal adaptations are controlled by hormones, and these delays in reproduction are called diapause. Many lepidopteran species, after mating and laying their eggs, die shortly afterwards, having only lived for a few days after eclosion. Others may still be active for several weeks and then overwinter and become sexually active again when the weather becomes more favorable, or diapause. The sperm of the male that mated most recently with the female is most likely to have fertilized the eggs, but the sperm from a prior mating may still prevail.

=== Life cycle ===

==== Eggs ====

Lepidoptera usually reproduce sexually and are oviparous (egg-laying), though some species exhibit live birth in a process called ovoviviparity. A variety of differences in egg-laying and the number of eggs laid occur. Some species simply drop their eggs in flight (these species normally have polyphagous larvae, meaning they eat a variety of plants e. g., hepialids and some nymphalids) while most lay their eggs near or on the host plant on which the larvae feed. The number of eggs laid may vary from only a few to several thousand. The females of both butterflies and moths select the host plant instinctively, and primarily, by chemical cues.

The eggs are derived from materials ingested as a larva and in some species, from the spermatophores received from males during mating. An egg can only be 1/1000 the mass of the female, yet she may lay up to her own mass in eggs. Females lay smaller eggs as they age. Larger females lay larger eggs. The egg is covered by a hard-ridged protective outer layer of shell, called the chorion. It is lined with a thin coating of wax, which prevents the egg from drying out. Each egg contains a number of micropyles, or tiny funnel-shaped openings at one end, the purpose of which is to allow sperm to enter and fertilize the egg. Butterfly and moth eggs vary greatly in size between species, but they are all either spherical or ovate.

The egg stage lasts a few weeks in most butterflies, but eggs laid prior to winter, especially in temperate regions, go through diapause, and hatching may be delayed until spring. Other butterflies may lay their eggs in the spring and have them hatch in the summer. These butterflies are usually temperate species (e. g. &quot;Nymphalis antiopa&quot;).

==== Larvae ====

The larvae or caterpillars are the first stage in the life cycle after hatching. Caterpillars are &quot;characteristic larvae with cylindrical bodies, short thoracic legs, and abdominal prolegs (pseudopods)&quot;. They have a sclerotized head capsule with an adfrontal suture formed by medial fusion of the sclerites, mandibles (mouthparts) for chewing, and a soft tubular, segmented body, that may have hair-like or other projections, three pairs of true legs, and additional prolegs (up to five pairs). The body consists of thirteen segments, of which three are thoracic and ten are abdominal. Most larvae are herbivores, but a few are carnivores (some eat ants or other caterpillars) and detritivores.

Different herbivorous species have adapted to feed on every part of the plant and are normally considered pests to their host plants; some species have been found to lay their eggs on the fruit and other species lay their eggs on clothing or fur (e. g., &quot;Tineola bisselliella&quot;, the common clothes moth). Some species are carnivorous, and others are even parasitic. Some lycaenid species such as &quot;Phengaris rebeli&quot; are social parasites of &quot;Myrmica&quot; ant nests. A species of Geometridae from Hawaii has carnivorous larvae that catch and eat flies. Some pyralid caterpillars are aquatic.

The larvae develop rapidly with several generations in a year; however, some species may take up to 3 years to develop, and exceptional examples like &quot;Gynaephora groenlandica&quot; take as long as seven years. The larval stage is where the feeding and growing stages occur, and the larvae periodically undergo hormone-induced ecdysis, developing further with each instar, until they undergo the final larval-pupal molt.

The larvae of both butterflies and moths exhibit mimicry to deter potential predators. Some caterpillars have the ability to inflate parts of their heads to appear snake-like. Many have false eye-spots to enhance this effect. Some caterpillars have special structures called osmeteria (family Papilionidae), which are exposed to produce smelly chemicals used in defense. Host plants often have toxic substances in them, and caterpillars are able to sequester these substances and retain them into the adult stage. This helps make them unpalatable to birds and other predators. Such unpalatability is advertised using bright red, orange, black, or white warning colors. The toxic chemicals in plants are often evolved specifically to prevent them from being eaten by insects. Insects, in turn, develop countermeasures or make use of these toxins for their own survival. This &quot;arms race&quot; has led to the coevolution of insects and their host plants.

==== Wing development ====

No form of wing is externally visible on the larva, but when larvae are dissected, developing wings can be seen as disks, which can be found on the second and third thoracic segments, in place of the spiracles that are apparent on abdominal segments. Wing disks develop in association with a trachea that runs along the base of the wing, and are surrounded by a thin peripodial membrane, which is linked to the outer epidermis of the larva by a tiny duct. Wing disks are very small until the last larval instar, when they increase dramatically in size, are invaded by branching tracheae from the wing base that precede the formation of the wing veins and begin to develop patterns associated with several landmarks of the wing.

Near pupation, the wings are forced outside the epidermis under pressure from the hemolymph, and although they are initially quite flexible and fragile, by the time the pupa breaks free of the larval cuticle, they have adhered tightly to the outer cuticle of the pupa (in obtect pupae). Within hours, the wings form a cuticle so hard and well-joined to the body that pupae can be picked up and handled without damage to the wings.

==== Pupa ====

After about five to seven instars, or molts, certain hormones, like PTTH, stimulate the production of ecdysone, which initiates insect molting. The larva starts to develop into the pupa: body parts specific to the larva, such as the abdominal prolegs, degenerate, while others such as the legs and wings undergo growth. After finding a suitable place, the animal sheds its last larval cuticle, revealing the pupal cuticle underneath.

Depending on the species, the pupa may be covered in a silk cocoon, attached to different types of substrates, buried in the ground, or may not be covered at all. Features of the imago are externally recognizable in the pupa. All the appendages on the adult head and thorax are found cased inside the cuticle (antennae, mouthparts, etc.), with the wings wrapped around, adjacent to the antennae. The pupae of some species have functional mandibles, while the pupal mandibles are not functional in others.

Although the pupal cuticle is highly sclerotized, some of the lower abdominal segments are not fused, and are able to move using small muscles found in between the membrane. Moving may help the pupa, for example, escape the sun, which would otherwise kill it. The pupa of the Mexican jumping bean moth (&quot;Cydia saltitans&quot;) does this. The larvae cut a trapdoor in the bean (species of &quot;Sebastiania&quot;) and use the bean as a shelter. With a sudden rise in temperature, the pupa inside twitches and jerks, pulling on the threads inside. Wiggling may also help to deter parasitoid wasps from laying eggs on the pupa. Other species of moths are able to make clicks to deter predators.

The length of time before the pupa ecloses (emerges) varies greatly. The monarch butterfly may stay in its chrysalis for two weeks, while other species may need to stay for more than 10 months in diapause. The adult emerges from the pupa either by using abdominal hooks or from projections located on the head. The mandibles found in the most primitive moth families are used to escape from their cocoon (e. g., Micropterigoidea).

==== Adult ====

Most lepidopteran species do not live long after eclosion, only needing a few days to find a mate and then lay their eggs. Others may remain active for a longer period (from one to several weeks) or go through diapause and overwintering as monarch butterflies do, or waiting out environmental stress. Some adult species of microlepidoptera go through a stage where no reproductive-related activity occurs, lasting through summer and winter, followed by mating and oviposition in the early spring.

While most butterflies and moths are terrestrial, many species of Acentropinae (Crambidae) are truly aquatic with all stages except the adult occurring in water. Many species from other families such as Erebidae, Nepticulidae, Cosmopterigidae, Tortricidae, Olethreutidae, Noctuidae, Cossidae, and Sphingidae are aquatic or semiaquatic.

== Video gallery of butterfly life cycle (Pieris rapae, the common cabbage white) ==

== Behavior ==

=== Flight ===

Flight is an important aspect of the lives of butterflies and moths, and is used for evading predators, searching for food, and finding mates in a timely manner, as most lepidopteran species do not live long after eclosion. It is the main form of locomotion in most species. In Lepidoptera, the forewings and hindwings are mechanically coupled and flap in synchrony. Flight is anteromotoric, or being driven primarily by action of the forewings. Although lepidopteran species reportedly can still fly when their hindwings are cut off, it reduces their linear flight and turning capabilities.

Lepidopteran species have to be warm, about , to fly. They depend on their body temperature being sufficiently high and since they cannot regulate it themselves, this is dependent on their environment. Butterflies living in cooler climates may use their wings to warm their bodies. They will bask in the sun, spreading out their wings so that they get maximum exposure to the sunlight. In hotter climates butterflies can easily overheat, so they are usually active only during the cooler parts of the day, early morning, late afternoon or early evening. During the heat of the day, they rest in the shade. Some larger thick-bodied moths (e.g. Sphingidae) can generate their own heat to a limited degree by vibrating their wings. The heat generated by the flight muscles warms the thorax while the temperature of the abdomen is unimportant for flight. To avoid overheating, some moths rely on hairy scales, internal air sacs, and other structures to separate the thorax and abdomen and keep the abdomen cooler.

Some species of butterflies can reach fast speeds, such as the southern dart, which can go as fast as . Sphingids are some of the fastest flying insects, some are capable of flying at over , having a wingspan of . In some species, sometimes a gliding component to their flight exists. Flight occurs either as hovering, or as forward or backward motion. In butterfly and moth species, such as hawk moths, hovering is important as they need to maintain a certain stability over flowers when feeding on the nectar.

==== Navigation ====

Navigation is important to Lepidoptera species, especially for those that migrate. Butterflies, which have more species that migrate, have been shown to navigate using time-compensated sun compasses. They can see polarized light, so can orient even in cloudy conditions. The polarized light in the region close to the ultraviolet spectrum is suggested to be particularly important. Most migratory butterflies are those that live in semiarid areas where breeding seasons are short. The life histories of their host plants also influence the strategies of the butterflies. Other theories include the use of landscapes. Lepidoptera may use coastal lines, mountains, and even roads to orient themselves. Above sea, the flight direction is much more accurate if the coast is still visible.

Many studies have also shown that moths navigate. One study showed that many moths may use the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field to navigate, as a study of the heart and dart moth suggests. Another study, of the migratory behavior of the silver Y, showed, even at high altitudes, the species can correct its course with changing winds, and prefers flying with favourable winds, suggesting a great sense of direction. &quot;Aphrissa statira&quot; in Panama loses its navigational capacity when exposed to a magnetic field, suggesting it uses the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field.

Moths exhibit a tendency to circle artificial lights repeatedly. This suggests they use a technique of celestial navigation called transverse orientation. By maintaining a constant angular relationship to a bright celestial light, such as the Moon, they can fly in a straight line. Celestial objects are so far away, even after traveling great distances, the change in angle between the moth and the light source is negligible; further, the moon will always be in the upper part of the visual field or on the horizon. When a moth encounters a much closer artificial light and uses it for navigation, the angle changes noticeably after only a short distance, in addition to being often below the horizon. The moth instinctively attempts to correct by turning toward the light, causing airborne moths to come plummeting downwards, and at close range, which results in a spiral flight path that gets closer and closer to the light source. Other explanations have been suggested, such as the idea that moths may be impaired with a visual distortion called a Mach band by Henry Hsiao in 1972. He stated that they fly towards the darkest part of the sky in pursuit of safety, thus are inclined to circle ambient objects in the Mach band region.

==== Migration ====

Lepidopteran migration is typically seasonal, as the insects moving to escape dry seasons or other disadvantageous conditions. Most lepidopterans that migrate are butterflies, and the distance travelled varies. Some butterflies that migrate include the mourning cloak, painted lady, American lady, red admiral, and the common buckeye. A notable species of moth that migrates long distances is the bogong moth. The most well-known migrations are those of the eastern population of the monarch butterfly from Mexico to northern United States and southern Canada, a distance of about . Other well-known migratory species include the painted lady and several of the danaine butterflies. Spectacular and large-scale migrations associated with the monsoons are seen in peninsular India. Migrations have been studied in more recent times using wing tags and stable hydrogen isotopes.

Moths also undertake migrations, an example being the uraniids. &quot;Urania fulgens&quot; undergoes population explosions and massive migrations that may be not surpassed by any other insect in the Neotropics. In Costa Rica and Panama, the first population movements may begin in July and early August and depending on the year, may be very massive, continuing unabated for as long as five months.

=== Communication ===

Pheromones are commonly involved in mating rituals among species, especially moths, but they are also an important aspect of other forms of communication. Usually, the pheromones are produced by either the male or the female and detected by members of the opposite sex with their antennae. In many species, a gland between the eighth and ninth segments under the abdomen in the female produces the pheromones. Communication can also occur through stridulation, or producing sounds by rubbing various parts of the body together.

Moths are known to engage in acoustic forms of communication, most often as courtship, attracting mates using sound or vibration. Like most other insects, moths pick up these sounds using tympanic membranes in their abdomens. An example is that of the polka-dot wasp moth (&quot;Syntomeida epilais&quot;), which produces sounds with a frequency above that normally detectable by humans (about 20 kHz). These sounds also function as tactile communication, or communication through touch, as they stridulate, or vibrate a substrate like leaves and stems.

Most moths lack bright colors, as many species use coloration as camouflage, but butterflies engage in visual communication. Female cabbage butterflies, for example, use ultraviolet light to communicate, with scales colored in this range on the dorsal wing surface. When they fly, each down stroke of the wing creates a brief flash of ultraviolet light which the males apparently recognize as the flight signature of a potential mate. These flashes from the wings may attract several males that engage in aerial courtship displays.

== Ecology ==

Moths and butterflies are important in the natural ecosystem. They are integral participants in the food chain; having co-evolved with flowering plants and predators, lepidopteran species have formed a network of trophic relationships between autotrophs and heterotrophs, which are included in the stages of Lepidoptera larvae, pupae, and adults. Larvae and pupae are links in the diets of birds and parasitic entomophagous insects. The adults are included in food webs in a much broader range of consumers (including birds, small mammals, reptiles, etc.).

=== Defense and predation ===


Lepidopteran species are soft bodied, fragile, and almost defenseless, while the immature stages move slowly or are immobile, hence all stages are exposed to predation. Adult butterflies and moths are preyed upon by birds, bats, lizards, amphibians, dragonflies, and spiders. One spider species, &quot;Argiope argentata&quot;, eats butterflies and moths and exhibits a long bite when preying on them rather than wrapping them in silk first. This is theorized to serve as an immobilization tactic. Caterpillars and pupae fall prey not only to birds, but also to invertebrate predators and small mammals, as well as fungi and bacteria. Parasitoid and parasitic wasps and flies may lay eggs in the caterpillar, which eventually kill it as they hatch inside its body and eat its tissues. Insect-eating birds are probably the largest predators. Lepidoptera, especially the immature stages, are an ecologically important food to many insectivorous birds, such as the great tit in Europe.

An &quot;evolutionary arms race&quot; can be seen between predator and prey species. The Lepidoptera have developed a number of strategies for defense and protection, including evolution of morphological characters and changes in ecological lifestyles and behaviors. These include aposematism, mimicry, camouflage, and development of threat patterns and displays. Only a few birds, such as the nightjars, hunt nocturnal lepidopterans. Their main predators are bats. Again, an &quot;evolutionary race&quot; exists, which has led to numerous evolutionary adaptations of moths to escape from their main predators, such as the ability to hear ultrasonic sounds, or even to emit sounds in some cases. Lepidopteran eggs are also preyed upon. Some caterpillars, such as the zebra swallowtail butterfly larvae, are cannibalistic.

Some species of Lepidoptera are poisonous to predators, such as the monarch butterfly in the Americas, &quot;Atrophaneura&quot; species (roses, windmills, etc.) in Asia, as well as &quot;Papilio antimachus&quot;, and the birdwings, the largest butterflies in Africa and Asia, respectively. They obtain their toxicity by sequestering the chemicals from the plants they eat into their own tissues. Some Lepidoptera manufacture their own toxins. Predators that eat poisonous butterflies and moths may become sick and vomit violently, learning not to eat those species. A predator which has previously eaten a poisonous lepidopteran may avoid other species with similar markings in the future, thus saving many other species, as well. Toxic butterflies and larvae tend to develop bright colors and striking patterns as an indicator to predators about their toxicity. This phenomenon is known as aposematism. Some caterpillars, especially members of Papilionidae, contain an osmeterium, a Y-shaped protrusible gland found in the prothoracic segment of the larvae. When threatened, the caterpillar emits unpleasant smells from the organ to ward off the predators.

Camouflage is also an important defense strategy, which involves the use of coloration or shape to blend into the surrounding environment. Some lepidopteran species blend with their surroundings, making them difficult to spot by predators. Caterpillars can exhibit shades of green that match its host plant. Caterpillars have been demonstrated to be able to detect the color of their surroundings and substrate using organs on their feet. Some caterpillars look like inedible objects, such as twigs or leaves. For instance, the mourning cloak fades into the backdrop of trees when it folds its wings back. The larvae of some species, such as the common Mormon (&quot;Papilio polytes&quot;) and the western tiger swallowtail look like bird droppings. For example, adult Sesiidae species (also known as clearwing moths) have a general appearance sufficiently similar to a wasp or hornet to make it likely the moths gain a reduction in predation by Batesian mimicry. Eyespots are a type of automimicry used by some butterflies and moths. In butterflies, the spots are composed of concentric rings of scales in different colors. The proposed role of the eyespots is to deflect attention of predators. Their resemblance to eyes provokes the predator&#x27;s instinct to attack these wing patterns.

Batesian and Müllerian mimicry complexes are commonly found in Lepidoptera. Genetic polymorphism and natural selection give rise to otherwise edible species (the mimic) gaining a survival advantage by resembling inedible species (the model). Such a mimicry complex is referred to as Batesian and is most commonly known in the example between the limenitidine viceroy butterfly in relation to the inedible danaine monarch. The viceroy is, in fact, more toxic than the monarch and this resemblance should be considered as a case of Müllerian mimicry. In Müllerian mimicry, inedible species, usually within a taxonomic order, find it advantageous to resemble each other so as to reduce the sampling rate by predators that need to learn about the insects&#x27; inedibility. Taxa from the toxic genus &quot;Heliconius&quot; form one of the most well-known Müllerian complexes. The adults of the various species now resemble each other so well, the species cannot be distinguished without close morphological observation and, in some cases, dissection or genetic analysis.

Moths are able to hear the range emitted by bats, which in effect causes flying moths to make evasive maneuvers because bats are a main predator of moths. Ultrasonic frequencies trigger a reflex action in the noctuid moth that cause it to drop a few inches in its flight to evade attack. Tiger moths in a defense emit clicks within the same range of the bats, which interfere with the bats and foil their attempts to echolocate it.

=== Pollination ===

Most species of Lepidoptera engage in some form of entomophily (more specifically psychophily and phalaenophily for butterflies and moths, respectively), or the pollination of flowers. Most adult butterflies and moths feed on the nectar inside flowers, using their probosces to reach the nectar hidden at the base of the petals. In the process, the adults brush against the flowers&#x27; stamens, on which the reproductive pollen is made and stored. The pollen is transferred on appendages on the adults, which fly to the next flower to feed and unwittingly deposit the pollen on the stigma of the next flower, where the pollen germinates and fertilizes the seeds.

Flowers pollinated by butterflies tend to be large and flamboyant, pink or lavender in color, frequently having a landing area, and usually scented, as butterflies are typically day-flying. Since butterflies do not digest pollen (except for heliconid species,) more nectar is offered than pollen. The flowers have simple nectar guides, with the nectaries usually hidden in narrow tubes or spurs, reached by the long &quot;tongue&quot; of the butterflies. Butterflies such as &quot;Thymelicus flavus&quot; have been observed to engage in flower constancy, which means they are more likely to transfer pollen to other conspecific plants. This can be beneficial for the plants being pollinated, as flower constancy prevents the loss of pollen during different flights and the pollinators from clogging stigmas with pollen of other flower species.

Among the more important moth pollinator groups are the hawk moths of the family Sphingidae. Their behavior is similar to hummingbirds, i.e., using rapid wing beats to hover in front of flowers. Most hawk moths are nocturnal or crepuscular, so moth-pollinated flowers (e.g., &quot;Silene latifolia&quot; ) tend to be white, night-opening, large, and showy with tubular corollae and a strong, sweet scent produced in the evening, night, or early morning. A lot of nectar is produced to fuel the high metabolic rates needed to power their flight. Other moths (e.g., noctuids, geometrids, pyralids) fly slowly and settle on the flower. They do not require as much nectar as the fast-flying hawk moths, and the flowers tend to be small (though they may be aggregated in heads).

=== Mutualism ===

Mutualism is a form of biological interaction wherein each individual involved benefits in some way. An example of a mutualistic relationship would be that shared by yucca moths (Tegeculidae) and their host, yucca flowers (Asparagaceae). Female yucca moths enter the host flowers, collect the pollen into a ball using specialized maxillary palps, then move to the apex of the pistil, where pollen is deposited on the stigma, and lay eggs into the base of the pistil where seeds will develop. The larvae develop in the fruit pod and feed on a portion of the seeds. Thus, both insect and plant benefit, forming a highly mutualistic relationship. Another form of mutualism occurs between some larvae of butterflies and certain species of ants (e.g. Lycaenidae). The larvae communicate with the ants using vibrations transmitted through a substrate, such as the wood of a tree or stems, as well as using chemical signals. The ants provide some degree of protection to these larvae and they in turn gather honeydew secretions.

=== Parasitism ===

Only 42 species of parasitoid lepidopterans are known (1 Pyralidae; 40 Epipyropidae). The larvae of the greater and lesser wax moths feed on the honeycomb inside bee nests and may become pests; they are also found in bumblebee and wasp nests, albeit to a lesser extent. In northern Europe, the wax moth is regarded as the most serious parasitoid of the bumblebee and is found only in bumblebee nests. In some areas in southern England, as much as 80% of nests can be destroyed. Other parasitic larvae are known to prey upon cicadas and leaf hoppers.


In reverse, moths and butterflies may be subject to parasitic wasps and flies, which may lay eggs on the caterpillars, which hatch and feed inside its body, resulting in death. Although, in a form of parasitism called idiobiont, the adult paralyzes the host, so as not to kill it but for it to live as long as possible, for the parasitic larvae to benefit the most. In another form of parasitism, koinobiont, the species live off their hosts while inside (endoparasitic). These parasites live inside the host caterpillar throughout its life cycle or may affect it later on as an adult. In other orders, koinobionts include flies, a majority of coleopteran, and many hymenopteran parasitoids. Some species may be subject to a variety of parasites, such as the spongy moth (&quot;Lymantaria dispar&quot;), which is attacked by a series of 13 species, in six different taxa throughout its life cycle.

In response to a parasitoid egg or larva in the caterpillar&#x27;s body, the plasmatocytes, or simply the host&#x27;s cells can form a multilayered capsule that eventually causes the endoparasite to asphyxiate. The process, called encapsulation, is one of the caterpillar&#x27;s only means of defense against parasitoids.

=== Other biological interactions ===

A few species of Lepidoptera are secondary consumers, or predators. These species typically prey upon the eggs of other insects, aphids, scale insects, or ant larvae. Some caterpillars are cannibals, and others prey on caterpillars of other species (e.g. Hawaiian &quot;Eupithecia&quot; ). Those of the 15 species in &quot;Eupithecia&quot; that mirror inchworms, are the only known species of butterflies and moths that are ambush predators. Four species are known to eat snails. For example, the Hawaiian caterpillar (&quot;Hyposmocoma molluscivora&quot;) uses silk traps, in a manner similar to that of spiders, to capture certain species of snails (typically Tornatellides).

Larvae of some species of moths in the Tineidae, Gelechiidae, and Noctuidae, besides others, feed on detritus, or dead organic material, such as fallen leaves and fruit, fungi, and animal products, and turn it into humus. Well-known species include the cloth moths (&quot;Tineola bisselliella&quot;, &quot;Tinea pellionella&quot;, and &quot;Trichophaga tapetzella&quot;), which feed on detritus containing keratin, including hair, feathers, cobwebs, bird nests (particularly of domestic pigeons, &quot;Columba livia domestica&quot;) and fruits or vegetables. These species are important to ecosystems as they remove substances that would otherwise take a long time to decompose.

In 2015 it was reported that wasp bracovirus DNA was present in Lepidoptera such as monarch butterflies, silkworms and moths. These were described in some newspaper articles as examples of a naturally occurring genetically engineered insects.

== Evolution and systematics ==
=== History of study ===

Linnaeus in &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; (1758) recognized three divisions of the Lepidoptera: &quot;Papilio&quot;, &quot;Sphinx&quot; and &quot;Phalaena&quot;, with seven subgroups in &quot;Phalaena&quot;. These persist today as 9 of the superfamilies of Lepidoptera. Other works on classification followed including those by Michael Denis &amp; Ignaz Schiffermüller (1775), Johan Christian Fabricius (1775) and Pierre André Latreille (1796). Jacob Hübner described many genera, and the lepidopteran genera were catalogued by Ferdinand Ochsenheimer and Georg Friedrich Treitschke in a series of volumes on the lepidopteran fauna of Europe published between 1807 and 1835. Gottlieb August Wilhelm Herrich-Schäffer (several volumes, 1843–1856), and Edward Meyrick (1895) based their classifications primarily on wing venation. Sir George Francis Hampson worked on the microlepidoptera during this period and Philipp Christoph Zeller published &quot;The Natural History of the Tineinae&quot; also on microlepidoptera (1855).

Among the first entomologists to study fossil insects and their evolution was Samuel Hubbard Scudder (1837–1911), who worked on butterflies. He published a study of the Florissant deposits of Colorado, including the exceptionally preserved &quot;Prodryas persephone&quot;. Andreas V. Martynov (1879–1938) recognized the close relationship between Lepidoptera and Trichoptera in his studies on phylogeny.

Major contributions in the 20th century included the creation of the monotrysia and ditrysia (based on female genital structure) by Borner in 1925 and 1939. Willi Hennig (1913–1976) developed the cladistic methodology and applied it to insect phylogeny. Niels P. Kristensen, E. S. Nielsen and D. R. Davis studied the relationships among monotrysian families and Kristensen worked more generally on insect phylogeny and higher Lepidoptera too. While it is often found that DNA-based phylogenies differ from those based on morphology, this has not been the case for the Lepidoptera; DNA phylogenies correspond to a large extent to morphology-based phylogenies.

Many attempts have been made to group the superfamilies of the Lepidoptera into natural groups, most of which fail because one of the two groups is not monophyletic: Microlepidoptera and Macrolepidoptera, Heterocera and Rhopalocera, Jugatae and Frenatae, Monotrysia and Ditrysia.

A 2024 genetic study found that the genomes of butterflies and moths have remained largely unchanged over the past 250 million years.

=== Fossil record ===
The fossil record for Lepidoptera is lacking in comparison to other winged species and tends not to be as common as some other insects in habitats that are most conducive to fossilization, such as lakes and ponds; their juvenile stage has only the head capsule as a hard part that might be preserved. Also, the scales covering their wings are hydrophobic and prevents their body from sinking when they end up on the water&#x27;s surface. Lepidopteran bodies tend to come apart after death, and decompose quickly, so fossil remains are often extremely fragmentary. Of the fossils known, only an estimated 7% have been described. The location and abundance of the most common moth species are indicative that mass migrations of moths occurred over the Palaeogene North Sea, which is why there is a serious lack of moth fossils. Yet there are fossils, some preserved in amber and some in very fine sediments. Leaf mines are also seen in fossil leaves, although the interpretation of them is tricky.

Putative fossil stem group representatives of Amphiesmenoptera (the clade comprising Trichoptera and Lepidoptera) are known from the Triassic. The earliest known lepidopteran fossils are fossilized scales from the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. They were found as rare palynological elements in the sediments of the Triassic-Jurassic boundary from the cored Schandelah-1 well, drilled near Braunschweig in northern Germany. This pushes back the fossil record and origin of glossatan lepidopterans by about 70 million years, supporting molecular estimates of a Norian (ca 212 million years) divergence of glossatan and non-glossatan lepidopterans. The findings were reported in 2018 in the journal &quot;Science Advances&quot;. The authors of the study proposed that lepidopterans evolved a proboscis as an adaptation to drink from droplets and thin films of water for maintaining their fluid balance in the hot and arid climate of the Triassic.

The earliest named lepidopteran taxon is &quot;Archaeolepis mane&quot;, a primitive moth-like species from the Early Jurassic, dated back to around , and known only from three wings found in the Charmouth Mudstone of Dorset, UK. The wings show scales with parallel grooves under a scanning electron microscope and a characteristic wing venation pattern shared with Trichoptera (caddisflies). Only two more sets of Jurassic lepidopteran fossils have been found, as well as 13 sets from the Cretaceous, which all belong to primitive moth-like families.

Many more fossils are found from the Tertiary, and particularly the Eocene Baltic amber. The oldest genuine butterflies of the superfamily Papilionoidea have been found in the Paleocene MoClay or Fur Formation of Denmark. The best preserved fossil lepidopteran is the Eocene &quot;Prodryas persephone&quot; from the Florissant Fossil Beds.

=== Phylogeny ===

Lepidoptera and Trichoptera (caddisflies) are sister groups, sharing many similarities that are lacking in others; for example the females of both orders are heterogametic, meaning they have two different sex chromosomes, whereas in most species the males are heterogametic and the females have two identical sex chromosomes. The adults in both orders display a particular wing venation pattern on their forewings. The larvae in the two orders have mouth structures and glands with which they make and manipulate silk. Willi Hennig grouped the two orders into the superorder Amphiesmenoptera; together they are sister to the extinct order Tarachoptera. Lepidoptera descend from a diurnal moth-like common ancestor that either fed on dead or living plants.

The cladogram, based on molecular analysis, shows the order as a clade, sister to the Trichoptera, and more distantly related to the Diptera (true flies) and Mecoptera (scorpionflies).

The internal phylogeny of Lepidoptera is still being resolved. While many large clades have been established, interfamilial and superfamilial relationships are poorly understood. A large scale study by Regier et al. attempts to resolve these relationships using three different analysis methods, which is shown in the following cladogram.

Micropterigidae, Agathiphagidae and Heterobathmiidae are the oldest and most basal lineages of Lepidoptera. The adults of these families do not have the curled tongue or proboscis, that are found in most members of the order, but instead have chewing mandibles adapted for a special diet. Micropterigidae larvae feed on leaves, fungi, or liverworts (much like the Trichoptera). Adult Micropterigidae chew the pollen or spores of ferns. In the Agathiphagidae, larvae live inside kauri pines and feed on seeds. In Heterobathmiidae the larvae feed on the leaves of &quot;Nothofagus&quot;, the southern beech tree. These families also have mandibles in the pupal stage, which help the pupa emerge from the seed or cocoon after metamorphosis.

The Eriocraniidae have a short coiled proboscis in the adult stage, and though they retain their pupal mandibles with which they escaped the cocoon, their mandibles are non-functional thereafter. Most of these non-ditrysian families, are primarily leaf miners in the larval stage. In addition to the proboscis, there is a change in the scales among these basal lineages, with later lineages showing more complex perforated scales.

With the evolution of the Ditrysia in the mid-Cretaceous, there was a major reproductive change. The Ditrysia, which comprise 98% of the Lepidoptera, have two separate openings for reproduction in the females (as well as a third opening for excretion), one for mating, and one for laying eggs. The two are linked internally by a seminal duct. (In more basal lineages there is one cloaca, or later, two openings and an external sperm canal.) Of the early lineages of Ditrysia, Gracillarioidea and Gelechioidea are mostly leaf miners, but more recent lineages feed externally. In the Tineoidea, most species feed on plant and animal detritus and fungi, and build shelters in the larval stage.

The Yponomeutoidea is the first group to have significant numbers of species whose larvae feed on herbaceous plants, as opposed to woody plants. They evolved about the time that flowering plants underwent an expansive adaptive radiation in the mid-Cretaceous, and the Gelechioidea that evolved at this time also have great diversity. Whether the processes involved coevolution or sequential evolution, the diversity of the Lepidoptera and the angiosperms increased together.

In the so-called &quot;macrolepidoptera&quot;, which constitutes about 60% of lepidopteran species, there was a general increase in size, better flying ability (via changes in wing shape and linkage of the forewings and hindwings), reduction in the adult mandibles, and a change in the arrangement of the crochets (hooks) on the larval prolegs, perhaps to improve the grip on the host plant. Many also have tympanal organs, that allow them to hear. These organs evolved eight times, at least, because they occur on different body parts and have structural differences.
The main lineages in the macrolepidoptera are the Noctuoidea, Bombycoidea, Lasiocampidae, Mimallonoidea, Geometroidea and Rhopalocera. Bombycoidea plus Lasiocampidae plus Mimallonoidea may be a monophyletic group. The Rhopalocera, comprising the Papilionoidea (butterflies), Hesperioidea (skippers), and the Hedyloidea (moth-butterflies), are the most recently evolved. There is quite a good fossil record for this group, with the oldest skipper dating from .

=== Taxonomy ===
Taxonomy is the classification of species in selected taxa, the process of naming being called nomenclature. There are over 120 families in Lepidoptera, in 45 to 48 superfamilies. Lepidoptera have always been, historically, classified in five suborders, one of which is of primitive moths that never lost the morphological features of their ancestors. The rest of the moths and butterflies make up ninety-eight percent of the other taxa, making Ditrysia. More recently, findings of new taxa, larvae and pupa have aided in detailing the relationships of primitive taxa, phylogenetic analysis showing the primitive lineages to be paraphyletic compared to the rest of Lepidoptera lineages. Recently, lepidopterists have abandoned clades like suborders, and those between orders and superfamilies.

* Zeugloptera is a clade with Micropterigoidea being its only superfamily, containing the single family Micropterigidae. Species of Micropterigoidea are practically living fossils, being one of the most primitive lepidopteran groups, still retaining chewing mouthparts (mandibles) in adults, unlike other clades of butterflies and moths. About 120 species are known worldwide, with more than half the species in the genus &quot;Micropterix&quot; in the Palearctic region. There are only two known in North America (&quot;Epimartyria&quot;), with many more being found in Asia and the southwest Pacific, particularly New Zealand with about 50 species.
* Aglossata is the second most primitive lineage of Lepidoptera; being first described in 1952 by Lionel Jack Dumbleton. Agathiphagidae is the only family in Aglossata and contains two species in its only genus, &quot;Agathiphaga&quot;. &quot;Agathiphaga queenslandensis&quot; and &quot;Agathiphaga vitiensis&quot; are found along the north-eastern coast of Queensland, Australia, and in Fiji to Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands, respectively.
* Heterobathmiina was first described by Kristensen and Nielsen in 1979. Heterobathmiidae is the only family and includes about 10 species, which are day-flying, metallic moths, confined to southern South America, the adults eat the pollen of &quot;Nothofagus&quot; or southern beech and the larvae mine the leaves.
* Glossata contains a majority of the species, with the most obvious difference being non-functioning mandibles, and elongated maxillary galeae or the proboscis. The basal clades still retaining some of the ancestral features of the wings such as similarly shaped fore- and hindwings with relatively complete venation. Glossata also contains the division Ditrysia, which contains 98% of all described species in Lepidoptera.

== Relationship to people ==

=== Culture ===

Artistic depictions of butterflies have been used in many cultures including as early as 3500 years ago, in Egyptian hieroglyphs. Today, butterflies are widely used in various objects of art and jewelry: mounted in frames, embedded in resin, displayed in bottles, laminated in paper, and in some mixed media artworks and furnishings. Butterflies have also inspired the &quot;butterfly fairy&quot; as an art and fictional character.

In many cultures the soul of a dead person is associated with the butterfly, for example in Ancient Greece, where the word for butterfly (psyche) also means &quot;soul&quot; and &quot;breath&quot;. In Latin, as in Ancient Greece, the word for &quot;butterfly&quot; was associated with the soul of the dead. The skull-like marking on the thorax of the death&#x27;s-head hawkmoth has helped these moths, particularly &quot;A. atropos&quot;, earn a negative reputation, such as associations with the supernatural and evil. The moth has been prominently featured in art and movies such as &quot;&quot; (by Buñuel and Dalí) and &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot;, and in the artwork of the Japanese metal band Sigh&#x27;s album &quot;Hail Horror Hail&quot;. According to &quot;&quot;, by Lafcadio Hearn, a butterfly was seen in Japan as the personification of a person&#x27;s soul; whether they be living, dying, or already dead. One Japanese superstition says that if a butterfly enters your guestroom and perches behind the bamboo screen, the person whom you most love is coming to see you. However, large numbers of butterflies are viewed as bad omens. When Taira no Masakado was secretly preparing for his famous revolt, there appeared in Kyoto so vast a swarm of butterflies that the people were frightened—thinking the apparition to be a portent of coming evil.

In the ancient Mesoamerican city of Teotihuacan, the brilliantly colored image of the butterfly was carved into many temples, buildings, jewelry, and emblazoned on incense burners in particular. The butterfly was sometimes depicted with the maw of a jaguar and some species were considered to be the reincarnations of the souls of dead warriors. The close association of butterflies to fire and warfare persisted through to the Aztec civilization and evidence of similar jaguar-butterfly images has been found among the Zapotec, and Maya civilizations.

=== Pests ===

The larvae of many lepidopteran species are major pests in agriculture. Some of the major pests include Tortricidae, Noctuidae, and Pyralidae. The larvae of the Noctuidae genus &quot;Spodoptera&quot; (armyworms), &quot;Helicoverpa&quot; (corn earworm), or &quot;Pieris brassicae&quot; can cause extensive damage to certain crops. &quot;Helicoverpa zea&quot; larvae (cotton bollworms or tomato fruitworms) are polyphagous, meaning they eat a variety of crops, including tomatoes and cotton. &quot;Peridroma saucia&quot; (variegated cutworms) are described as one of the most damaging pests to gardens, with the ability to destroy entire gardens and fields in a matter of days.

Butterflies and moths are one of the largest taxa to solely feed and be dependent on living plants, in terms of the number of species, and they are in many ecosystems, making up the largest biomass to do so. In many species, the female may produce anywhere from 200 to 600 eggs, while in some others it may go as high as 30,000 eggs in one day. This can create many problems for agriculture, where many caterpillars can affect acres of vegetation. Some reports estimate that there have been over 80,000 caterpillars of several different taxa feeding on a single oak tree. In some cases, phytophagous larvae can lead to the destruction of entire trees in relatively short periods of time.

Ecological ways of removing pest Lepidoptera species are becoming more economically viable, as research has shown ways like introducing parasitic wasps and flies. For example, &quot;Sarcophaga aldrichi&quot;, a fly which deposited larvae feed upon the pupae of the forest tent caterpillar moth. Pesticides can affect other species other than the species they are targeted to eliminate, damaging the natural ecosystem. Another good biological pest control method is the use of pheromone traps. A pheromone trap is a type of insect trap that uses pheromones to lure insects. Sex pheromones and aggregating pheromones are the most common types used. A pheromone-impregnated lure is encased in a conventional trap such as a Delta trap, water-pan trap, or funnel trap.

Species of moths that are detritivores would naturally eat detritus containing keratin, such as hairs or feathers. Well known species are cloth moths (&quot;T. bisselliella&quot;, &quot;T. pellionella&quot;, and &quot;T. tapetzella&quot;), feeding on foodstuffs that people find economically important, such as cotton, linen, silk and wool fabrics as well as furs; furthermore they have been found on shed feathers and hair, bran, semolina and flour (possibly preferring wheat flour), biscuits, casein, and insect specimens in museums.

=== Beneficial insects ===

Even though some butterflies and moths affect the economy negatively, many species are a valuable economic resource. The most prominent example is that of the domesticated silkworm moth (&quot;Bombyx mori&quot;), the larvae of which make their cocoons out of silk, which can be spun into cloth. Silk is and has been an important economic resource throughout history. The species &quot;Bombyx mori&quot; has been domesticated to the point where it is completely dependent on mankind for survival. A number of wild moths such as &quot;Bombyx mandarina&quot;, and &quot;Antheraea&quot; species, besides others, provide commercially important silks.

The preference of the larvae of most lepidopteran species to feed on a single species or limited range of plants is used as a mechanism for biological control of weeds in place of herbicides. The pyralid cactus moth was introduced from Argentina to Australia, where it successfully suppressed millions of acres of prickly pear cactus. Another species of the Pyralidae, called the alligator weed stem borer (&quot;Arcola malloi&quot;), was used to control the aquatic plant known as alligator weed (&quot;Alternanthera philoxeroides&quot;) in conjunction with the alligator weed flea beetle; in this case, the two insects work in synergy and the weed rarely recovers.

Breeding butterflies and moths, or butterfly gardening/rearing, has become an ecologically viable process of introducing species into the ecosystem to benefit it. Butterfly ranching in Papua New Guinea permits nationals of that country to &quot;farm&quot; economically valuable insect species for the collectors market in an ecologically sustainable manner.

=== Food ===

Lepidoptera feature prominently in entomophagy as food items on almost every continent. While in most cases, adults, larvae or pupae are eaten as staples by indigenous people, beondegi or silkworm pupae are eaten as a snack in Korean cuisine while Maguey worm is considered a delicacy in Mexico. In some parts of Huasteca, the silk nests of the Madrone butterfly are maintained on the edge of roof tops of houses for consumption. In the Carnia region of Italy, children catch and eat ingluvies of the toxic &quot;Zygaena&quot; moths in early summer. The ingluvies, despite having a very low cyanogenic content, serve as a convenient, supplementary source of sugar to the children who can include this resource as a seasonal delicacy at minimum risk. Outside of this instance, adult Lepidoptera are rarely consumed by humans, with the sole exception of the Bogong moth.

=== Health ===

Some larvae of both moths and butterflies have a form of hair that has been known to be a cause of human health problems. Caterpillar hairs sometimes have toxins in them and species from approximately 12 families of moths or butterflies worldwide can inflict serious human injuries (urticarial dermatitis and atopic asthma to osteochondritis, consumption coagulopathy, renal failure, and intracerebral hemorrhage). Skin rashes are the most common, but there have been fatalities. &quot;Lonomia&quot; is a frequent cause of envenomation in humans in Brazil, with 354 cases reported between 1989 and 2005. Lethality ranging up to 20% with death caused most often by intracranial hemorrhage.

These hairs have also been known to cause keratoconjunctivitis. The sharp barbs on the end of caterpillar hairs can get lodged in soft tissues and mucous membranes such as the eyes. Once they enter such tissues, they can be difficult to extract, often exacerbating the problem as they migrate across the membrane. This becomes a particular problem in an indoor setting. The hairs easily enter buildings through ventilation systems and accumulate in indoor environments because of their small size, which makes it difficult for them to be vented out. This accumulation increases the risk of human contact in indoor environments.

== See also ==

* Lepidoptera in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae
* McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity, University of Florida
* Societas Europaea Lepidopterologica

=== Lists ===
* Lists of Lepidoptera by region
* Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Kristensen, N. P. (ed.) 1999. Lepidoptera, Moths and Butterflies. Volume 1: Evolution, Systematics, and Biogeography. &quot;Handbuch der Zoologie. Eine Naturgeschichte der Stämme des Tierreiches / Handbook of Zoology. A Natural History of the phyla of the Animal Kingdom&quot;. Band / Volume IV Arthropoda: Insecta Teilband / Part 35: 491 pp. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York.
* Nye, I. W. B. &amp; Fletcher, D. S. 1991. &quot;Generic Names of Moths of the World.&quot; Volume 6: xxix + 368 pp. Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History), London.
* O&#x27;Toole, Christopher. 2002. &quot;Firefly Encyclopedia of Insects and Spiders&quot;. .
; Bibliography

== External links ==


* Natural History Museum archived database of host plants
* Historic Moth illustrations
* Lepidoptera at Insects (Insecta) of the World
* Caught Between the Pages: Treasures from the Franclemont Collection Online virtual exhibit featuring a selection of historic entomological writings and images from the Comstock Library of Entomology at Cornell University
; Regional sites
* British Butterflies and Moths
* Butterflies of Bulgaria 
* Butterflies of Canada
* Photography of European Butterflies and Moths
* Lepidoptera of French Antilles
* Butterflies of India
* A Check List of Butterflies in Indo-China
* Moths of Jamaica
* Japmoth Japanese moths. Access images via the numbers on the left.
* Butterflies and Moths in the Netherlands 
* Butterflies and Moths of Northern Ireland 
* Butterflies of Asian Russia 
* Photos of Larvae and Pupae butterflies and moths. Spain 
* Butterflies of Asturias – Spain
* Swedish Moths and Butterflies Lepidoptera (English)
* Butterflies of Turkey</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="0" end="11" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="19" end="32" title="Lepidoptera" label="lepidopterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="39" end="44" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q22708" start="48" end="61" title="winged insect" label="winged insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="78" end="89" title="butterflies" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="94" end="98" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="115" end="122" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="282" end="292" title="Coleoptera" label="Coleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="303" end="311" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="319" end="332" title="Taxonomic rank" label="superfamilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188488" start="531" end="536" title="scale (anatomy)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q160695" start="553" end="559" title="torso" label="bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="578" end="583" title="Insect wing" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q899348" start="591" end="600" title="proboscis" label="proboscis"/>
<link wikidata="Q426656" start="605" end="611" title="siphon" label="siphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="615" end="621" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q228395" start="865" end="871" title="Mating" label="Mating"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="948" end="953" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048559" start="1007" end="1021" title="holometabolous" label="holometabolous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048559" start="1044" end="1066" title="complete metamorphosis" label="complete metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="1099" end="1110" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q811126" start="1323" end="1329" title="proleg" label="proleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="1421" end="1427" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1476" end="1480" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="1529" end="1533" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1544" end="1550" title="cocoon (silk)" label="cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1660" end="1669" title="chrysalis" label="chrysalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="1846" end="1854" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="1855" end="1863" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="1882" end="1890" title="coevolve" label="coevolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="1897" end="1912" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184701" start="1924" end="1939" title="Cretaceous Terrestrial Revolution" label="angiosperm boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="1947" end="1953" title="Middle Cretaceous" label="Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="1954" end="1969" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="2263" end="2273" title="Coleoptera" label="Coleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="2285" end="2292" title="Diptera" label="Diptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="2302" end="2313" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="2315" end="2318" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="2321" end="2324" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="2327" end="2331" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q615290" start="2337" end="2345" title="sawflies" label="sawflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q26371" start="2351" end="2360" title="Hemiptera" label="Hemiptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="2362" end="2368" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="2371" end="2376" title="aphid" label="aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184616" start="2538" end="2549" title="Trichoptera" label="Trichoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442870" start="2852" end="2865" title="lepidopterist" label="lepidopterist"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="2901" end="2912" title="herbivorous" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q617573" start="2914" end="2924" title="folivorous" label="folivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q120880" start="2946" end="2959" title="nectarivorous" label="nectarivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="3027" end="3037" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3052" end="3068" title="consumer (food chain)#Levels of the food chain" label="primary consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="3077" end="3087" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="3246" end="3253" title="foliage" label="foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="3618" end="3622" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="3647" end="3660" title="pest control" label="extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="3664" end="3668" title="pest (organism)" label="pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3736" end="3749" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54555934" start="3763" end="3776" title="Fauna Svecica" label="Fauna Svecica"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3809" end="3814" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="3817" end="3821" title="Genitive case" label="gen."/>
<link wikidata="Q7429713" start="3829" end="3834" title="scale (insect anatomy)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="3886" end="3897" title="Rhopalocera" label="Rhopalocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="3914" end="3919" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="4089" end="4096" title="antenna (biology)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4224" end="4231" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4255" end="4266" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="4480" end="4490" title="Heterocera" label="Heterocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="4511" end="4515" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378612" start="4606" end="4626" title="Northumbrian dialect" label="Northumbrian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="4665" end="4674" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="4683" end="4688" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4700" end="4706" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q853811" start="4819" end="4825" title="maggot" label="maggot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234359" start="4858" end="4863" title="midge" label="midge"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="5125" end="5139" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="5170" end="5186" title="Old French" label="Old North French"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="5381" end="5391" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="5584" end="5599" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365624" start="5697" end="5716" title="Parnassius arcticus" label="Parnassius arcticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="5777" end="5784" title="Yakutia" label="Yakutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="5828" end="5837" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365628" start="5876" end="5894" title="Parnassius epaphus" label="Parnassius epaphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="6002" end="6011" title="symbiotic" label="symbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="6013" end="6021" title="Commensalism" label="phoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="6026" end="6035" title="parasitic" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320011" start="6112" end="6124" title="Coprophagous" label="Coprophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q248425" start="6125" end="6132" title="Pyralidae" label="pyralid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541431" start="6154" end="6164" title="sloth moth" label="sloth moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955263" start="6181" end="6202" title="Bradipodicola hahneli" label="Bradipodicola hahneli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191051" start="6219" end="6237" title="Cryptoses choloepi" label="Cryptoses choloepi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="6314" end="6319" title="sloth" label="sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="6339" end="6346" title="Central America" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="6351" end="6364" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955436" start="6387" end="6392" title="Tinea (moth)" label="Tinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069186" start="6515" end="6526" title="Zenodochium" label="Zenodochium"/>
<link wikidata="Q209602" start="6577" end="6583" title="coccid" label="coccid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383821" start="6590" end="6596" title="Kermes (insect)" label="Kermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q232936" start="6842" end="6850" title="Skipper (butterfly)" label="skippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q944816" start="7253" end="7266" title="biogeographic realm" label="faunal region"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="7395" end="7417" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="7435" end="7469" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429713" start="7633" end="7638" title="scale (Lepidoptera)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="7705" end="7710" title="Insect wing" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178801" start="7752" end="7768" title="microlepidoptera" label="microlepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q932602" start="7864" end="7895" title="Queen Alexandra&amp;#x27;s birdwing" label="Queen Alexandra&amp;#x27;s birdwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167435" start="7900" end="7910" title="Atlas moth" label="Atlas moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="7947" end="7957" title="Biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="7959" end="7962" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="7964" end="7969" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="7973" end="7984" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="7986" end="7990" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="7994" end="8003" title="chrysalis" label="chrysalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="8009" end="8033" title="imago" label="imago (plural: imagines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q590175" start="8308" end="8319" title="sclerite" label="sclerotized"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="8344" end="8356" title="compound eye" label="compound eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="8879" end="8895" title="Galea (insects)" label="maxillary galeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q899348" start="8931" end="8940" title="proboscis" label="proboscis"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="9125" end="9130" title="basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="9148" end="9156" title="mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q280818" start="9232" end="9247" title="Micropterigidae" label="Micropterigidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="9269" end="9280" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="9372" end="9382" title="Insect mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="9409" end="9417" title="mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q621054" start="9529" end="9538" title="spinneret" label="spinneret"/>
<link wikidata="Q123439" start="9724" end="9733" title="prothorax" label="prothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118266" start="9735" end="9745" title="mesothorax" label="mesothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925178" start="9751" end="9761" title="metathorax" label="metathorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q156449" start="9878" end="9889" title="Nymphalidae" label="Nymphalidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118266" start="10368" end="10378" title="mesothorax" label="mesothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925178" start="10383" end="10393" title="metathorax" label="metathorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q133240" start="10884" end="10894" title="Noctuoidea" label="Noctuoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784041" start="10931" end="10956" title="Tympanal organ" label="tympanal or hearing organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="11372" end="11376" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527674" start="11728" end="11737" title="Lepidoptera genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35413" start="11860" end="11865" title="valva" label="valva"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600878" start="12061" end="12071" title="copulation (zoology)" label="copulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q868460" start="12082" end="12092" title="ovipositor" label="ovipositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45559" start="12548" end="12559" title="Geometridae" label="Geometridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314900" start="12750" end="12760" title="Prodoxidae" label="Prodoxidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q244254" start="12765" end="12777" title="Nepticulidae" label="Nepticulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247568" start="12975" end="12982" title="lamella (anatomy)" label="lamella"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="13211" end="13218" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664774" start="13244" end="13265" title="structural coloration" label="structural coloration"/>
<link wikidata="Q900150" start="13295" end="13311" title="photonic crystal" label="photonic crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q653294" start="13317" end="13336" title="diffraction grating" label="diffraction grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="13399" end="13409" title="pheromones" label="pheromones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422039" start="13411" end="13424" title="androconia" label="in males only"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455898" start="13523" end="13531" title="patterns in nature" label="patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="13588" end="13598" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="13602" end="13609" title="mimicry" label="mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="13674" end="13689" title="sexual selection" label="potential mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527674" start="13751" end="13795" title="Lepidoptera genitalia" label="reproductive system of butterflies and moths"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="13806" end="13815" title="genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140739" start="14141" end="14152" title="Hepialoidea" label="Hepialoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17592189" start="14157" end="14172" title="Mnesarchaeoidea" label="Mnesarchaeoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="14752" end="14768" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q24787912" start="14795" end="14821" title="prothoracicotropic hormone" label="prothoracicotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14865" end="14873" title="#Diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081643" start="14903" end="14917" title="corpora allata" label="corpora allata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037231" start="14922" end="14938" title="corpus cardiacum" label="corpora cardiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649" start="15252" end="15268" title="digestive system" label="digestive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="15436" end="15445" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="15663" end="15674" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q813622" start="15902" end="15913" title="goblet cell" label="goblet cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="16031" end="16040" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q135289" start="16259" end="16268" title="luna moth" label="luna moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="16443" end="16461" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="16463" end="16472" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="16530" end="16546" title="thermoregulation" label="thermoregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="16833" end="16840" title="Invertebrate trachea" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="17021" end="17039" title="respiratory system" label="respiratory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="17618" end="17635" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17685" end="17710" title="geographical polymorphism" label="geographical polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17777" end="17798" title="seasonal polymorphism" label="seasonal polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770571" start="17802" end="17813" title="polyphenism" label="polyphenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="17933" end="17940" title="mimicry" label="mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="18284" end="18289" title="trait (biology)" label="trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q156449" start="18452" end="18463" title="Nymphalidae" label="Nymphalidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41559" start="18468" end="18476" title="Pieridae" label="Pieridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768465" start="18540" end="18553" title="Eurema hecabe" label="Eurema hecabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="18835" end="18851" title="Biston betularia" label="Biston betularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324092" start="18988" end="19005" title="Limenitis procris" label="Limenitis procris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41633" start="19173" end="19189" title="Apollo butterfly" label="Apollo butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="19841" end="19851" title="Lycaenidae" label="Lycaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41559" start="19853" end="19861" title="Pieridae" label="Pieridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156449" start="19887" end="19898" title="Nymphalidae" label="Nymphalidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q59905" start="20228" end="20240" title="Papilionidae" label="Papilionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q844816" start="20404" end="20413" title="Psychidae" label="Psychidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048559" start="20647" end="20661" title="holometabolism" label="holometabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="20742" end="20745" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="20749" end="20754" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="20758" end="20762" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="20771" end="20776" title="imago" label="imago"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="20818" end="20829" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="20887" end="20893" title="cocoon (silk)" label="cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="20948" end="20959" title="chrysalides" label="chrysalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q913288" start="21069" end="21077" title="diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="21208" end="21216" title="eclosion" label="eclosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="21581" end="21588" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="21707" end="21716" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508953" start="21901" end="21919" title="Syntomeida epilais" label="Syntomeida epilais"/>
<link wikidata="Q946680" start="22009" end="22018" title="voltinism" label="voltinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="22095" end="22112" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q913288" start="22394" end="22402" title="diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="22936" end="22945" title="oviparous" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="23019" end="23032" title="ovoviviparity" label="ovoviviparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="23062" end="23065" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q580250" start="23247" end="23255" title="hepialid" label="hepialid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156449" start="23266" end="23276" title="Nymphalidae" label="nymphalids"/>
<link wikidata="Q22328086" start="23919" end="23926" title="chorion" label="chorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="23963" end="23966" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q15946058" start="24038" end="24048" title="micropyle (zoology)" label="micropyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="24369" end="24385" title="temperate region" label="temperate region"/>
<link wikidata="Q913288" start="24399" end="24407" title="diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q503989" start="24598" end="24615" title="Nymphalis antiopa" label="Nymphalis antiopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="24961" end="24983" title="Mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandibles (mouthparts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q811126" start="25120" end="25126" title="proleg" label="proleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="25255" end="25264" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="25281" end="25290" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="25334" end="25345" title="detritivore" label="detritivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945889" start="25609" end="25629" title="Tineola bisselliella" label="Tineola bisselliella"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="25729" end="25737" title="lycaenid" label="lycaenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047011" start="25760" end="25776" title="Phengaris rebeli" label="Phengaris rebeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="25787" end="25803" title="social parasitism (biology)" label="social parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q134468" start="25813" end="25820" title="Myrmica" label="Myrmica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45559" start="25851" end="25862" title="Geometridae" label="Geometridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="25868" end="25874" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763490" start="26120" end="26143" title="Gynaephora groenlandica" label="Gynaephora groenlandica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="26295" end="26302" title="ecdysis" label="ecdysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="26333" end="26339" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034398" start="26665" end="26674" title="osmeteria" label="osmeteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q59905" start="26683" end="26695" title="Papilionidae" label="Papilionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="27954" end="27962" title="Invertebrate trachea" label="tracheae"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="28187" end="28196" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q139085" start="28655" end="28663" title="ecdysone" label="ecdysone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="28734" end="28738" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="29167" end="29172" title="imago" label="imago"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="29298" end="29305" title="antenna (biology)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="29308" end="29317" title="Insect mouthparts" label="mouthpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q60520157" start="29770" end="29790" title="Mexican jumping bean" label="Mexican jumping bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714227" start="29803" end="29818" title="Cydia saltitans" label="Cydia saltitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220377" start="29893" end="29904" title="Sebastiania" label="Sebastiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="30077" end="30087" title="parasitoid" label="parasitoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q280818" start="30604" end="30620" title="Micropterigoidea" label="Micropterigoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="31176" end="31187" title="Terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q149469" start="31205" end="31217" title="Acentropinae" label="Acentropinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132980" start="31219" end="31228" title="Crambidae" label="Crambidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="31240" end="31247" title="Aquatic animal" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068481" start="31342" end="31350" title="Erebidae" label="Erebidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q244254" start="31352" end="31364" title="Nepticulidae" label="Nepticulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134107" start="31366" end="31381" title="Cosmopterigidae" label="Cosmopterigidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="31383" end="31394" title="Tortricidae" label="Tortricidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="31396" end="31409" title="Olethreutidae" label="Olethreutidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q459180" start="31411" end="31420" title="Noctuidae" label="Noctuidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q838122" start="31422" end="31430" title="Cossidae" label="Cossidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157683" start="31436" end="31446" title="Sphingidae" label="Sphingidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31462" end="31473" title=":wikt:semi-aquatic" label="semiaquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27653" start="31518" end="31530" title="Pieris rapae" label="Pieris rapae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712037" start="33261" end="33274" title="southern dart" label="southern dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q157683" start="33590" end="33599" title="hawk moth" label="hawk moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086918" start="33733" end="33743" title="Animal navigation" label="Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="33946" end="33961" title="polarized light" label="polarized light"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="34614" end="34641" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q771090" start="34673" end="34687" title="heart and dart" label="heart and dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q839039" start="34751" end="34759" title="silver Y" label="silver Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348055" start="34936" end="34952" title="Aphrissa statira" label="Aphrissa statira"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="34962" end="34968" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="35191" end="35211" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835446" start="35219" end="35241" title="transverse orientation" label="transverse orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="35331" end="35335" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="35597" end="35604" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q655405" start="36142" end="36151" title="Mach band" label="Mach band"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="36385" end="36391" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q503989" start="36602" end="36616" title="mourning cloak" label="mourning cloak"/>
<link wikidata="Q158603" start="36618" end="36630" title="painted lady" label="painted lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590841" start="36632" end="36645" title="American lady" label="American lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q156454" start="36647" end="36658" title="Vanessa atalanta" label="red admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257151" start="36668" end="36682" title="common buckeye" label="common buckeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q285592" start="36746" end="36757" title="bogong moth" label="bogong moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212398" start="36833" end="36850" title="monarch butterfly" label="monarch butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q427688" start="37011" end="37018" title="Danainae" label="danaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="37091" end="37099" title="monsoons" label="monsoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815107" start="37281" end="37289" title="Uraniidae" label="uraniids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539681" start="37297" end="37311" title="Urania fulgens" label="Urania fulgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="37426" end="37435" title="Neotropic" label="Neotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="37441" end="37451" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="37456" end="37462" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508953" start="38431" end="38450" title="polka-dot wasp moth" label="polka-dot wasp moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="38798" end="38808" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q96476582" start="38865" end="38884" title="cabbage butterfly" label="cabbage butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="39494" end="39501" title="Trophic level" label="trophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="39524" end="39533" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="39539" end="39550" title="heterotroph" label="heterotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046284" start="39691" end="39704" title="entomophagous" label="entomophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="40029" end="40038" title="predation" label="predation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="40087" end="40091" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="40094" end="40097" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="40100" end="40106" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="40109" end="40118" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="40121" end="40132" title="dragonflies" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="40138" end="40144" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q138440" start="40173" end="40190" title="Argiope argentata" label="Argiope argentata"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="40505" end="40515" title="Parasitoid" label="Parasitoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="40520" end="40529" title="parasitic" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="40540" end="40545" title="flies" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25485" start="40832" end="40841" title="great tit" label="great tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702288" start="40863" end="40885" title="evolutionary arms race" label="evolutionary arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q619751" start="41135" end="41146" title="aposematism" label="aposematism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="41148" end="41155" title="mimicry" label="mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="41157" end="41167" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27244" start="41248" end="41256" title="nightjar" label="nightjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="41314" end="41317" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016214" start="41621" end="41648" title="zebra swallowtail butterfly" label="zebra swallowtail butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q737853" start="41786" end="41798" title="Atrophaneura" label="Atrophaneura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315652" start="41864" end="41882" title="Papilio antimachus" label="Papilio antimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18086809" start="41898" end="41906" title="birdwing" label="birdwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q619751" start="42568" end="42579" title="aposematism" label="aposematism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59905" start="42622" end="42634" title="Papilionidae" label="Papilionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034398" start="42647" end="42657" title="osmeterium" label="osmeterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9647" start="42682" end="42687" title="gland" label="gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123439" start="42701" end="42712" title="prothoracic" label="prothoracic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503989" start="43364" end="43378" title="mourning cloak" label="mourning cloak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768118" start="43503" end="43518" title="Papilio polytes" label="Papilio polytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q309617" start="43534" end="43559" title="western tiger swallowtail" label="western tiger swallowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q305072" start="43605" end="43613" title="Sesiidae" label="Sesiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="43706" end="43710" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q334422" start="43714" end="43720" title="hornet" label="hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="43782" end="43798" title="mimicry" label="Batesian mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q760306" start="43800" end="43807" title="Eyespot (mimicry)" label="Eyespot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130008" start="43823" end="43834" title="automimicry" label="automimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111075" start="44129" end="44137" title="Batesian" label="Batesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892944" start="44142" end="44151" title="Müllerian mimicry" label="Müllerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q669463" start="44475" end="44487" title="Limenitidinae" label="limenitidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310832" start="44488" end="44505" title="viceroy butterfly" label="viceroy butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q427688" start="44534" end="44541" title="Danainae" label="danaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q655665" start="44931" end="44941" title="Heliconius" label="Heliconius"/>
<link wikidata="Q459180" start="45406" end="45413" title="noctuid" label="noctuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q655316" start="45485" end="45495" title="Arctiidae" label="Tiger moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063308" start="45702" end="45713" title="entomophily" label="entomophily"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="45812" end="45823" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="45881" end="45887" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="46039" end="46045" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="46074" end="46080" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="46235" end="46241" title="stigma (botany)" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="46279" end="46289" title="germinates" label="germinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="46532" end="46538" title="digestion" label="digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q655665" start="46558" end="46575" title="Heliconius" label="heliconid species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318004" start="46798" end="46815" title="Thymelicus" label="Thymelicus flavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462202" start="46854" end="46870" title="flower constancy" label="flower constancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157683" start="47218" end="47227" title="hawk moth" label="hawk moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="47236" end="47242" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="47284" end="47295" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="47377" end="47386" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="47390" end="47401" title="crepuscular" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q27624" start="47443" end="47459" title="Silene latifolia" label="Silene latifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="47531" end="47539" title="Corollaceous" label="corollae"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="47661" end="47675" title="metabolic rate" label="metabolic rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q459180" start="47726" end="47734" title="noctuids" label="noctuids"/>
<link wikidata="Q45559" start="47736" end="47746" title="Geometer moth" label="geometrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q248419" start="47748" end="47756" title="Pyraloidea" label="pyralids"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="47956" end="47965" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="Mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823478" start="47979" end="48001" title="biological interaction" label="biological interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594775" start="48122" end="48133" title="Tegeticula" label="yucca moths"/>
<link wikidata="Q156317" start="48164" end="48177" title="yucca" label="yucca flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="48691" end="48694" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="48702" end="48712" title="Lycaenidae" label="Lycaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q751760" start="48957" end="48976" title="Honeydew (secretion)" label="honeydew secretions"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="49018" end="49028" title="parasitoid" label="parasitoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q248425" start="49056" end="49065" title="Pyralidae" label="Pyralidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055798" start="49070" end="49082" title="Epipyropidae" label="Epipyropidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q761648" start="49103" end="49110" title="Galleria mellonella" label="greater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071861" start="49115" end="49130" title="lesser wax moth" label="lesser wax moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="49144" end="49153" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="49161" end="49164" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="49186" end="49190" title="pest (organism)" label="pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25407" start="49216" end="49225" title="bumblebee" label="bumblebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="49230" end="49234" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="49523" end="49529" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q244452" start="49535" end="49546" title="leaf hopper" label="leaf hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398438" start="49603" end="49617" title="parasitic wasp" label="parasitic wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="49623" end="49628" title="flies" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="50195" end="50206" title="coleopteran" label="coleopteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="50217" end="50228" title="hymenoptera" label="hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q45532" start="50310" end="50321" title="spongy moth" label="spongy moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211709" start="50527" end="50539" title="Hemocyte" label="plasmatocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="50649" end="50659" title="asphyxiate" label="asphyxiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="50869" end="50877" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q138267" start="51082" end="51092" title="Eupithecia" label="Eupithecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135243" start="51337" end="51361" title="Hyposmocoma molluscivora" label="Hyposmocoma molluscivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826063" start="51474" end="51487" title="Tornatellides" label="Tornatellides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473551" start="51530" end="51538" title="Tineidae" label="Tineidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q778491" start="51540" end="51551" title="Gelechiidae" label="Gelechiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q459180" start="51557" end="51566" title="Noctuidae" label="Noctuidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="51592" end="51600" title="detritus" label="detritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="51706" end="51711" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473551" start="51744" end="51754" title="Tineidae" label="cloth moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945889" start="51763" end="51783" title="Tineola bisselliella" label="Tineola bisselliella"/>
<link wikidata="Q647307" start="51797" end="51814" title="Tinea pellionella" label="Tinea pellionella"/>
<link wikidata="Q641829" start="51832" end="51854" title="Trichophaga tapetzella" label="Trichophaga tapetzella"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="51897" end="51904" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="51916" end="51920" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="51922" end="51929" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q188691" start="51932" end="51938" title="cobweb" label="cobweb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="51941" end="51950" title="bird nest" label="bird nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q204179" start="51969" end="51984" title="domestic pigeon" label="domestic pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210379" start="52205" end="52215" title="bracovirus" label="bracovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="52382" end="52404" title="genetically engineered" label="genetically engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="52491" end="52506" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887871" start="52617" end="52625" title="Phalaena" label="Phalaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q494586" start="52799" end="52812" title="Michael Denis" label="Michael Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q112142" start="52819" end="52839" title="Ignaz Schiffermüller" label="Ignaz Schiffermüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q156205" start="52848" end="52873" title="Johan Christian Fabricius" label="Johan Christian Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q312771" start="52885" end="52907" title="Pierre André Latreille" label="Pierre André Latreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q77459" start="52916" end="52928" title="Jacob Hübner" label="Jacob Hübner"/>
<link wikidata="Q95181" start="52999" end="53021" title="Ferdinand Ochsenheimer" label="Ferdinand Ochsenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78038" start="53026" end="53052" title="Georg Friedrich Treitschke" label="Georg Friedrich Treitschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q64830" start="53145" end="53185" title="Gottlieb August Wilhelm Herrich-Schäffer" label="Gottlieb August Wilhelm Herrich-Schäffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363920" start="53220" end="53234" title="Edward Meyrick" label="Edward Meyrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101573" start="53302" end="53324" title="George Francis Hampson" label="George Francis Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q63361" start="53379" end="53403" title="Philipp Christoph Zeller" label="Philipp Christoph Zeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q723149" start="53574" end="53596" title="Samuel Hubbard Scudder" label="Samuel Hubbard Scudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18095281" start="53742" end="53761" title="Prodryas persephone" label="Prodryas persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846849" start="53769" end="53788" title="Andreas V. Martynov" label="Andreas V. Martynov"/>
<link wikidata="Q57999" start="54058" end="54070" title="Willi Hennig" label="Willi Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="54097" end="54106" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q609183" start="54238" end="54248" title="monotrysia" label="monotrysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="54306" end="54315" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="54422" end="54432" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="54713" end="54725" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="54878" end="54884" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="55342" end="55353" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="55760" end="55769" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544843" start="55905" end="55915" title="Leaf mines" label="Leaf mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q594224" start="56042" end="56058" title="Amphiesmenoptera" label="Amphiesmenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="56129" end="56137" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="56210" end="56236" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="Triassic-Jurassic boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="56262" end="56275" title="palynological" label="palynological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="56383" end="56395" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="56408" end="56415" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q132742" start="56466" end="56474" title="glossata" label="glossata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080207" start="56553" end="56559" title="Norian" label="Norian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881044" start="56696" end="56712" title="Science Advances" label="Science Advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q728393" start="56879" end="56892" title="fluid balance" label="fluid balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="56913" end="56920" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="56928" end="56936" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675320" start="56986" end="57003" title="Archaeolepis mane" label="Archaeolepis mane"/>
<link wikidata="Q284787" start="57050" end="57064" title="Early Jurassic" label="Early Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508535" start="57134" end="57152" title="Charmouth Mudstone" label="Charmouth Mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="57156" end="57162" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="57164" end="57166" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q184616" start="57304" end="57315" title="Trichoptera" label="Trichoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="57428" end="57438" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="57559" end="57565" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q516481" start="57566" end="57578" title="Baltic amber" label="Baltic amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="57667" end="57676" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q454040" start="57677" end="57683" title="MoClay" label="MoClay"/>
<link wikidata="Q454040" start="57687" end="57700" title="Fur Formation" label="Fur Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="57704" end="57711" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18095281" start="57772" end="57791" title="Prodryas persephone" label="Prodryas persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430179" start="57807" end="57829" title="Florissant Fossil Beds" label="Florissant Fossil Beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q184616" start="57867" end="57878" title="Trichoptera" label="Trichoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="57897" end="57909" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q135752" start="58009" end="58022" title="ZW sex-determination system" label="heterogametic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="58056" end="58071" title="gamete" label="sex chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="58364" end="58368" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q57999" start="58370" end="58382" title="Willi Hennig" label="Willi Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q594224" start="58426" end="58442" title="Amphiesmenoptera" label="Amphiesmenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q33120782" start="58490" end="58502" title="Tarachoptera" label="Tarachoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="58612" end="58621" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="58673" end="58678" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="58741" end="58748" title="Diptera" label="Diptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q205301" start="58766" end="58775" title="Mecoptera" label="Mecoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q280818" start="59134" end="59149" title="Micropterigidae" label="Micropterigidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132693" start="59151" end="59165" title="Agathiphagidae" label="Agathiphagidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13910188" start="59170" end="59186" title="Heterobathmiidae" label="Heterobathmiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="59211" end="59216" title="basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899348" start="59304" end="59313" title="proboscis" label="proboscis"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="59385" end="59393" title="mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="59454" end="59460" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="59462" end="59467" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189808" start="59472" end="59482" title="liverworts" label="liverworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q184616" start="59498" end="59509" title="Trichoptera" label="Trichoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q216113" start="59612" end="59622" title="kauri pine" label="kauri pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218274" start="59702" end="59712" title="Nothofagus" label="Nothofagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="59857" end="59870" title="metamorphosis" label="metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q775573" start="59877" end="59890" title="Eriocraniidae" label="Eriocraniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544843" start="60121" end="60131" title="leaf miner" label="leaf miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q843246" start="60331" end="60339" title="Ditrysia" label="Ditrysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035" start="60685" end="60691" title="cloaca" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q135038" start="60781" end="60796" title="Gracillarioidea" label="Gracillarioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q135051" start="60801" end="60813" title="Gelechioidea" label="Gelechioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30252" start="60887" end="60896" title="Tineoidea" label="Tineoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q135418" start="61001" end="61015" title="Yponomeutoidea" label="Yponomeutoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="61215" end="61233" title="adaptive radiation" label="adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="61245" end="61255" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="61362" end="61373" title="coevolution" label="coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q580252" start="61496" end="61512" title="macrolepidoptera" label="macrolepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784041" start="61880" end="61894" title="tympanal organ" label="tympanal organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q133240" start="62092" end="62102" title="Noctuoidea" label="Noctuoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q133694" start="62104" end="62115" title="Bombycoidea" label="Bombycoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q857997" start="62117" end="62130" title="Lasiocampidae" label="Lasiocampidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18536944" start="62132" end="62145" title="Mimallonoidea" label="Mimallonoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357593" start="62147" end="62159" title="Geometroidea" label="Geometroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="62164" end="62175" title="Rhopalocera" label="Rhopalocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="62236" end="62248" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="62288" end="62301" title="Papilionoidea" label="Papilionoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q232936" start="62317" end="62329" title="Hesperioidea" label="Hesperioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198829" start="62350" end="62360" title="Hedyloidea" label="Hedyloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="62615" end="62627" title="Biological classification" label="nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q843246" start="62965" end="62973" title="Ditrysia" label="Ditrysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="63148" end="63160" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q280818" start="63317" end="63328" title="Zeugloptera" label="Zeugloptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q280818" start="63345" end="63361" title="Micropterigoidea" label="Micropterigoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q746814" start="63743" end="63754" title="Micropterix" label="Micropterix"/>
<link wikidata="Q639325" start="63836" end="63847" title="Epimartyria" label="Epimartyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q132693" start="63968" end="63977" title="Aglossata" label="Aglossata"/>
<link wikidata="Q332985" start="64007" end="64014" title="lineage (evolution)" label="lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241889" start="64064" end="64085" title="Lionel Jack Dumbleton" label="Lionel Jack Dumbleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q132693" start="64087" end="64101" title="Agathiphagidae" label="Agathiphagidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132693" start="64184" end="64195" title="Agathiphaga" label="Agathiphaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350513" start="64209" end="64236" title="Agathiphaga queenslandensis" label="Agathiphaga queenslandensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350495" start="64253" end="64274" title="Agathiphaga vitiensis" label="Agathiphaga vitiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="64324" end="64334" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="64336" end="64345" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="64354" end="64358" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="64362" end="64369" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="64378" end="64393" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13910188" start="64411" end="64426" title="Heterobathmiina" label="Heterobathmiina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13910188" start="64482" end="64498" title="Heterobathmiidae" label="Heterobathmiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q218274" start="64658" end="64668" title="Nothofagus" label="Nothofagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132742" start="64727" end="64735" title="Glossata" label="Glossata"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="64891" end="64902" title="basal clade" label="basal clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q843246" start="65080" end="65088" title="Ditrysia" label="Ditrysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="65573" end="65588" title="fairy" label="butterfly fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="65723" end="65737" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="65794" end="65798" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="65815" end="65821" title="breath" label="breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="65832" end="65837" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312009" start="65982" end="66008" title="death&amp;#x27;s-head hawkmoth" label="death&amp;#x27;s-head hawkmoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="66233" end="66239" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="66244" end="66248" title="Dalí" label="Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q133654" start="66260" end="66284" title="The Silence of the Lambs (film)" label="The Silence of the Lambs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382642" start="66338" end="66342" title="Sigh (band)" label="Sigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639182" start="66362" end="66378" title="Hail Horror Hail" label="Hail Horror Hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q313638" start="66416" end="66430" title="Lafcadio Hearn" label="Lafcadio Hearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="66469" end="66484" title="personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="66654" end="66660" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120735" start="66777" end="66781" title="omen" label="omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207652" start="66789" end="66806" title="Taira no Masakado" label="Taira no Masakado"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="66871" end="66876" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="67012" end="67023" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="67033" end="67044" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264081" start="67161" end="67176" title="Censer" label="incense burners"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="67247" end="67253" title="jaguar" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="67383" end="67387" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="67425" end="67443" title="Aztec civilization" label="Aztec civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q844750" start="67517" end="67524" title="Zapotec civilization" label="Zapotec"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="67530" end="67547" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="67570" end="67575" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="67625" end="67636" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="67670" end="67681" title="Tortricidae" label="Tortricidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q459180" start="67683" end="67692" title="Noctuidae" label="Noctuidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q248425" start="67698" end="67707" title="Pyralidae" label="Pyralidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492887" start="67749" end="67759" title="Spodoptera" label="Spodoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235268" start="67785" end="67796" title="Helicoverpa" label="Helicoverpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764" start="67828" end="67844" title="Pieris brassicae" label="Pieris brassicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q811649" start="67902" end="67917" title="Helicoverpa zea" label="Helicoverpa zea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281331" start="67975" end="67986" title="polyphagous" label="polyphagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="68035" end="68041" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="68048" end="68054" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666183" start="68062" end="68078" title="Peridroma saucia" label="Peridroma saucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423608" start="69114" end="69133" title="Sarcophaga aldrichi" label="Sarcophaga aldrichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121239" start="69197" end="69225" title="forest tent caterpillar moth" label="forest tent caterpillar moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389612" start="69408" end="69422" title="pheromone trap" label="pheromone trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758791" start="69455" end="69466" title="insect trap" label="insect trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="69477" end="69486" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="69496" end="69502" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q110244461" start="69664" end="69678" title="pan trap" label="water-pan trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="69723" end="69734" title="detritivore" label="detritivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="69756" end="69764" title="detritus" label="detritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="69776" end="69783" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="69793" end="69797" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="69802" end="69809" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473551" start="69835" end="69845" title="Tineidae" label="cloth moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945889" start="69854" end="69869" title="Tineola bisselliella" label="T. bisselliella"/>
<link wikidata="Q647307" start="69883" end="69897" title="Tinea pellionella" label="T. pellionella"/>
<link wikidata="Q641829" start="69915" end="69928" title="Trichophaga tapetzella" label="T. tapetzella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="70008" end="70014" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="70016" end="70021" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="70023" end="70027" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="70037" end="70043" title="fabric" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="70056" end="70059" title="fur" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="70103" end="70110" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="70116" end="70120" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q188672" start="70122" end="70126" title="bran" label="bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q381350" start="70128" end="70136" title="semolina" label="semolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="70141" end="70146" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="70168" end="70173" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="70182" end="70189" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193970" start="70192" end="70198" title="casein" label="casein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="70204" end="70210" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="70224" end="70230" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="70421" end="70447" title="Bombyx mori" label="domesticated silkworm moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="70521" end="70525" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105917" start="70609" end="70627" title="History of silk" label="throughout history"/>
<link wikidata="Q144548" start="70795" end="70811" title="Bombyx mandarina" label="Bombyx mandarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q135431" start="70829" end="70838" title="Antheraea" label="Antheraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067310" start="71071" end="71075" title="noxious weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q248425" start="71105" end="71112" title="Pyralidae" label="pyralid"/>
<link wikidata="Q961141" start="71113" end="71124" title="cactus moth" label="cactus moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="71223" end="71242" title="prickly pear cactus" label="prickly pear cactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787449" start="71289" end="71314" title="alligator weed stem borer" label="alligator weed stem borer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="71368" end="71381" title="aquatic plant" label="aquatic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472735" start="71391" end="71405" title="alligator weed" label="alligator weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943487" start="71472" end="71498" title="alligator weed flea beetle" label="alligator weed flea beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="71538" end="71545" title="synergy" label="synergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243966" start="71612" end="71631" title="butterfly gardening" label="butterfly gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002977" start="71740" end="71778" title="Butterfly ranching in Papua New Guinea" label="Butterfly ranching in Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046284" start="71985" end="71996" title="entomophagy" label="entomophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490759" start="72126" end="72134" title="beondegi" label="beondegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="72138" end="72146" title="silkworm" label="silkworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="72147" end="72151" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="72177" end="72191" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621741" start="72198" end="72209" title="Maguey worm" label="Maguey worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="72238" end="72244" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853415" start="72263" end="72271" title="Huasteca" label="Huasteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768392" start="72295" end="72312" title="Madrone butterfly" label="Madrone butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q369765" start="72387" end="72393" title="Carnia" label="Carnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214934" start="72434" end="72443" title="Crop (anatomy)" label="ingluvies"/>
<link wikidata="Q604450" start="72463" end="72470" title="Zygaena" label="Zygaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q285592" start="72806" end="72817" title="Bogong moth" label="Bogong moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="73119" end="73128" title="urticaria" label="urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q757678" start="73145" end="73151" title="atopic" label="atopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="73152" end="73158" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13616307" start="73162" end="73177" title="osteochondritis" label="osteochondritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q890200" start="73191" end="73203" title="coagulopathy" label="coagulopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="73205" end="73210" title="renal" label="renal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="73224" end="73237" title="brain" label="intracerebral"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="73238" end="73248" title="hemorrhage" label="hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767197" start="73322" end="73329" title="Lonomia" label="Lonomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623006" start="73568" end="73588" title="keratoconjunctivitis" label="keratoconjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="73673" end="73688" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042777" start="74173" end="74223" title="Lepidoptera in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Lepidoptera in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074272" start="74226" end="74273" title="McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity" label="McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="74275" end="74296" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551981" start="74299" end="74334" title="Societas Europaea Lepidopterologica" label="Societas Europaea Lepidopterologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004336" start="74352" end="74382" title="Lists of Lepidoptera by region" label="Lists of Lepidoptera by region"/>
<link wikidata="Q163126" start="74385" end="74412" title="Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera" label="Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53308" wikidata="Q8018934" url="?curid=53308" title="William Strunk Jr.">
<text>William Strunk Jr. (July 1, 1869 – September 26, 1946) was an American professor of English at Cornell University and the author of &quot;The Elements of Style&quot; (1918). After his former student E. B. White revised and extended the book, &quot;The Elements of Style&quot; became an influential guide to writing in the English language, informally known as “Strunk &amp; White”.

==Life and career==
William Strunk was born and reared in Cincinnati, Ohio, the eldest of the four surviving children of William and Ella Garretson Strunk. He earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree at the University of Cincinnati in 1890 and a PhD at Cornell University in 1896. He spent the academic year 1898–99 at the Sorbonne and the Collège de France, where he studied morphology and philology.

Strunk first taught mathematics at Rose Polytechnical Institute in Terre Haute, Indiana in 1890–91. He then taught English at Cornell for 46 years, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, disdaining specialization and becoming an expert in both classical and non-English literature. In 1922 he published &quot;English Metres&quot;, a study of poetic metrical form, and he compiled critical editions of Cynewulf&#x27;s &quot;Juliana&quot;, several works of Dryden, James Fenimore Cooper&#x27;s &quot;Last of the Mohicans&quot;, and several Shakespearean plays. Strunk was also active in a gathering known as the Manuscript Club, an &quot;informal Saturday-night gathering of students and professors interested in writing,&quot; where he met &quot;a sensitive and deeply thoughtful young man named Elwyn Brooks White.&quot;

In 1935–36, Strunk enjoyed serving as the literary consultant for the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; (1936). In the studio he was known as &quot;the professor,&quot; in part because, with his three-piece suit and wire-rim spectacles, he &quot;looked as though he&#x27;d been delivered to the set from MGM&#x27;s casting department.&quot;

In 1918, Strunk privately published &quot;The Elements of Style&quot; for the use of his Cornell students, who gave it its nickname, &quot;the little book.&quot; Strunk intended the guide &quot;to lighten the task of instructor and student by concentrating attention ... on a few essentials, the rules of usage and principles of composition most commonly violated.&quot; In 1935, Strunk and Edward A. Tenney revised and published the guide as &quot;The Elements and Practice of Composition&quot; (1935).

In his &quot;New Yorker&quot; column of July 27, 1957, E. B. White praised the &quot;little book&quot; as a &quot;forty-three-page summation of the case for cleanliness, accuracy, and brevity in the use of English.&quot; Macmillan and Company then commissioned White to revise the 1935 edition for republication under Strunk&#x27;s original title. His expansion and modernization sold more than two million copies. Since 1959, total sales of the three editions have exceeded ten million copies.

In 1900, Strunk married Olivia Emilie Locke, with whom he had three children, including the noted musicologist Oliver Strunk. William Strunk retired from Cornell in 1937. In 1945 he suffered a mental breakdown, diagnosed as &quot;senile psychosis&quot;, and died less than a year later at the Hudson River Psychiatric Institute in Poughkeepsie, New York. Strunk&#x27;s Cornell obituary noted that his friends and former students remembered &quot;his kindness, his helpfulness as a teacher and colleague, [and] his boyish lack of envy and guile&quot;.

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Mark Garvey, &quot;Stylized : A Slightly Obsessive History of Strunk &amp; White&#x27;s The Elements of Style &quot; (New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2009).

== External links ==
* 
* &quot;Elements of Style&quot;, full text of Strunk&#x27;s original at Bartleby.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8018934" start="0" end="18" title="William Strunk Jr." label="William Strunk Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="95" end="113" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010059" start="138" end="159" title="The Elements of Style" label="The Elements of Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="199" end="210" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="298" end="314" title="Prescription and description" label="guide to writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="441" end="451" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="453" end="457" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="581" end="605" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="697" end="705" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="714" end="731" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="750" end="760" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="765" end="774" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166712" start="812" end="840" title="Rose–Hulman Institute of Technology" label="Rose Polytechnical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q492478" start="844" end="864" title="Terre Haute, Indiana" label="Terre Haute, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="944" end="958" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q560915" start="1174" end="1182" title="Cynewulf" label="Cynewulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799229" start="1196" end="1203" title="Juliana (poem)" label="Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="1228" end="1234" title="Dryden" label="Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q167856" start="1236" end="1257" title="James Fenimore Cooper" label="James Fenimore Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q493574" start="1271" end="1291" title="Last of the Mohicans" label="Last of the Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1311" end="1324" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="1568" end="1586" title="E.B. White" label="Elwyn Brooks White"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="1665" end="1684" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081181" start="1696" end="1712" title="Romeo and Juliet (1936 film)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010059" start="1999" end="2020" title="The Elements of Style" label="The Elements of Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="2475" end="2485" title="The New Yorker" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="2683" end="2704" title="Macmillan and Company" label="Macmillan and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266266" start="3069" end="3082" title="Oliver Strunk" label="Oliver Strunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928866" start="3251" end="3285" title="Hudson River State Hospital" label="Hudson River Psychiatric Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="3289" end="3311" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="3677" end="3697" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53309" wikidata="Q2314176" url="?curid=53309" title="Psychedelic drug">
<text>Psychedelics are a subclass of hallucinogenic drugs whose primary effect is to trigger non-ordinary mental states (known as psychedelic experiences or &quot;trips&quot;) and a perceived &quot;expansion of consciousness&quot;. Also referred to as classic hallucinogens or serotonergic hallucinogens, the term &quot;psychedelic&quot; is sometimes used more broadly to include various types of hallucinogens, such as those which are atypical or adjacent to psychedelia like salvia and MDMA, respectively.

Classic psychedelics generally cause specific psychological, visual, and auditory changes, and oftentimes a substantially altered state of consciousness. They have had the largest influence on science and culture, and include mescaline, LSD, psilocybin, and DMT. There are a large number of both naturally occurring and synthetic serotonergic psychedelics.

Most psychedelic drugs fall into one of the three families of chemical compounds: tryptamines, phenethylamines, or lysergamides (LSD is considered both a tryptamine and lysergamide). They act via serotonin 2A receptor agonism. When compounds bind to serotonin 5-HT2A receptors, they modulate the activity of key circuits in the brain involved with sensory perception and cognition. However, the exact nature of how psychedelics induce changes in perception and cognition via the 5-HT2A receptor is still unknown. The psychedelic experience is often compared to non-ordinary forms of consciousness such as those experienced in meditation, mystical experiences, and near-death experiences, which also appear to be partially underpinned by altered default mode network activity. The phenomenon of ego death is often described as a key feature of the psychedelic experience.

Many psychedelic drugs are illegal to possess without lawful authorisation, exemption or license worldwide under the UN conventions, with occasional exceptions for religious use or research contexts. Despite these controls, recreational use of psychedelics is common. Legal barriers have made the scientific study of psychedelics more difficult. Research has been conducted, however, and studies show that psychedelics are physiologically safe and rarely lead to addiction. Studies conducted using psilocybin in a psychotherapeutic setting reveal that psychedelic drugs may assist with treating depression, anxiety, alcohol addiction, and nicotine addiction. Although further research is needed, existing results suggest that psychedelics could be effective treatments for certain forms of psychopathology. A 2022 survey found that 28% of Americans had used a psychedelic at some point in their life.

==Etymology and nomenclature==
The term &quot;&quot; was coined by the psychiatrist Humphrey Osmond during written correspondence with author Aldous Huxley (written in a rhyme: “To fathom Hell or soar angelic/Just take a pinch of psychedelic.”) and presented to the New York Academy of Sciences by Osmond in 1957. It is irregularly derived from the Greek words ψυχή (&quot;psychḗ&quot;, meaning &#x27;mind, soul&#x27;) and δηλείν (&quot;dēleín&quot;, meaning &#x27;to manifest&#x27;), with the intended meaning &quot;mind manifesting&quot; or alternatively &quot;soul manifesting&quot;, and the implication that psychedelics can reveal unused potentials of the human mind. The term was loathed by American ethnobotanist Richard Schultes but championed by American psychologist Timothy Leary.

Aldous Huxley had suggested his own coinage &quot;phanerothyme&quot; (Greek &quot;phaneroein&quot;- &quot;to make manifest or visible&quot; and Greek &quot;thymos&quot; &quot;soul&quot;, thus &quot;to reveal the soul&quot;) to Osmond in 1956. Recently, the term entheogen (meaning &quot;that which produces the divine within&quot;) has come into use to denote the use of psychedelic drugs, as well as various other types of psychoactive substances, in a religious, spiritual, and mystical context.

In 2004, David E. Nichols wrote the following about the nomenclature used for psychedelic drugs:

Robin Carhart-Harris and Guy Goodwin write that the term &quot;psychedelic&quot; is preferable to &quot;hallucinogen&quot; for describing classical psychedelics because of the term &quot;hallucinogen&quot;″s &quot;arguably misleading emphasis on these compounds&#x27; hallucinogenic properties.&quot;

While the term &quot;psychedelic&quot; is most commonly used to refer only to serotonergic hallucinogens, it is sometimes used for a much broader range of drugs, including empathogen–entactogens, dissociatives, and atypical hallucinogens/psychoactives such as &quot;Amanita muscaria&quot;, &quot;Cannabis sativa&quot;, &quot;Nymphaea nouchali&quot; and &quot;Salvia divinorum&quot;. Thus, the term &quot;serotonergic psychedelic&quot; is sometimes used for the narrower class. It is important to check the definition of a given source. This article uses the more common, narrower definition of &quot;psychedelic&quot;.

==Examples==


* 2C-B (2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromophenethylamine) is a substituted phenethylamine first synthesised in 1974 by Alexander Shulgin. 2C-B is both a psychedelic and a mild entactogen, with its psychedelic effects increasing and its entactogenic effects decreasing with dosage. 2C-B is the most well known compound in the 2C family, their general structure being discovered as a result of modifying the structure of mescaline.
* DMT (&quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-dimethyltryptamine) is an indole alkaloid found in various species of plants. Traditionally it is consumed by tribes in South America in the form of ayahuasca. A brew is used that consists of DMT-containing plants as well as plants containing MAOIs, specifically harmaline, which allows DMT to be consumed orally without being rendered inactive by monoamine oxidase enzymes in the digestive system. A pharmaceutical version of ayahuasca is called pharmahuasca. In the Western world DMT is more commonly consumed via the vaporisation of freebase DMT. Whereas Ayahuasca typically lasts for several hours, inhalation has an onset measured in seconds and has effects measured in minutes, being significantly more intense. Particularly in vaporised form, DMT has the ability to cause users to enter a hallucinatory realm fully detached from reality, being typically characterised by hyperbolic geometry, and described as defying visual or verbal description. Users have also reported encountering and communicating with entitites within this hallucinatory state. DMT is the archetypal substituted tryptamine, being the structural scaffold of psilocybin and – to a lesser extent – the lysergamides. 
* LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) is a derivative of lysergic acid, which is obtained from the hydrolysis of ergotamine. Ergotamine is an alkaloid found in the fungus &quot;Claviceps purpurea&quot;, which primarily infects rye. LSD is both the prototypical psychedelic and the prototypical lysergamide. As a lysergamide, LSD contains both a tryptamine and phenethylamine group within its structure. As a result of containing a phenethylamine group LSD agonises dopamine receptors as well as serotonin receptors, making it more energetic in effect in contrast to the more sedating effects of psilocin, which is not a dopamine agonist.
* Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine) is a phenethylamine alkaloid found in various species of cacti, the best-known of these being peyote (&quot;Lophophora williamsii&quot;) and the San Pedro cactus (&quot;Trichocereus macrogonus&quot; var. &quot;pachanoi&quot;, syn. &quot;Echinopsis pachanoi&quot;). Mescaline has effects comparable to those of LSD and psilocybin, albeit with a greater emphasis on colors and patterns. Ceremonial San Pedro use seems to be characterized by relatively strong spiritual experiences, and low incidence of challenging experiences.
* Psilocin (4-HO-DMT) is the dephosphorylated active metabolite of the indole alkaloid psilocybin and a substituted tryptamine, which is produced in over 200 species of fungi. Of the classical psychedelics psilocybin has attracted the greatest academic interest regarding its ability to manifest mystical experiences, although all psychedelics are capable of doing so to variable degrees. 4-AcO-DMT (&quot;O&quot;-acetylpsilocin) is an acetylated analog of psilocin. Additionally, replacement of a methyl group at the dimethylated nitrogen with an isopropyl or ethyl group yields 4-HO-MIPT and 4-HO-MET, respectively.

== Uses ==
=== Traditional ===


A number of frequently mentioned or traditional psychedelics such as &quot;Ayahuasca&quot; (which contains DMT), San Pedro, Peyote, and Peruvian torch (which all contain mescaline), Psilocybe mushrooms (which contain psilocin/psilocybin) and &quot;Tabernanthe iboga&quot; (which contains the unique psychedelic ibogaine) all have a long and extensive history of spiritual, shamanic and traditional usage by indigenous peoples in various world regions, particularly in Latin America, but also Gabon, Africa in the case of iboga. Different countries and/or regions have come to be associated with traditional or spiritual use of particular psychedelics, such as the ancient and entheogenic use of psilocybe mushrooms by the native Mazatec people of Oaxaca, Mexico or the use of the ayahuasca brew in the Amazon basin, particularly in Peru for spiritual and physical healing as well as for religious festivals. Peyote has also been used for several thousand years in the Rio Grande Valley in North America by native tribes as an entheogen. In the Andean region of South America, the San Pedro cactus (&quot;Trichocereus macrogonus&quot; var. &quot;pachanoi&quot;, syn. &quot;Echinopsis pachanoi&quot;) has a long history of use, possibly as a traditional medicine. Archaeological studies have found evidence of use going back two thousand years, to Moche culture, Nazca culture, and Chavín culture. Although authorities of the Roman Catholic church attempted to suppress its use after the Spanish conquest, this failed, as shown by the Christian element in the common name &quot;San Pedro cactus&quot; – Saint Peter cactus. The name has its origin in the belief that just as St Peter holds the keys to heaven, the effects of the cactus allow users &quot;to reach heaven while still on earth.&quot; In 2022, the Peruvian Ministry of Culture declared the traditional use of San Pedro cactus in northern Peru as cultural heritage.

Although people of Western culture have tended to use psychedelics for either psychotherapeutic or recreational reasons, most indigenous cultures, particularly in South America, have seemingly tended to use psychedelics for more supernatural reasons such as divination. This can often be related to &quot;healing&quot; or health as well but typically in the context of finding out what is wrong with the individual, such as using psychedelic states to &quot;identify&quot; a disease and/or its cause, locate lost objects, and identify a victim or even perpetrator of sorcery. In some cultures and regions, even psychedelics themselves, such as ayahuasca and the psychedelic lichen of eastern Ecuador (&quot;Dictyonema huaorani&quot;) that supposedly contains both 5-MeO-DMT and psilocybin, have also been used by witches and sorcerers to conduct their malicious magic, similarly to nightshade deliriants like &quot;brugmansia&quot; and &quot;latua&quot;.

=== Psychedelic therapy ===
Psychedelic therapy (or psychedelic-assisted therapy) is the proposed use of psychedelic drugs to treat mental disorders. As of 2021, psychedelic drugs are controlled substances in most countries and psychedelic therapy is not legally available outside clinical trials, with some exceptions.

The procedure for psychedelic therapy differs from that of therapies using conventional psychiatric medications. While conventional medications are usually taken without supervision at least once daily, in contemporary psychedelic therapy the drug is administered in a single session (or sometimes up to three sessions) in a therapeutic context. The therapeutic team prepares the patient for the experience beforehand and helps them integrate insights from the drug experience afterwards. After ingesting the drug, the patient normally wears eyeshades and listens to music to facilitate focus on the psychedelic experience, with the therapeutic team interrupting only to provide reassurance if adverse effects such as anxiety or disorientation arise.

As of 2022, the body of high-quality evidence on psychedelic therapy remains relatively small and more, larger studies are needed to reliably show the effectiveness and safety of psychedelic therapy&#x27;s various forms and applications. On the basis of favorable early results, ongoing research is examining proposed psychedelic therapies for conditions including major depressive disorder, and anxiety and depression linked to terminal illness. The United States Food and Drug Administration has granted breakthrough therapy status, which expedites the assessment of promising drug therapies for potential approval, to psilocybin therapy for treatment-resistant depression and major depressive disorder.

It has been proposed that psychedelics used for therapeutic purposes may act as active &quot;super placebos&quot;.

===Recreational===
Recreational use of psychedelics has been common since the psychedelic era of the mid-1960s and continues to play a role in various festivals and events, including Burning Man. A survey published in 2013 found that 13.4% of American adults had used a psychedelic.

A June 2024 report by the RAND Corporation suggests psilocybin mushrooms may be the most prevalent psychedelic drug among adults in the United States. The RAND national survey indicated that 3.1% of U.S. adults reported using psilocybin in the past year. Roughly 12% of respondents acknowledged lifetime use of psilocybin, while a similar percentage reported having used LSD at some point in their lives. MDMA, also known as ecstasy, showed a lower prevalence of use at 7.6%. Notably, less than 1% of U.S. adults reported using any psychedelic drugs within the past month.

===Microdosing===
Psychedelic microdosing is the practice of using sub-threshold doses (microdoses) of psychedelics in an attempt to improve creativity, boost physical energy level, emotional balance, increase performance on problems-solving tasks and to treat anxiety, depression and addiction. The practice of microdosing has become more widespread in the 21st century with more people claiming long-term benefits from the practice.

A 2022 study recognized signatures of psilocybin microdosing in natural language and concluded that low amount of psychedelics have potential for application, and ecological observation of microdosing schedules.

==Pharmacology==
===Mechanism of action===
Most serotonergic psychedelics act as non-selective agonists of serotonin receptors, including of the serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, but often also of other serotonin receptors, such as the serotonin 5-HT1 receptors. They are thought to mediate their hallucinogenic effects specifically by activation of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors. Psychedelics (including tryptamines like psilocin, DMT, and 5-MeO-DMT; phenethylamines like mescaline, DOM, and 2C-B; and ergolines and lysergamides like LSD) all act as agonists of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptors. Some psychedelics, such as phenethylamines like DOM and 2C-B, show high selectivity for the serotonin 5-HT2 receptors over other serotonin receptors. There is a very strong correlation between 5-HT2A receptor affinity and human hallucinogenic potency. In addition, the intensity of hallucinogenic effects in humans is directly correlated with the level of serotonin 5-HT2A receptor occupancy as measured with positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. Serotonin 5-HT2A receptor blockade with drugs like the semi-selective ketanserin and the non-selective risperidone can abolish the hallucinogenic effects of psychedelics in humans. However, studies with more selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, like pimavanserin, are still needed.

In animals, potency for stimulus generalization to the psychedelic DOM in drug discrimination tests is strongly correlated with serotonin 5-HT2A receptor affinity. Non-selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, like ketanserin and pirenperone, and selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, like volinanserin (MDL-100907), abolish the stimulus generalization of psychedelics in drug discrimination tests. Conversely, serotonin 5-HT2B and 5-HT2C receptor antagonists are ineffective. The potencies of serotonin 5-HT2 receptor antagonists in blocking psychedelic substitution are strongly correlated with their serotonin 5-HT2A receptor affinities. Highly selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists have recently been developed and show stimulus generalization to psychedelics, whereas selective serotonin 5-HT2C receptor agonists do not do so. The head-twitch response (HTR) is induced by serotonergic psychedelics and is a behavioral proxy of psychedelic-like effects in animals. The HTR is invariably induced by serotonergic psychedelics, is blocked by selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists, and is abolished in serotonin 5-HT2A receptor knockout mice. In addition, there is a strong correlation between hallucinogenic potency in humans and potency in the HTR assay. Moreover, the HTR paradigm is one of the only animal tests that can distinguish between hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists and non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists, such as lisuride. In accordance with the preceding animal and human findings, it has been said that the evidence that the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor mediates the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics is overwhelming.

The serotonin 5-HT2A receptor activates several downstream signaling pathways. These include the Gq, β-arrestin2, and other pathways. Activation of both the Gq and β-arrestin2 pathways have been implicated in mediating the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics. However, subsequently, activation of the Gq pathway and not β-arrestin2 has been implicated. Interestingly, Gq signaling appeared to mediate hallucinogenic-like effects, whereas β-arrestin2 mediated receptor downregulation and tachyphylaxis. The lack of psychedelic effects with non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists may be due to partial agonism of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor with efficacy insufficient to produce psychedelic effects or may be due to biased agonism of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. There appears to be a threshold level of Gq activation (in terms of intrinsic activity, with &gt;70%) required for production of hallucinogenic effects. Full agonists and partial agonists above this threshold are psychedelic 5-HT2A receptor agonists, whereas partial agonists below this threshold, such as lisuride, 2-bromo-LSD, 6-fluoro-DET, 6-MeO-DMT, and Ariadne, are non-hallucinogenic 5-HT2A receptor agonists. In addition, biased agonists that activate β-arrestin2 signaling but not Gq signaling, such as ITI-1549, IHCH-7086, and 25N-N1-Nap, are non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists.

The hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics may be critically mediated by serotonin 5-HT2A receptor activation in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Layer V pyramidal neurons in this area are especially discussed. Activation of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors in the mPFC results in marked excitatory and inhibitory effects as well as increased release of glutamate and GABA. Direct injection of serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists into the mPFC produces the HTR. Drugs that suppress glutamatergic activity in the mPFC, including AMPA receptor antagonists, metabotropic glutamate mGlu2/3 receptor agonists, μ-opioid receptor agonists, and adenosine A1 receptor agonists, block or suppress many of the neurochemical and behavioral effects of serotonergic psychedelics, including the HTR. Metabotropic glutamate mGlu2 receptors are primarily expressed as presynaptic autoreceptors and have inhibitory effects on glutamate release. Serotonergic psychedelics have been found to produce frontal cortex hyperactivity in humans in PET and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging studies. The PFC projects to many other cortical and subcortical brain areas, such as the locus coeruleus, nucleus accumbens, and amygdala, among others, and activation of the PFC by serotonergic psychedelics may thereby indirectly modulate these areas. In addition to the PFC, there is moderate to high expression of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors in the primary visual cortex (V1), as well as expression of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor in other visual areas, and activation of these receptors may contribute to or mediate the visual effects of serotonergic psychedelics. Serotonergic psychedelics also directly or indirectly modulate a variety of other brain areas, like the claustrum, and this may be involved in their effects as well.

Serotonin, as well as drugs that increase serotonin levels, like the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and serotonin releasing agents, are non-hallucinogenic in humans despite increasing activation of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors. Serotonin is a hydrophilic molecule which cannot easily cross biological membranes without active transport, and the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor is usually expressed as a cell surface receptor that is readily accessible to extracellular serotonin. The HTR, a behavioral proxy of psychedelic-like effects, appears to be mediated by activation of intracellularly expressed serotonin 5-HT2A receptors in a population of mPFC neurons that do not also express the serotonin transporter (SERT) and hence cannot be activated by serotonin. In contrast to serotonin, serotonergic psychedelics are more lipophilic than serotonin and are able to readily enter these neurons and activate the serotonin 5-HT2A receptors within them. Artificial expression of the SERT in this population of neurons in animals resulted in a serotonin releasing agent that doesn&#x27;t normally produce the HTR being able to do so. Although serotonin itself is non-hallucinogenic, at very high concentrations achieved pharmacologically (e.g., injected into the brain or with massive doses of 5-HTP) it can produce psychedelic-like effects in animals by being metabolized by indolethylamine &quot;N&quot;-methyltransferase (INMT) into more lipophilic &quot;N&quot;-methylated tryptamines like &quot;N&quot;-methylserotonin and bufotenin (&quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-dimethylserotonin).

In addition to their hallucinogenic effects, serotonergic psychedelics may also produce a variety of other effects, including psychoplastogenic (i.e., neuroplasticity-enhancing), antidepressant, anxiolytic, empathy-enhancing or prosocial effects, anti-obsessional, anti-addictive, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects, analgesic effects, and/or antimigraine effects. While psychedelics themselves are also being clinically evaluated for these potential therapeutic benefits, non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists, which are often analogues of serotonergic psychedelics, have been developed and are being studied for potential use in medicine in an attempt to provide some such benefits without hallucinogenic effects.

Although the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics are thought to be mediated by serotonin 5-HT2A receptor activation, interactions with other receptors, such as the serotonin 5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT2B, and 5-HT2C receptors among many others, may additionally contribute to and modulate their effects. Interestingly, some psychedelics, such as LSD and psilocybin, have been claimed to act as positive allosteric modulators of the tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), one of the signaling receptors of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). However, despite this apparent TrkB potentiation, the psychoplastogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics, including dendritogenesis, spinogenesis, and synaptogenesis, appear to be mediated by activation of serotonin 5-HT2A receptors, whereas psychedelics do not generally stimulate neurogenesis.

===Chemical families===
The three major chemical groups of serotonergic psychedelics include the tryptamines, phenethylamines, and lysergamides, which each have different profiles of pharmacological activity.

====Tryptamines====
Tryptamines are derivatives of tryptamine and are structurally related to the monoamine neurotransmitter serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT). Many tryptamines act as non-selective serotonin receptor agonists, including of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. Some tryptamines also act as monoamine releasing agents, including of serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine. Examples of psychedelic tryptamines include tryptamine, dimethyltryptamine (DMT), 5-MeO-DMT, psilocin, psilocybin, bufotenin, 5-MeO-DiPT, 5-MeO-MiPT, α-methyltryptamine (αMT), and 5-MeO-αMT, among many others.

====Phenethylamines====
Phenethylamines, as well as amphetamines (α-methylphenethylamines), are derivatives of β-phenethylamine and are structurally related to the monoamine neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Some phenethylamines and amphetamines, particularly those with methoxy and other substitions on the phenyl ring, are potent serotonin 5-HT2 receptor agonists, including of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor, and can produce psychedelic effects. In contrast to phenethylamines and amphetamines generally, most psychedelic phenethylamines are not monoamine releasing agents. Examples of psychedelic phenethylamines and amphetamines include mescaline, the 2C drugs like 2C-B, 2C-D, 2C-E, and 2C-I, the DOx drugs like DOB, DOI, and DOM, certain MDxx drugs like MDA and MDMA (weak psychedelics), and the NBOMe (25x-NBx) drugs like 25C-NBOMe and 25I-NBOMe.

====Lysergamides====
Lysergamides are ergoline derivatives related to the ergot alkaloids. They are notable in containing both tryptamine and phenethylamine within their chemical structures. As such, ergolines and lysergamides may be considered structurally related to the monoamine neurotransmitters. Many ergolines and lysergamides act as highly promiscuous ligands of monoamine receptors, including of serotonin, dopamine, and adrenergic receptors. Some lysergamides are efficacious serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists and thereby produce psychedelic effects. Examples of psychedelic lysergamides include lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), lysergic acid amide (LSA), 1P-LSD, ALD-52, ergonovine (ergometrine), and methylergometrine (methylergonovine), among others.

==Psychedelic experiences==
Although several attempts have been made, starting in the 19th and 20th centuries, to define common phenomenological structures of the effects produced by classic psychedelics, a universally accepted taxonomy does not yet exist. At lower doses, features of psychedelic experiences include sensory alterations, such as the warping of surfaces, shape suggestibility, pareidolia and color variations. Users often report intense colors that they have not previously experienced, and repetitive geometric shapes or form constants are common as well. Higher doses often cause intense and fundamental alterations of sensory (notably visual) perception, such as synesthesia or the experience of additional spatial or temporal dimensions. Tryptamines are well documented to cause classic psychedelic states, such as increased empathy, visual distortions (drifting, morphing, breathing, melting of various surfaces and objects), auditory hallucinations, ego dissolution or ego death with high enough dose, mystical, transpersonal and spiritual experiences, autonomous &quot;entity&quot; encounters, time distortion, closed eye hallucinations and complete detachment from reality with a high enough dose. Luis Luna describes psychedelic experiences as having a distinctly gnosis-like quality, and says that they offer &quot;learning experiences that elevate consciousness and can make a profound contribution to personal development.&quot; Czech psychiatrist Stanislav Grof studied the effects of psychedelics like LSD early in his career and said of the experience, that it commonly includes &quot;complex revelatory insights into the nature of existence… typically accompanied by a sense of certainty that this knowledge is ultimately more relevant and &#x27;real&#x27; than the perceptions and beliefs we share in everyday life.&quot; Traditionally, the standard model for the subjective phenomenological effects of psychedelics has typically been based on LSD, with anything that is considered &quot;psychedelic&quot; evidently being compared to it and its specific effects.

During a speech on his 100th birthday, the inventor of LSD, Albert Hofmann said of the drug: &quot;It gave me an inner joy, an open mindedness, a gratefulness, open eyes and an internal sensitivity for the miracles of creation... I think that in human evolution it has never been as necessary to have this substance LSD. It is just a tool to turn us into what we are supposed to be.&quot; With certain psychedelics and experiences, a user may also experience an &quot;afterglow&quot; of improved mood or perceived mental state for days or even weeks after ingestion in some cases. In 1898, the English writer and intellectual Havelock Ellis reported a heightened perceptual sensitivity to &quot;the more delicate phenomena of light and shade and color&quot; for a prolonged period of time after his exposure to mescaline. Good trips are reportedly deeply pleasurable, and typically involve intense joy or euphoria, a greater appreciation for life, reduced anxiety, a sense of spiritual enlightenment, and a sense of belonging or interconnectedness with the universe. Negative experiences, colloquially known as &quot;bad trips,&quot; evoke an array of dark emotions, such as irrational fear, anxiety, panic, paranoia, dread, distrustfulness, hopelessness, and even suicidal ideation. While it is impossible to predict when a bad trip will occur, one&#x27;s mood, surroundings, sleep, hydration, social setting, and other factors can be controlled (colloquially referred to as &quot;set and setting&quot;) to minimize the risk of a bad trip. The concept of &quot;set and setting&quot; also generally appears to be more applicable to psychedelics than to other types of hallucinogens such as deliriants, hypnotics and dissociative anesthetics.

Classic psychedelics are considered to be those found in nature like psilocybin, DMT, mescaline, and LSD which is derived from naturally occurring ergotamine, and non-classic psychedelics are considered to be newer analogs and derivatives of pharmacophore lysergamides, tryptamine, and phenethylamine structures like 2C-B. Many of these psychedelics cause remarkably similar effects, despite their different chemical structure. However, many users report that the three major families have subjectively different qualities in the &quot;feel&quot; of the experience, which are difficult to describe. Some compounds, such as 2C-B, have extremely tight &quot;dose curves&quot;, meaning the difference in dose between a non-event and an overwhelming disconnection from reality can be very slight. There can also be very substantial differences between the drugs; for instance, 5-MeO-DMT rarely produces the visual effects typical of other psychedelics.

==Potential adverse effects==
Despite the contrary perception of much of the public, psychedelic drugs are not addictive and are physiologically safe. As of 2016, there have been no known deaths due to overdose of LSD, psilocybin, or mescaline.

Risks do exist during an unsupervised psychedelic experience, however; Ira Byock wrote in 2018 in the &quot;Journal of Palliative Medicine&quot; that psilocybin is safe when administered to a properly screened patient and supervised by a qualified professional with appropriate set and setting. However, he called for an &quot;abundance of caution&quot; because in the absence of these conditions a range of negative reactions is possible, including &quot;fear, a prolonged sense of dread, or full panic.&quot; He notes that driving or even walking in public can be dangerous during a psychedelic experience because of impaired hand-eye coordination and fine motor control. In some cases, individuals taking psychedelics have performed dangerous or fatal acts because they believed they possessed superhuman powers.

Psilocybin-induced states of mind share features with states experienced in psychosis, and while a causal relationship between psilocybin and the onset of psychosis has not been established as of 2011, researchers have called for investigation of the relationship. Many of the persistent negative perceptions of psychological risks are unsupported by the currently available scientific evidence, with the majority of reported adverse effects not being observed in a regulated and/or medical context. A population study on associations between psychedelic use and mental illness published in 2013 found no evidence that psychedelic use was associated with increased prevalence of any mental illness. In any case, induction of psychosis has been associated with psychedelics in small percentages of individuals, and the rates appear to be higher in people with schizophrenia.

Using psychedelics poses certain risks of re-experiencing of the drug&#x27;s effects, including flashbacks and hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD). These non-psychotic effects are poorly studied, but the permanent symptoms (also called &quot;endless trip&quot;) are considered to be rare.

Serotonin syndrome can be caused by combining psychedelics with other serotonergic drugs, including certain antidepressants, opioids, CNS stimulants (e.g. MDMA), 5-HT1 agonists (e.g. triptans), herbs and others.

Serotonergic psychedelics are agonists not only of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor but also of the serotonin 5-HT2B receptor and other serotonin receptors. A potential risk of frequent repeated use of serotonergic psychedelics is cardiac fibrosis and valvulopathy caused by 5-HT2B receptor activation. However, single high doses or widely spaced doses (e.g., months) are widely thought to be safe and concerns about cardiac toxicity apply more to chronic psychedelic microdosing or very frequent use (e.g., weekly). Selective 5-HT2A receptor agonists that do not activate the 5-HT2B receptor or other serotonin receptors, such as 25CN-NBOH, DMBMPP, and LPH-5, have been developed and are being studied. Selective 5-HT2A receptor agonists are expected to avoid the cardiac risks of 5-HT2B receptor activation.

==Potential therapeutic effects==


Psychedelic substances which may have therapeutic uses include psilocybin, LSD, and mescaline. During the 1950s and 1960s, lack of informed consent in some scientific trials on psychedelics led to significant, long-lasting harm to some participants. Since then, research regarding the effectiveness of psychedelic therapy has been conducted under strict ethical guidelines, with fully informed consent and a pre-screening to avoid people with psychosis taking part. Although the history behind these substances has hindered research into their potential medicinal value, scientists are now able to conduct studies and renew research that was halted in the 1970s. Some research has shown that these substances have helped people with such mental disorders as obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), alcoholism, depression, and cluster headaches.

It has long been known that psychedelics promote neurite growth and neuroplasticity and are potent psychoplastogens. There is evidence that psychedelics induce molecular and cellular adaptations related to neuroplasticity and that these could potentially underlie therapeutic benefits. Psychedelics have also been shown to have potent anti-inflammatory activity and therapeutic effects in animal models of inflammatory diseases including asthma, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. They might also be useful for the treatment of neuroinflammation as well as post-COVID-19 syndrome (long COVID).

==History==
===Psychedelic renaissance===
A so-called &quot;psychedelic renaissance&quot;, in which interest in psychedelics has resurged, began in the late 2010s and early 2020s.

==Surrounding culture==

Psychedelic culture includes manifestations such as psychedelic music, psychedelic art, psychedelic literature, psychedelic film, and psychedelic festivals. Examples of psychedelic music are found in the work of 1960s rock bands like the Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane, The 13th Floor Elevators, and Syd Barrett-era Pink Floyd. Many psychedelic bands and elements of the psychedelic subculture originated in San Francisco during the mid to late 1960s.

==Legal status==
Many psychedelics are classified under Schedule I of the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 as drugs with the greatest potential to cause harm and no acceptable medical uses. In addition, many countries have analogue laws; for example, in the United States, the Federal Analogue Act of 1986 automatically forbids any drugs sharing similar chemical structures or chemical formulas to prohibited substances if sold for human consumption.

In July 2022, though, under the United States Food and Drug Administration, the drug psilocybin was on track to be approved of as a treatment for depression, and MDMA as a treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder.

U.S. states such as Oregon and Colorado have also instituted decriminalization and legalization measures for accessing psychedelics and states like New Hampshire are attempting to do the same. J.D. Tuccille argues that increasing rates of use of psychedelics in defiance of the law are likely to result in more widespread legalization and decriminalization of access to the substances in the United States (as has happened with alcohol and cannabis).

==See also==

* Aztec use of entheogens
* Bwiti
* Cognitive liberty
* Concord Prison Experiment
* Designer Drugs
* Dissociative drug
* Deliriant
* Drug harmfulness
* Entheogenic drugs and the archaeological record
* Entheogenics and the Maya
* Hallucinogenic fish
* Hallucinogenic plants in Chinese herbals
* &quot;Hamilton&#x27;s Pharmacopeia&quot;
* History of lysergic acid diethylamide
* Ibogaine
* List of designer drugs
* List of psychedelic drugs
* List of psychedelic plants
* Marsh Chapel Experiment
* Morning glory
* Mystical psychosis
* &quot;PiHKAL&quot;
* Research chemical
* Serotonergic cell groups
* Serotonin syndrome
* &quot;Tabernanthe iboga&quot;
* &quot;TiHKAL&quot;
* Trip killer
===Categories===
== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Winstock, Ar; Timmerman, C; Davies, E; Maier, Lj; Zhuparris, A; Ferris, Ja; Barratt, Mj; Kuypers, Kpc (2021). &quot;Global Drug Survey (GDS) 2020 Psychedelics Key Findings Report&quot;.

== External links ==

Psychedelic Timeline by Tom Frame, Psychedelic Times</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="0" end="12" title="Psychedelic drug" label="Psychedelics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="31" end="51" title="Hallucinogen" label="hallucinogenic drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076521" start="124" end="146" title="psychedelic experience" label="psychedelic experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="246" end="267" title="Psychedelic drug" label="classic hallucinogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="271" end="297" title="Psychedelic drug" label="serotonergic hallucinogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="454" end="465" title="psychedelia" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320584" start="471" end="477" title="Salvia divinorum" label="salvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="482" end="486" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q852859" start="625" end="655" title="altered state of consciousness" label="altered state of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="729" end="738" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="740" end="743" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="745" end="755" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="761" end="764" title="N,N-Dimethyltryptamine" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q901227" start="799" end="818" title="natural product" label="naturally occurring"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="823" end="832" title="synthetic compound" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="943" end="954" title="Substituted tryptamine" label="tryptamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="956" end="971" title="Substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="976" end="988" title="lysergamides" label="lysergamides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455050" start="1057" end="1086" title="Serotonin receptor agonist" label="serotonin 2A receptor agonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="1121" end="1127" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q143210" start="1499" end="1518" title="mystical experience" label="mystical experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q219566" start="1525" end="1546" title="near-death experience" label="near-death experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348168" start="1655" end="1664" title="ego death" label="ego death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273678" start="1850" end="1864" title="Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs" label="UN conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="1957" end="1973" title="recreational use" label="recreational use"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="2247" end="2264" title="Psychotherapy" label="psychotherapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="2328" end="2338" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="2340" end="2347" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2349" end="2366" title="alcohol addiction" label="alcohol addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="2372" end="2390" title="nicotine addiction" label="nicotine addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275370" start="2719" end="2734" title="Humphrey Osmond" label="Humphrey Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="2777" end="2790" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2984" end="2989" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q841408" start="3341" end="3354" title="ethnobotanist" label="ethnobotanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124975" start="3355" end="3371" title="Richard Schultes" label="Richard Schultes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="3412" end="3425" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="3690" end="3699" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017818" start="3936" end="3952" title="David E. Nichols" label="David E. Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q49986629" start="4025" end="4045" title="Robin Carhart-Harris" label="Robin Carhart-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622285" start="4050" end="4061" title="Guy Goodwin" label="Guy Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q903338" start="4499" end="4520" title="empathogen–entactogen" label="empathogen–entactogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q900394" start="4523" end="4535" title="dissociative" label="dissociative"/>
<link wikidata="Q131227" start="4593" end="4609" title="Amanita muscaria" label="Amanita muscaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26726" start="4623" end="4638" title="Cannabis sativa" label="Cannabis sativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663639" start="4652" end="4669" title="Nymphaea nouchali" label="Nymphaea nouchali"/>
<link wikidata="Q320584" start="4686" end="4702" title="Salvia divinorum" label="Salvia divinorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q229942" start="4964" end="4968" title="2C-B" label="2C-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="5012" end="5038" title="substituted phenethylamine" label="substituted phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="5068" end="5085" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q903338" start="5125" end="5135" title="Empathogen–entactogen" label="entactogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728188" start="5274" end="5283" title="2C (psychedelics)" label="2C family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633049" start="5291" end="5308" title="2C-H" label="general structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="5381" end="5384" title="N,N-Dimethyltryptamine" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q408452" start="5440" end="5455" title="indole alkaloid" label="indole alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q380436" start="5563" end="5572" title="ayahuasca" label="ayahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q410954" start="5657" end="5662" title="Monoamine oxidase inhibitor" label="MAOIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q135270" start="5677" end="5686" title="harmaline" label="harmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q410867" start="5762" end="5779" title="monoamine oxidase" label="monoamine oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180828" start="5861" end="5873" title="pharmahuasca" label="pharmahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="6292" end="6311" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="6494" end="6516" title="substituted tryptamine" label="substituted tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="6610" end="6613" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q415837" start="6662" end="6675" title="lysergic acid" label="lysergic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="6704" end="6714" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419186" start="6718" end="6728" title="ergotamine" label="ergotamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="6747" end="6755" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q217227" start="6782" end="6800" title="Claviceps purpurea" label="Claviceps purpurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="6899" end="6910" title="Lysergamides" label="lysergamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="6950" end="6960" title="Substituted tryptamine" label="tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="6965" end="6979" title="Substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="7061" end="7069" title="Agonist" label="agonises"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="7245" end="7254" title="Mescaline" label="Mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="7293" end="7307" title="Substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="7382" end="7388" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q92450324" start="7451" end="7512" title="Trichocereus macrogonus var. pachanoi" label="&amp;quot;Trichocereus macrogonus&amp;quot; var. &amp;quot;pachanoi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q92450324" start="7525" end="7544" title="Echinopsis pachanoi" label="Echinopsis pachanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q409150" start="7816" end="7824" title="Psilocin" label="Psilocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101143" start="7843" end="7859" title="Dephosphorylation" label="dephosphorylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677569" start="7860" end="7877" title="active metabolite" label="active metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q408452" start="7885" end="7900" title="indole alkaloid" label="indole alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="7901" end="7911" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="7918" end="7940" title="substituted tryptamine" label="substituted tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="7963" end="7988" title="Psilocybin mushroom" label="over 200 species of fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491364" start="8203" end="8212" title="4-AcO-DMT" label="4-AcO-DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="8345" end="8353" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162772" start="8394" end="8403" title="4-HO-MIPT" label="4-HO-MIPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090804" start="8408" end="8416" title="4-HO-MET" label="4-HO-MET"/>
<link wikidata="Q380436" start="8541" end="8550" title="Ayahuasca" label="Ayahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="8573" end="8576" title="N,N-Dimethyltryptamine" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q41793333" start="8579" end="8588" title="Trichocereus macrogonus" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="8590" end="8596" title="Peyote" label="Peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q41793333" start="8602" end="8616" title="Echinopsis peruviana" label="Peruvian torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="8636" end="8645" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q850667" start="8648" end="8667" title="Psilocybe mushrooms" label="Psilocybe mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q409150" start="8683" end="8691" title="psilocin" label="psilocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="8692" end="8702" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132677" start="8714" end="8731" title="Tabernanthe iboga" label="Tabernanthe iboga"/>
<link wikidata="Q409455" start="8777" end="8785" title="ibogaine" label="ibogaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="8828" end="8837" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="8839" end="8847" title="shamanic" label="shamanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="8873" end="8891" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="8958" end="8963" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262708" start="9195" end="9202" title="Mazatec" label="Mazatec"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="9213" end="9219" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="9268" end="9280" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644904" start="9434" end="9451" title="Rio Grande Valley" label="Rio Grande Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="9492" end="9501" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="9510" end="9516" title="Andes" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q92450324" start="9564" end="9625" title="Trichocereus macrogonus var. pachanoi" label="&amp;quot;Trichocereus macrogonus&amp;quot; var. &amp;quot;pachanoi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q92450324" start="9638" end="9657" title="Echinopsis pachanoi" label="Echinopsis pachanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="9706" end="9726" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208188" start="9812" end="9817" title="Moche (culture)" label="Moche"/>
<link wikidata="Q210570" start="9827" end="9840" title="Nazca culture" label="Nazca culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13341477" start="9846" end="9860" title="Chavín culture" label="Chavín culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9890" end="9904" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="10067" end="10078" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="10372" end="10389" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="10411" end="10426" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="10470" end="10487" title="psychotherapeutic" label="psychotherapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="10491" end="10503" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="10621" end="10633" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="10650" end="10660" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="10959" end="10966" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="11066" end="11072" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60472372" start="11099" end="11118" title="Dictyonema huaorani" label="Dictyonema huaorani"/>
<link wikidata="Q570757" start="11156" end="11165" title="5-MeO-DMT" label="5-MeO-DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540656" start="11244" end="11259" title="Maleficium (sorcery)" label="malicious magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="11274" end="11284" title="nightshade" label="nightshade"/>
<link wikidata="Q901434" start="11285" end="11295" title="deliriants" label="deliriants"/>
<link wikidata="Q757262" start="11307" end="11317" title="brugmansia" label="brugmansia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11145504" start="11334" end="11339" title="latua" label="latua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="11480" end="11495" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572854" start="11757" end="11779" title="psychiatric medication" label="psychiatric medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="12786" end="12811" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="12817" end="12824" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364787" start="12850" end="12866" title="terminal illness" label="terminal illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="12886" end="12914" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326544" start="12927" end="12947" title="breakthrough therapy" label="breakthrough therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677576" start="13208" end="13214" title="active placebo" label="active"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="13227" end="13234" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256213" start="13322" end="13337" title="psychedelic era" label="psychedelic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q152518" start="13427" end="13438" title="Burning Man" label="Burning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="13554" end="13570" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="13899" end="13902" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="13933" end="13937" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839483" start="14190" end="14199" title="microdose" label="microdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="14602" end="14618" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914025" start="14832" end="14845" title="binding selectivity" label="non-selective"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="14846" end="14853" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q238516" start="14858" end="14876" title="serotonin receptor" label="serotonin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="14896" end="14905" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753586" start="14906" end="14920" title="5-HT2 receptor" label="5-HT2 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q753583" start="14990" end="15004" title="5-HT1 receptor" label="5-HT1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="15104" end="15119" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="15146" end="15156" title="substituted tryptamine" label="tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409150" start="15163" end="15171" title="psilocin" label="psilocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="15173" end="15176" title="dimethyltryptamine" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q570757" start="15182" end="15191" title="5-MeO-DMT" label="5-MeO-DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="15193" end="15207" title="substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="15214" end="15223" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q62267185" start="15225" end="15228" title="DOM (drug)" label="DOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q229942" start="15234" end="15238" title="2C-B" label="2C-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q424432" start="15244" end="15252" title="ergoline" label="ergoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="15258" end="15269" title="lysergamide" label="lysergamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="15276" end="15279" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914025" start="15408" end="15419" title="binding selectivity" label="selectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="15545" end="15553" title="affinity (pharmacology)" label="affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066956" start="15579" end="15586" title="potency (pharmacology)" label="potency"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="15718" end="15727" title="receptor occupancy" label="occupancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="15745" end="15773" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="15780" end="15787" title="medical imaging" label="imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q415997" start="15859" end="15869" title="ketanserin" label="ketanserin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412443" start="15892" end="15903" title="risperidone" label="risperidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194603" start="16051" end="16063" title="pimavanserin" label="pimavanserin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617378" start="16108" end="16131" title="stimulus generalization" label="stimulus generalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q62267185" start="16151" end="16154" title="DOM (drug)" label="DOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q131298980" start="16158" end="16177" title="drug discrimination" label="drug discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q27088400" start="16321" end="16332" title="pirenperone" label="pirenperone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940202" start="16392" end="16404" title="volinanserin" label="volinanserin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639596" start="16523" end="16529" title="5-HT2B receptor" label="5-HT2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027437" start="16534" end="16549" title="5-HT2C receptor" label="5-HT2C receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689075" start="16945" end="16965" title="head-twitch response" label="head-twitch response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364740" start="17247" end="17260" title="knockout mice" label="knockout mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q424446" start="17581" end="17589" title="lisuride" label="lisuride"/>
<link wikidata="Q210973" start="17863" end="17880" title="cell signaling" label="signaling pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726231" start="17901" end="17903" title="Gq protein" label="Gq"/>
<link wikidata="Q17832094" start="17905" end="17916" title="β-arrestin2" label="β-arrestin2"/>
<link wikidata="Q224527" start="18279" end="18302" title="receptor downregulation" label="receptor downregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464757" start="18307" end="18320" title="tachyphylaxis" label="tachyphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q770260" start="18427" end="18442" title="partial agonism" label="partial agonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671589" start="18481" end="18489" title="intrinsic activity" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258877" start="18551" end="18565" title="biased agonism" label="biased agonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671589" start="18668" end="18686" title="intrinsic activity" label="intrinsic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="18753" end="18765" title="Full agonist" label="Full agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q770260" start="18771" end="18786" title="partial agonist" label="partial agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596865" start="18916" end="18927" title="2-bromo-LSD" label="2-bromo-LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q110782354" start="18929" end="18941" title="6-Fluoro-DET" label="6-fluoro-DET"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105167" start="18943" end="18952" title="6-MeO-DMT" label="6-MeO-DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790178" start="18958" end="18965" title="Ariadne (drug)" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975023" start="19111" end="19119" title="ITI-1549" label="ITI-1549"/>
<link wikidata="Q127393828" start="19121" end="19130" title="IHCH-7086" label="IHCH-7086"/>
<link wikidata="Q123532270" start="19136" end="19146" title="25N-N1-Nap" label="25N-N1-Nap"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="19338" end="19362" title="medial prefrontal cortex" label="medial prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19371" end="19378" title="Cerebral cortex#Layer V" label="Layer V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116409" start="19379" end="19395" title="pyramidal cell" label="pyramidal neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="19573" end="19582" title="glutamate" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="19587" end="19591" title="GABA" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q295251" start="19746" end="19759" title="AMPA receptor" label="AMPA receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033959" start="19773" end="19795" title="metabotropic glutamate receptor" label="metabotropic glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859538" start="19796" end="19801" title="mGlu2" label="mGlu2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594119" start="19802" end="19812" title="mGlu3" label="3 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911924" start="19823" end="19840" title="μ-opioid receptor" label="μ-opioid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190012" start="19855" end="19864" title="adenosine" label="adenosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14888579" start="19865" end="19876" title="A1 receptor" label="A1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="20069" end="20080" title="presynaptic" label="presynaptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q417749" start="20081" end="20093" title="autoreceptor" label="autoreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="20198" end="20212" title="frontal cortex" label="frontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207387" start="20213" end="20226" title="excitatory postsynaptic potential" label="hyperactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="20248" end="20290" title="single-photon emission computed tomography" label="single-photon emission computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470452" start="20397" end="20412" title="locus coeruleus" label="locus coeruleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476178" start="20414" end="20431" title="nucleus accumbens" label="nucleus accumbens"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="20437" end="20445" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q75785" start="20659" end="20680" title="primary visual cortex" label="primary visual cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q429036" start="20981" end="20990" title="claustrum" label="claustrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q108607284" start="21113" end="21132" title="serotonin precursor" label="serotonin precursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q238544" start="21133" end="21152" title="5-hydroxytryptophan" label="5-hydroxytryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455053" start="21162" end="21190" title="serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="serotonin reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455052" start="21197" end="21222" title="serotonin releasing agent" label="serotonin releasing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="21334" end="21345" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587185" start="21381" end="21400" title="biological membrane" label="biological membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q304618" start="21410" end="21426" title="active transport" label="active transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476074" start="21488" end="21509" title="cell surface receptor" label="cell surface receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571762" start="21662" end="21675" title="intracellular" label="intracellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="21678" end="21687" title="gene expression" label="expressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q410142" start="21776" end="21797" title="serotonin transporter" label="serotonin transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="21910" end="21920" title="lipophilic" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124842" start="22443" end="22454" title="drug metabolism" label="metabolized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614421" start="22458" end="22505" title="indolethylamine N-methyltransferase" label="indolethylamine &amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-methyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407" start="22548" end="22558" title="methyl group" label="methylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q855403" start="22576" end="22605" title="N-Methylserotonin" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-methylserotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408915" start="22610" end="22619" title="bufotenin" label="bufotenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623431" start="22796" end="22811" title="psychoplastogen" label="psychoplastogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="22821" end="22836" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="22849" end="22863" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="22865" end="22875" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="22877" end="22884" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990613" start="22898" end="22907" title="prosocial" label="prosocial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22917" end="22933" title="Obsessive–compulsive disorder#Management" label="anti-obsessional"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="22935" end="22949" title="anti-addictive" label="anti-addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="22951" end="22968" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427096" start="22973" end="22988" title="immunomodulator" label="immunomodulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="22999" end="23008" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853292" start="23025" end="23037" title="antimigraine agent" label="antimigraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="23226" end="23234" title="structural analog" label="analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q21115043" start="23605" end="23611" title="5-HT1A receptor" label="5-HT1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q288797" start="23613" end="23619" title="5-HT1B receptor" label="5-HT1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649417" start="23818" end="23847" title="positive allosteric modulator" label="positive allosteric modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897782" start="23856" end="23885" title="tropomyosin receptor kinase B" label="tropomyosin receptor kinase B"/>
<link wikidata="Q123045" start="23928" end="23961" title="brain-derived neurotrophic factor" label="brain-derived neurotrophic factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="24090" end="24105" title="dendrite" label="dendritogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q902079" start="24107" end="24119" title="dendritic spine" label="spinogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813773" start="24125" end="24139" title="synaptogenesis" label="synaptogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456827" start="24256" end="24268" title="neurogenesis" label="neurogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="24311" end="24325" title="chemical group" label="chemical group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="24368" end="24378" title="substituted tryptamine" label="tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="24381" end="24395" title="substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="24402" end="24413" title="lysergamide" label="lysergamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q864491" start="24454" end="24478" title="pharmacological activity" label="pharmacological activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="24501" end="24511" title="Substituted tryptamine" label="Tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q898317" start="24517" end="24527" title="chemical derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q409439" start="24532" end="24542" title="tryptamine" label="tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="24551" end="24571" title="structural analog" label="structurally related"/>
<link wikidata="Q420225" start="24579" end="24605" title="monoamine neurotransmitter" label="monoamine neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="24606" end="24615" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914025" start="24685" end="24698" title="binding selectivity" label="non-selective"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455050" start="24699" end="24725" title="serotonin receptor agonist" label="serotonin receptor agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249391" start="24801" end="24826" title="monoamine releasing agent" label="monoamine releasing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q409439" start="24930" end="24940" title="tryptamine" label="tryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="24942" end="24960" title="dimethyltryptamine" label="dimethyltryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q570757" start="24968" end="24977" title="5-MeO-DMT" label="5-MeO-DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q409150" start="24979" end="24987" title="psilocin" label="psilocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208118" start="24989" end="24999" title="psilocybin" label="psilocybin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408915" start="25001" end="25010" title="bufotenin" label="bufotenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983762" start="25012" end="25022" title="5-MeO-DiPT" label="5-MeO-DiPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412834" start="25024" end="25034" title="5-MeO-MiPT" label="5-MeO-MiPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q421163" start="25036" end="25054" title="α-methyltryptamine" label="α-methyltryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031586" start="25066" end="25075" title="5-MeO-αMT" label="5-MeO-αMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="25121" end="25135" title="Substituted phenethylamine" label="Phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="25149" end="25160" title="substituted amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407411" start="25208" end="25224" title="phenethylamine" label="β-phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="25289" end="25297" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="25299" end="25313" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="25319" end="25330" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899597" start="25395" end="25402" title="methoxy group" label="methoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q898422" start="25413" end="25423" title="chemical substituent" label="substition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43413" start="25432" end="25443" title="phenyl ring" label="phenyl ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249391" start="25672" end="25697" title="monoamine releasing agent" label="monoamine releasing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="25765" end="25774" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728188" start="25780" end="25782" title="2C (psychedelics)" label="2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q229942" start="25794" end="25798" title="2C-B" label="2C-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q209260" start="25800" end="25804" title="2C-D" label="2C-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q209242" start="25806" end="25810" title="2C-E" label="2C-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q209255" start="25816" end="25820" title="2C-I" label="2C-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205910" start="25826" end="25829" title="DOx" label="DOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q209241" start="25841" end="25844" title="DOB (drug)" label="DOB"/>
<link wikidata="Q209251" start="25846" end="25849" title="DOI (drug)" label="DOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q62267185" start="25855" end="25858" title="DOM (drug)" label="DOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632114" start="25868" end="25872" title="MDxx" label="MDxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q223020" start="25884" end="25887" title="MDA (drug)" label="MDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="25892" end="25896" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39090943" start="25926" end="25931" title="NBOMe" label="NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q980120" start="25953" end="25962" title="25C-NBOMe" label="25C-NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632141" start="25967" end="25976" title="25I-NBOMe" label="25I-NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q546242" start="26000" end="26011" title="Lysergamide" label="Lysergamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424432" start="26017" end="26025" title="ergoline" label="ergoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q424432" start="26053" end="26067" title="ergot alkaloid" label="ergot alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q500256" start="26149" end="26167" title="chemical structure" label="chemical structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590051" start="26350" end="26368" title="monoamine receptor" label="monoamine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q238516" start="26384" end="26393" title="serotonin receptor" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415496" start="26395" end="26403" title="dopamine receptor" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410568" start="26409" end="26428" title="adrenergic receptor" label="adrenergic receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="26586" end="26612" title="lysergic acid diethylamide" label="lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041643" start="26620" end="26639" title="lysergic acid amide" label="lysergic acid amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096201" start="26647" end="26653" title="1P-LSD" label="1P-LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032934" start="26655" end="26661" title="ALD-52" label="ALD-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q424508" start="26663" end="26673" title="ergonovine" label="ergonovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424477" start="26693" end="26710" title="methylergometrine" label="methylergometrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914894" start="26874" end="26890" title="Phenomenology (psychology)" label="phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469929" start="27284" end="27298" title="form constants" label="form constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="27400" end="27406" title="Visual perception" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q13258" start="27428" end="27439" title="synesthesia" label="synesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="27591" end="27598" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348168" start="27737" end="27746" title="ego death" label="ego death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462024" start="27780" end="27793" title="transpersonal" label="transpersonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35120" start="27838" end="27844" title="entity" label="entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135315" start="27880" end="27904" title="closed eye hallucination" label="closed eye hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700498" start="27968" end="27977" title="Luis Eduardo Luna" label="Luis Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q421261" start="28035" end="28041" title="gnosis" label="gnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998095" start="28175" end="28195" title="personal development" label="personal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q508620" start="28222" end="28236" title="Stanislav Grof" label="Stanislav Grof"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="28370" end="28380" title="Revelation" label="revelatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312056" start="28381" end="28389" title="Epiphany (feeling)" label="insights"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="28643" end="28653" title="Subjective experience" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28820" end="28840" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide#Effects" label="its specific effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="28903" end="28917" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095708" start="28970" end="28985" title="Open-mindedness" label="open mindedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690719" start="29311" end="29320" title="afterglow (drug culture)" label="afterglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q552983" start="29469" end="29483" title="Havelock Ellis" label="Havelock Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30227" end="30236" title="Drinking#Hydration and dehydration" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752960" start="30325" end="30340" title="set and setting" label="set and setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q229942" start="30903" end="30907" title="2C-B" label="2C-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="31738" end="31746" title="Drug overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065982" start="31853" end="31862" title="Ira Byock" label="Ira Byock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295711" start="31890" end="31920" title="Journal of Palliative Medicine" label="Journal of Palliative Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q565578" start="32410" end="32431" title="hand-eye coordination" label="hand-eye coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q46627" start="32436" end="32454" title="Fine motor skill" label="fine motor control"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="32675" end="32684" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229825" start="33101" end="33117" title="population study" label="population study"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="33458" end="33471" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001920" start="33585" end="33628" title="hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" label="hallucinogen persisting perception disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="33779" end="33797" title="Serotonin syndrome" label="Serotonin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q238516" start="33941" end="33946" title="5-HT receptor" label="5-HT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q423866" start="33962" end="33969" title="triptan" label="triptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="34022" end="34029" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="34047" end="34056" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="34057" end="34072" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639596" start="34099" end="34114" title="5-HT2B receptor" label="5-HT2B receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q238516" start="34125" end="34143" title="serotonin receptor" label="serotonin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038318" start="34220" end="34236" title="cardiac fibrosis" label="cardiac fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130519" start="34241" end="34253" title="valvular heart disease" label="valvulopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29525998" start="34445" end="34468" title="psychedelic microdosing" label="psychedelic microdosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914025" start="34506" end="34515" title="Binding selectivity" label="Selective"/>
<link wikidata="Q15409371" start="34620" end="34629" title="25CN-NBOH" label="25CN-NBOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708268" start="34631" end="34637" title="DMBMPP" label="DMBMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q125856121" start="34643" end="34648" title="LPH-5 (drug)" label="LPH-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q764527" start="34967" end="34983" title="informed consent" label="informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="35594" end="35623" title="obsessive-compulsive disorder" label="obsessive-compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="35631" end="35661" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="35698" end="35715" title="cluster headaches" label="cluster headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="35786" end="35801" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623431" start="35817" end="35832" title="psychoplastogen" label="psychoplastogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="36053" end="36070" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="36124" end="36144" title="inflammatory disease" label="inflammatory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="36156" end="36162" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="36164" end="36186" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="36192" end="36200" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157137" start="36249" end="36266" title="neuroinflammation" label="neuroinflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q100732653" start="36278" end="36300" title="post-COVID-19 syndrome" label="post-COVID-19 syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="36574" end="36591" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q696160" start="36593" end="36608" title="psychedelic art" label="psychedelic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256214" start="36610" end="36632" title="psychedelic literature" label="psychedelic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q21858363" start="36634" end="36650" title="psychedelic film" label="psychedelic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="36668" end="36677" title="Music festival" label="festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="36760" end="36773" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q488260" start="36775" end="36793" title="Jefferson Airplane" label="Jefferson Airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q861190" start="36795" end="36819" title="The 13th Floor Elevators" label="The 13th Floor Elevators"/>
<link wikidata="Q173061" start="36825" end="36836" title="Syd Barrett" label="Syd Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="36841" end="36851" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="36933" end="36946" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429332" start="37067" end="37104" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances" label="Convention on Psychotropic Substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440009" start="37283" end="37303" title="Federal Analogue Act" label="Federal Analogue Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="38105" end="38112" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="38117" end="38125" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832973" start="38145" end="38168" title="Aztec use of entheogens" label="Aztec use of entheogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018444" start="38171" end="38176" title="Bwiti" label="Bwiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226078" start="38179" end="38196" title="Cognitive liberty" label="Cognitive liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158849" start="38199" end="38224" title="Concord Prison Experiment" label="Concord Prison Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200715" start="38227" end="38241" title="Designer Drugs" label="Designer Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q900394" start="38244" end="38261" title="Dissociative drug" label="Dissociative drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q901434" start="38264" end="38273" title="Deliriant" label="Deliriant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="38276" end="38292" title="Drug harmfulness" label="Drug harmfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380517" start="38295" end="38342" title="Entheogenic drugs and the archaeological record" label="Entheogenic drugs and the archaeological record"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242126" start="38345" end="38370" title="Entheogenics and the Maya" label="Entheogenics and the Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077413" start="38373" end="38392" title="Hallucinogenic fish" label="Hallucinogenic fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001440" start="38395" end="38435" title="Hallucinogenic plants in Chinese herbals" label="Hallucinogenic plants in Chinese herbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209457" start="38444" end="38472" title="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s Pharmacopeia" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s Pharmacopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992519" start="38481" end="38518" title="History of lysergic acid diethylamide" label="History of lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409455" start="38521" end="38529" title="Ibogaine" label="Ibogaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716898" start="38532" end="38554" title="List of designer drugs" label="List of designer drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635539" start="38557" end="38582" title="List of psychedelic drugs" label="List of psychedelic drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253234" start="38585" end="38611" title="List of psychedelic plants" label="List of psychedelic plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773300" start="38614" end="38637" title="Marsh Chapel Experiment" label="Marsh Chapel Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537167" start="38640" end="38653" title="Morning glory" label="Morning glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296524" start="38656" end="38674" title="Mystical psychosis" label="Mystical psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751374" start="38683" end="38689" title="PiHKAL" label="PiHKAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315154" start="38698" end="38715" title="Research chemical" label="Research chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455042" start="38718" end="38742" title="Serotonergic cell groups" label="Serotonergic cell groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="38745" end="38763" title="Serotonin syndrome" label="Serotonin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q132677" start="38772" end="38789" title="Tabernanthe iboga" label="Tabernanthe iboga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367117" start="38804" end="38810" title="TiHKAL" label="TiHKAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q130548484" start="38819" end="38830" title="Trip killer" label="Trip killer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53310" wikidata="Q5079636" url="?curid=53310" title="Vaccinium">
<text>Vaccinium is a common and widespread genus of shrubs or dwarf shrubs in the heath family (Ericaceae). The fruits of many species are eaten by humans and some are of commercial importance, including the cranberry, blueberry, bilberry (whortleberry), lingonberry (cowberry), and huckleberry. Like many other heath plants, they are restricted to acidic soils.

==Description==
The plant structure varies between species: some trail along the ground, some are dwarf shrubs, and some are larger shrubs perhaps tall. Some tropical species are epiphytic. Stems are usually woody. Flowers are epigynous with fused petals and have long styles that protrude from their bell-shaped corollas. Stamens have anthers with extended tube-like structures called &quot;awns&quot; through which pollen falls when mature. Inflorescences can be axillary or terminal. The fruit develops from an inferior ovary and is a four- or five-parted berry; it is usually brightly coloured, often red or bluish with purple juice. Roots are commonly mycorrhizal, which likely help the plants to access nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus in the acidic, nutrient-poor soils they inhabit.

==Taxonomy==
The genus was first described scientifically by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. The name &quot;Vaccinium&quot; was used in classical Latin for a plant, possibly the bilberry or a hyacinth, and may be derived from the Latin &quot;bacca&quot;, meaning berry, although its ultimate derivation is obscure. It is not the same word as &quot;Vaccinum&quot;, which means &quot;of or pertaining to cows&quot;.

The taxonomy of the genus is complex and still under investigation. Genetic analyses indicate that the genus &quot;Vaccinium&quot; is not monophyletic. A number of the Asian species are more closely related to &quot;Agapetes&quot; than to other &quot;Vaccinium&quot; species. A second group includes most of &quot;Orthaea&quot; and &quot;Notopora&quot;, at least some of &quot;Gaylussacia&quot; (huckleberry), and a number of species from &quot;Vaccinium&quot;, such as &quot;V. crassifolium&quot;. Other parts of &quot;Vaccinium&quot; form other groups, sometimes together with species of other genera. The taxonomy of &quot;Vaccinium&quot; can either be resolved by enlarging the genus to include the entirety of the tribe Vaccinieae or by breaking the genus up into several genera.

Two fossil seeds of &quot;V. minutulum&quot; have been extracted from borehole samples of the Middle Miocene freshwater deposits in Nowy Sacz Basin, West Carpathians, Poland.

===Subgenera===
A classification predating molecular phylogeny divides &quot;Vaccinium&quot; into subgenera and several sections:

;Subgenus Oxycoccus: The cranberries, with slender, trailing, wiry non-woody shoots and strongly reflexed flower petals. Some botanists treat &quot;Oxycoccus&quot; as a distinct genus.
*Sect. &quot;Oxycoccus&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium macrocarpon&quot; – American cranberry
**&quot;Vaccinium oxycoccos&quot; – common cranberry
**&quot;Vaccinium microcarpum&quot; – small bog cranberry
*Sect. &quot;Oxycoccoides&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium erythrocarpum&quot; – southern mountain cranberry
**&quot;Vaccinium japonicum&quot; – mountain blueberry
;Subgenus Vaccinium: All the other species, with thicker, upright woody shoots and bell-shaped flowers.
*Sect. &quot;Batodendron&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium arboreum&quot; – sparkleberry
**&quot;Vaccinium crassifolium&quot; – creeping blueberry
*Sect. &quot;Brachyceratium&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium dependens&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Bracteata&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium acrobracteatum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium barandanum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium bracteatum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium coriaceum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium cornigerum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium cruentum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium hooglandii&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium horizontale&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium laurifolium&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium lucidum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium myrtoides&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium phillyreoides&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium reticulatovenosum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium sparsum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium varingifolium&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Ciliata&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium ciliatum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium oldhamii&quot; - Japanese blueberry
*Sect. &quot;Cinctosandra&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium exul&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Conchophyllum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium corymbodendron&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium delavayi&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium emarginatum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium griffithianum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium moupinense&quot; – Himalayan blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium neilgherrense&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium nummularia&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium retusum&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Cyanococcus&quot; – typical North American blueberries
**&quot;Vaccinium angustifolium&quot; – lowbush blueberry - also known as &quot;Vaccinium stenophyllum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium boreale&quot; – northern blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium caesariense&quot; – New Jersey blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium corymbosum&quot; – highbush blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium darrowii&quot; – evergreen blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium elliottii&quot; – Elliott&#x27;s blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium formosum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium fuscatum&quot; – black highbush blueberry; syn. &quot;V. atrococcum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium hirsutum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium myrsinites&quot; – evergreen blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium myrtilloides&quot; – Canadian blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium pallidum&quot; – dryland blueberry; syn. &quot;V. vacillans&quot; 
**&quot;Vaccinium simulatum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium tenellum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium virgatum&quot; – rabbiteye blueberry; syn. &quot;V. ashei&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Eococcus&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium fragile&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Epigynium&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium vacciniaceum&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Galeopetalum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium chunii&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium dunalianum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium glaucoalbum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium sikkimense&quot; (may not be treated as a separate species from &quot;V. glaucoalbum&quot;)
**&quot;Vaccinium urceolatum&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Hemimyrtillus&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium arctostaphylos&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium cylindraceum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium hirtum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium padifolium&quot; – Madeira blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium smallii&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Koreanum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium koreanum&quot; – Korean blueberry
*Sect. &quot;Myrtillus&quot; (including sect. &quot;Macropelma&quot;) – bilberries and relatives. Monophyly of this section has been confirmed by matK and nuclear ribosomal ITS sequence data.
**&quot;Vaccinium calycinum&quot; – (Hawaii)
**&quot;Vaccinium cereum&quot; – east Polynesian blueberry, Pacific blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium cespitosum&quot; – dwarf bilberry
**&quot;Vaccinium deliciosum&quot; – Cascade bilberry, Cascade blueberry, blueleaf huckleberry
**&quot;Vaccinium dentatum&quot; – (Hawaii)
**&quot;Vaccinium membranaceum&quot; – square-twig blueberry, thinleaf huckleberry, tall huckleberry, big huckleberry, mountain huckleberry, &quot;black huckleberry&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium myrtillus&quot; – common bilberry, blue whortleberry, blaeberry, fraughan, hurtleberry
**&quot;Vaccinium ovalifolium&quot; – Alaska blueberry, early blueberry, oval-leaf blueberry
**&quot;Vaccinium parvifolium&quot; – red huckleberry
**Vaccinium praestans – &quot;krasnika&quot; (), Kamchatka bilberry
**&quot;Vaccinium reticulatum&quot; – (Hawaii)
**&quot;Vaccinium scoparium&quot; – grouse whortleberry, grouseberry, littleleaf huckleberry
**&quot;Vaccinium shastense&quot; - Shasta huckleberry
*Sect. &quot;Neurodesia&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium crenatum&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Oarianthe&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium ambyandrum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium cyclopense&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Oreades&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium poasanum&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Pachyanthum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium fissiflorum&quot;
*Sect. &quot;Polycodium&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium stamineum&quot; – deerberry; syn. &quot;V. caesium&quot; (eastern North America) (images)
*Sect. &quot;Pyxothamnus&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium chihuahuense&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium confertum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium consanguineum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium corymbodendron&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium floribundum&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium meridionale&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium ovatum&quot; – California huckleberry (or evergreen huckleberry) (coastal western North America). First collected and described for western science by Meriwether Lewis.
*Sect. &quot;Vaccinium&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium uliginosum&quot; – northern (or bog) bilberry (or blueberry); syn. &quot;V. occidentale&quot; (northern North America and Eurasia)
*Sect. &quot;Vitis-idaea&quot;
**&quot;Vaccinium vitis-idaea&quot; – partridgeberry, cowberry, redberry, red whortleberry, or lingonberry (northern North America and Eurasia)
==Distribution and habitat==
The genus contains about 450 species, which are found mostly in the cooler areas of the Northern Hemisphere. However, there are tropical species from areas as widely separated as Madagascar and Hawaii. The genus is distributed worldwide except for Australia and Antarctica, but areas of great &quot;Vaccinium&quot; diversity include the montane regions of North and South America, as well as Southeast Asia. Species are still being discovered in the Andes.

Plants of this group typically require acidic soils, and as wild plants, they live in habitats such as heath, bog and acidic woodland (for example, blueberries under oaks or pines). Blueberry plants are commonly found in oak-heath forests in eastern North America. &quot;Vaccinium&quot; is found in both successional and stable sites, and it is fire-adapted in many regions, withstanding low-intensity burns, and re-sprouting from rhizomes when above-ground tissues are burned off.

==Ecology==
&quot;Vaccinium&quot; species are used as food plants by the larvae of a number of Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species. Berries of North American species nourish a variety of mammals and birds, notably including the grizzly bear.

== Cultivation ==
Blueberries (sect. Cyanococcus) and cranberries (sect. Oxycoccus) are relatively newly cultivated plants and are largely unchanged from their wild relatives. Genetic breeding of blueberries began around the turn of the 20th century. It was spearheaded by Frederick Coville, who performed many cross-breeding trials and produced dozens of new blueberry cultivars. He often tested new cultivars for their flavor, claiming after a long day of tasting that &quot;all blueberries taste the same, and all taste sour.&quot;

==See also==
*&quot;Malea pilosa&quot;
*&quot;Gaylussacia&quot;

==References==
==External links==

*&quot;Vaccinium&quot; information from U.S. National Plant Germplasm System
*British Towns and Villages Network, &quot;Vaccinium&quot;; Species of the Genus &quot;Vaccinium&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="37" end="42" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="46" end="51" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867502" start="56" end="67" title="dwarf shrub" label="dwarf shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q975872" start="76" end="88" title="heath family" label="heath family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="106" end="111" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="202" end="211" title="cranberry" label="cranberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="213" end="222" title="blueberry" label="blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60708120" start="224" end="232" title="bilberry" label="bilberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q93235" start="249" end="260" title="lingonberry" label="lingonberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689896" start="277" end="288" title="huckleberry" label="huckleberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q565649" start="343" end="354" title="acidic soil" label="acidic soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867502" start="456" end="467" title="dwarf shrub" label="dwarf shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="537" end="546" title="epiphytic" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="585" end="594" title="epigynous" label="epigynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="849" end="854" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="917" end="922" title="berry (botany)" label="berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q99974" start="1015" end="1025" title="mycorrhiza" label="mycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1220" end="1233" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="1286" end="1301" title="classical Latin" label="classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413585" start="1328" end="1336" title="Vaccinium myrtillus" label="bilberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q158758" start="1342" end="1350" title="hyacinth (plant)" label="hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="1552" end="1555" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="1569" end="1577" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="1703" end="1715" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658662" start="1781" end="1789" title="Agapetes" label="Agapetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q250851" start="1879" end="1886" title="Orthaea (plant)" label="Orthaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219322" start="1903" end="1911" title="Notopora" label="Notopora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704451" start="1942" end="1953" title="Gaylussacia" label="Gaylussacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907962" start="2041" end="2056" title="Vaccinium crassifolium" label="V. crassifolium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838808" start="2290" end="2300" title="Vaccinieae" label="Vaccinieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2355" end="2361" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="2421" end="2429" title="borehole" label="borehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841498" start="2445" end="2459" title="Middle Miocene" label="Middle Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q802" start="2483" end="2492" title="Nowy Sacz" label="Nowy Sacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q927233" start="2500" end="2516" title="West Carpathians" label="West Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2518" end="2524" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2570" end="2589" title="molecular phylogeny" label="molecular phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="2683" end="2694" title="cranberry" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q149397" start="2880" end="2901" title="Vaccinium macrocarpon" label="Vaccinium macrocarpon"/>
<link wikidata="Q374399" start="2937" end="2956" title="Vaccinium oxycoccos" label="Vaccinium oxycoccos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573422" start="2990" end="3011" title="Vaccinium microcarpum" label="Vaccinium microcarpum"/>
<link wikidata="Q195561" start="3080" end="3103" title="Vaccinium erythrocarpum" label="Vaccinium erythrocarpum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086379" start="3148" end="3167" title="Vaccinium japonicum" label="Vaccinium japonicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249733" start="3338" end="3356" title="Vaccinium arboreum" label="Vaccinium arboreum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907962" start="3386" end="3408" title="Creeping blueberry" label="Vaccinium crassifolium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3478" end="3497" title="Vaccinium dependens" label="Vaccinium dependens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3541" end="3565" title="Vaccinium acrobracteatum" label="Vaccinium acrobracteatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3580" end="3600" title="Vaccinium barandanum" label="Vaccinium barandanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11240829" start="3615" end="3635" title="Vaccinium bracteatum" label="Vaccinium bracteatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3650" end="3669" title="Vaccinium coriaceum" label="Vaccinium coriaceum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3684" end="3704" title="Vaccinium cornigerum" label="Vaccinium cornigerum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3719" end="3737" title="Vaccinium cruentum" label="Vaccinium cruentum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3752" end="3772" title="Vaccinium hooglandii" label="Vaccinium hooglandii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3787" end="3808" title="Vaccinium horizontale" label="Vaccinium horizontale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3823" end="3844" title="Vaccinium laurifolium" label="Vaccinium laurifolium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3859" end="3876" title="Vaccinium lucidum" label="Vaccinium lucidum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3891" end="3910" title="Vaccinium myrtoides" label="Vaccinium myrtoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3925" end="3948" title="Vaccinium phillyreoides" label="Vaccinium phillyreoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3963" end="3990" title="Vaccinium reticulatovenosum" label="Vaccinium reticulatovenosum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4005" end="4022" title="Vaccinium sparsum" label="Vaccinium sparsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21303358" start="4037" end="4060" title="Vaccinium varingifolium" label="Vaccinium varingifolium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4102" end="4120" title="Vaccinium ciliatum" label="Vaccinium ciliatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269920" start="4135" end="4153" title="Vaccinium oldhamii" label="Vaccinium oldhamii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4221" end="4235" title="Vaccinium exul" label="Vaccinium exul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4283" end="4307" title="Vaccinium corymbodendron" label="Vaccinium corymbodendron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4322" end="4340" title="Vaccinium delavayi" label="Vaccinium delavayi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4355" end="4376" title="Vaccinium emarginatum" label="Vaccinium emarginatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4391" end="4414" title="Vaccinium griffithianum" label="Vaccinium griffithianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10949279" start="4429" end="4449" title="Vaccinium moupinense" label="Vaccinium moupinense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4486" end="4509" title="Vaccinium neilgherrense" label="Vaccinium neilgherrense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4524" end="4544" title="Vaccinium nummularia" label="Vaccinium nummularia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4559" end="4576" title="Vaccinium retusum" label="Vaccinium retusum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="4639" end="4650" title="blueberry" label="blueberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q512441" start="4659" end="4682" title="Vaccinium angustifolium" label="Vaccinium angustifolium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4731" end="4753" title="Vaccinium stenophyllum" label="Vaccinium stenophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993359" start="4768" end="4785" title="Vaccinium boreale" label="Vaccinium boreale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907960" start="4821" end="4842" title="Vaccinium caesariense" label="Vaccinium caesariense"/>
<link wikidata="Q468695" start="4880" end="4900" title="Vaccinium corymbosum" label="Vaccinium corymbosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907961" start="4936" end="4954" title="Vaccinium darrowii" label="Vaccinium darrowii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907963" start="4991" end="5010" title="Vaccinium elliottii" label="Vaccinium elliottii"/>
<link wikidata="Q17251902" start="5052" end="5070" title="Vaccinium formosum" label="Vaccinium formosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252570" start="5085" end="5103" title="Vaccinium fuscatum" label="Vaccinium fuscatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948282" start="5177" end="5195" title="Vaccinium hirsutum" label="Vaccinium hirsutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907966" start="5210" end="5230" title="Vaccinium myrsinites" label="Vaccinium myrsinites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017539" start="5267" end="5289" title="Vaccinium myrtilloides" label="Vaccinium myrtilloides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907968" start="5325" end="5343" title="Vaccinium pallidum" label="Vaccinium pallidum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5410" end="5429" title="Vaccinium simulatum" label="Vaccinium simulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993360" start="5444" end="5462" title="Vaccinium tenellum" label="Vaccinium tenellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4142371" start="5477" end="5495" title="Vaccinium virgatum" label="Vaccinium virgatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5587" end="5604" title="Vaccinium fragile" label="Vaccinium fragile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5648" end="5670" title="Vaccinium vacciniaceum" label="Vaccinium vacciniaceum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5717" end="5733" title="Vaccinium chunii" label="Vaccinium chunii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5748" end="5768" title="Vaccinium dunalianum" label="Vaccinium dunalianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15247279" start="5783" end="5804" title="Vaccinium glaucoalbum" label="Vaccinium glaucoalbum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15250921" start="5819" end="5839" title="Vaccinium sikkimense" label="Vaccinium sikkimense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5929" end="5949" title="Vaccinium urceolatum" label="Vaccinium urceolatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002269" start="5997" end="6021" title="Vaccinium arctostaphylos" label="Vaccinium arctostaphylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10388626" start="6036" end="6058" title="Vaccinium cylindraceum" label="Vaccinium cylindraceum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6073" end="6089" title="Vaccinium hirtum" label="Vaccinium hirtum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10388513" start="6104" end="6124" title="Vaccinium padifolium" label="Vaccinium padifolium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6159" end="6176" title="Vaccinium smallii" label="Vaccinium smallii"/>
<link wikidata="Q12600028" start="6219" end="6237" title="Vaccinium koreanum" label="Vaccinium koreanum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6463" end="6482" title="Vaccinium calycinum" label="Vaccinium calycinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="6492" end="6498" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q17250203" start="6508" end="6524" title="Vaccinium cereum" label="Vaccinium cereum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116550" start="6586" end="6606" title="Vaccinium cespitosum" label="Vaccinium cespitosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116550" start="6615" end="6629" title="dwarf bilberry" label="dwarf bilberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507064" start="6638" end="6658" title="Vaccinium deliciosum" label="Vaccinium deliciosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507064" start="6667" end="6683" title="Cascade bilberry" label="Cascade bilberry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6733" end="6751" title="Vaccinium dentatum" label="Vaccinium dentatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q292442" start="6777" end="6799" title="Vaccinium membranaceum" label="Vaccinium membranaceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q292442" start="6808" end="6829" title="square-twig blueberry" label="square-twig blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378662" start="6916" end="6933" title="black huckleberry" label="black huckleberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413585" start="6948" end="6967" title="Vaccinium myrtillus" label="Vaccinium myrtillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413585" start="6976" end="6991" title="common bilberry" label="common bilberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q143673" start="7053" end="7074" title="Vaccinium ovalifolium" label="Vaccinium ovalifolium"/>
<link wikidata="Q143673" start="7083" end="7099" title="Alaska blueberry" label="Alaska blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299248" start="7146" end="7167" title="Vaccinium parvifolium" label="Vaccinium parvifolium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299248" start="7176" end="7191" title="red huckleberry" label="red huckleberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4238190" start="7194" end="7213" title="Vaccinium praestans" label="Vaccinium praestans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7222" end="7230" title="krasnika" label="krasnika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081166" start="7268" end="7289" title="Vaccinium reticulatum" label="Vaccinium reticulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907969" start="7315" end="7334" title="Vaccinium scoparium" label="Vaccinium scoparium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907969" start="7343" end="7362" title="grouse whortleberry" label="grouse whortleberry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7408" end="7427" title="Vaccinium shastense" label="Vaccinium shastense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7436" end="7454" title="Shasta huckleberry" label="Shasta huckleberry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7493" end="7511" title="Vaccinium crenatum" label="Vaccinium crenatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7555" end="7575" title="Vaccinium ambyandrum" label="Vaccinium ambyandrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7590" end="7610" title="Vaccinium cyclopense" label="Vaccinium cyclopense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7652" end="7670" title="Vaccinium poasanum" label="Vaccinium poasanum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7716" end="7737" title="Vaccinium fissiflorum" label="Vaccinium fissiflorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907970" start="7782" end="7801" title="Vaccinium stamineum" label="Vaccinium stamineum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7921" end="7943" title="Vaccinium chihuahuense" label="Vaccinium chihuahuense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7958" end="7977" title="Vaccinium confertum" label="Vaccinium confertum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241046" start="7992" end="8015" title="Vaccinium consanguineum" label="Vaccinium consanguineum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8030" end="8054" title="Vaccinium corymbodendron" label="Vaccinium corymbodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907965" start="8069" end="8090" title="Vaccinium floribundum" label="Vaccinium floribundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15395050" start="8105" end="8126" title="Vaccinium meridionale" label="Vaccinium meridionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907967" start="8141" end="8157" title="Vaccinium ovatum" label="Vaccinium ovatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q146967" start="8357" end="8377" title="Vaccinium uliginosum" label="Vaccinium uliginosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q93235" start="8537" end="8558" title="Vaccinium vitis-idaea" label="Vaccinium vitis-idaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="8790" end="8809" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="8881" end="8891" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="8896" end="8902" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="9152" end="9157" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="9199" end="9203" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="9263" end="9268" title="heath (habitat)" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="9270" end="9273" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="9285" end="9293" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073410" start="9381" end="9397" title="oak-heath forest" label="oak-heath forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="9591" end="9598" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="9716" end="9721" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="9738" end="9749" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="9751" end="9760" title="butterfly" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="9765" end="9769" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="9876" end="9888" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="9945" end="9956" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257323" start="10447" end="10459" title="Malea pilosa" label="Malea pilosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704451" start="10473" end="10484" title="Gaylussacia" label="Gaylussacia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53311" wikidata="Q60024" url="?curid=53311" title="Hermann von Helmholtz">
<text>Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz (; ; 31 August 1821 – 8 September 1894; &quot;von&quot; since 1883) was a German physicist and physician who made significant contributions in several scientific fields, particularly hydrodynamic stability. The Helmholtz Association, the largest German association of research institutions, was named in his honour.

In the fields of physiology and psychology, Helmholtz is known for his mathematics concerning the eye, theories of vision, ideas on the visual perception of space, colour vision research, the sensation of tone, perceptions of sound, and empiricism in the physiology of perception. In physics, he is known for his theories on the conservation of energy and on the electrical double layer, work in electrodynamics, chemical thermodynamics, and on a mechanical foundation of thermodynamics. Although credit is shared with Julius von Mayer, James Joule, and Daniel Bernoulli—among others—for the energy conservation principles that eventually led to the first law of thermodynamics, he is credited with the first formulation of the energy conservation principle in its maximally general form.

As a philosopher, he is known for his philosophy of science, ideas on the relation between the laws of perception and the laws of nature, the science of aesthetics, and ideas on the civilizing power of science. By the late nineteenth century, Helmholtz&#x27;s development of a broadly Kantian methodology, including the &quot;a priori&quot; determination of the manifold of possible orientations in perceptual space, had inspired new readings of Kant and contributed to the late modern neo-Kantianism movement in philosophy.

== Biography ==

===Early years===

Helmholtz was born in Potsdam, the son of the local gymnasium headmaster, Ferdinand Helmholtz, who had studied classical philology and philosophy, and who was a close friend of the publisher and philosopher Immanuel Hermann Fichte. Helmholtz&#x27;s work was influenced by the philosophy of Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Immanuel Kant. He tried to trace their theories in empirical matters like physiology.

As a young man, Helmholtz was interested in natural science, but his father wanted him to study medicine. Helmholtz earned a medical doctorate at Medizinisch-chirurgisches Friedrich-Wilhelm-Institute in 1842 and served a one-year internship at the Charité hospital (because there was financial support for medical students).

Trained primarily in physiology, Helmholtz wrote on many other topics, ranging from theoretical physics to the age of the Earth, and to the origin of the Solar System.

===University posts===

Helmholtz&#x27;s first academic position was as a teacher of anatomy at the Academy of Arts in Berlin in 1848. He then moved to take a post of associate professor of physiology at the Prussian University of Königsberg, where he was appointed in 1849. In 1855 he accepted a full professorship of anatomy and physiology at the University of Bonn. He was not particularly happy in Bonn, however, and three years later he transferred to the University of Heidelberg, in Baden, where he served as professor of physiology. In 1871 he accepted his final university position, as professor of physics at the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin.

== Research ==

===Mechanics===

His first important scientific achievement, an 1847 treatise on the conservation of energy, was written in the context of his medical studies and philosophical background. His work on energy conservation came about while studying muscle metabolism. He tried to demonstrate that no energy is lost in muscle movement, motivated by the implication that there were no &quot;vital forces&quot; necessary to move a muscle. This was a rejection of the speculative tradition of &quot;Naturphilosophie&quot; and vitalism which was at that time a dominant philosophical paradigm in German physiology. He was working against the argument, promoted by some vitalists, that &quot;living force&quot; can power a machine indefinitely.

Drawing on the earlier work of Sadi Carnot, Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron and James Prescott Joule, he postulated a relationship between mechanics, heat, light, electricity and magnetism by treating them all as manifestations of a single &quot;force&quot;, or energy in today&#x27;s terminology. He published his theories in his book &quot;Über die Erhaltung der Kraft&quot; (&quot;On the Conservation of Force&quot;, 1847).

In the 1850s and 60s, building on the publications of William Thomson, Helmholtz and William Rankine helped popularize the idea of the heat death of the universe.

In fluid dynamics, Helmholtz made several contributions, including Helmholtz&#x27;s theorems for vortex dynamics in inviscid fluids.

===Sensory physiology===

Helmholtz was a pioneer in the scientific study of human vision and audition. Inspired by psychophysics, he was interested in the relationships between measurable physical stimuli and their correspondent human perceptions. For example, the amplitude of a sound wave can be varied, causing the sound to appear louder or softer, but a linear step in sound pressure amplitude does not result in a linear step in perceived loudness. The physical sound needs to be increased exponentially in order for equal steps to seem linear, a fact that is used in current electronic devices to control volume. Helmholtz paved the way in experimental studies on the relationship between the physical energy (physics) and its appreciation (psychology), with the goal in mind to develop &quot;psychophysical laws&quot;.

The sensory physiology of Helmholtz was the basis of the work of Wilhelm Wundt, a student of Helmholtz, who is considered one of the founders of experimental psychology. More explicitly than Helmholtz, Wundt described his research as a form of empirical philosophy and as a study of the mind as something separate. Helmholtz had, in his early repudiation of Naturphilosophie, stressed the importance of materialism, and was focusing more on the unity of &quot;mind&quot; and body.

===Ophthalmic optics===

In 1851, Helmholtz revolutionized the field of ophthalmology with the invention of the ophthalmoscope; an instrument used to examine the inside of the human eye. This made him world-famous overnight. Helmholtz&#x27;s interests at that time were increasingly focused on the physiology of the senses. His main publication, titled &quot;Handbuch der Physiologischen Optik&quot; (&quot;Handbook of Physiological Optics&quot; or &quot;Treatise on Physiological Optics&quot;; English translation of the 3rd volume here), provided empirical theories on depth perception, colour vision, and motion perception, and became the fundamental reference work in his field during the second half of the nineteenth century. In the third and final volume, published in 1867, Helmholtz described the importance of unconscious inferences for perception. The &quot;Handbuch&quot; was first translated into English under the editorship of James P. C. Southall on behalf of the Optical Society of America in 1924–5. His theory of accommodation went unchallenged until the final decade of the 20th century.

Helmholtz continued to work for several decades on several editions of the handbook, frequently updating his work because of his dispute with Ewald Hering who held opposite views on spatial and colour vision. This dispute divided the discipline of physiology during the second half of the 1800s.

===Nerve physiology===

In 1849, while at Königsberg, Helmholtz measured the speed at which the signal is carried along a nerve fibre. At that time most people believed that nerve signals passed along nerves immeasurably fast. He used a recently dissected sciatic nerve of a frog and the calf muscle to which it attached. He used a galvanometer as a sensitive timing device, attaching a mirror to the needle to reflect a light beam across the room to a scale which gave much greater sensitivity. Helmholtz reported transmission speeds in the range of 24.6 – 38.4 meters per second.

===Acoustics and aesthetics===

In 1863, Helmholtz published &quot;Sensations of Tone&quot;, once again demonstrating his interest in the physics of perception. This book influenced musicologists into the twentieth century. Helmholtz invented the Helmholtz resonator to identify the various frequencies or pitches of the pure sine wave components of complex sounds containing multiple tones.

Helmholtz showed that different combinations of resonators could mimic vowel sounds: Alexander Graham Bell in particular was interested in this but, not being able to read German, misconstrued Helmholtz&#x27;s diagrams as meaning that Helmholtz had transmitted multiple frequencies by wire—which would allow multiplexing of telegraph signals—whereas, in reality, electrical power was used only to keep the resonators in motion. Bell failed to reproduce what he thought Helmholtz had done but later said that, had he been able to read German, he would not have gone on to invent the telephone on the harmonic telegraph principle.

The translation by Alexander J. Ellis was first published in 1875 (the first English edition was from the 1870 third German edition; Ellis&#x27;s second English edition from the 1877 fourth German edition was published in 1885; the 1895 and 1912 third and fourth English editions were reprints of the second).

===Electromagnetism===

Helmholtz studied electrical oscillations from 1869 to 1871, and in a lecture delivered to the Naturhistorisch-medizinischen Verein zu Heidelberg (Natural History and Medical Association of Heidelberg) on 30 April 1869, titled &quot;On Electrical Oscillations&quot;, he indicated that the perceptible damped electrical oscillations in a coil connected to a Leyden jar were about second in duration.

In 1871, Helmholtz moved from Heidelberg to Berlin to become a professor of physics. He became interested in electromagnetism, and the Helmholtz equation is named for him. Although he made no major contributions to this field, his student Heinrich Rudolf Hertz became famous as the first to demonstrate electromagnetic radiation. Oliver Heaviside criticised Helmholtz&#x27;s electromagnetic theory because it allowed the existence of longitudinal waves. Based on work on Maxwell&#x27;s equations, Heaviside pronounced that longitudinal waves could not exist in a vacuum or a homogeneous medium. Heaviside did not note, however, that longitudinal electromagnetic waves can exist at a boundary or in an enclosed space.

==Philosophy==

Helmholtz&#x27; scientific work in physiology and mechanics occasioned much that he is known for in philosophy of science, including ideas on the relation between the laws of perception and the laws of nature and his rejection of the exclusive use of Euclidean geometry.

His philosophy of science wavered between some version of empiricism and transcendentalism. Despite the speculative associations of the latter, his philosophy of science is thoroughly indebted to his use of mathematical physics to supplant vitalism and articulate the general conservation of energy principle.

His rejection of Euclidean geometry as the only possible science of space is central to understanding his appropriation of Kant&#x27;s philosophy of space, which ostensibly requires Euclidean geometry to be that exclusive &quot;a priori&quot; science of physical space. Helmholtz introduced a new conception of the &quot;a priori&quot; in space: that of the determination of the manifold of possible orientations in perceptual space. These developments inspired new readings of Kant and contributed to the rise of late modern neo-Kantianism movement in philosophy.

== Students and associates ==

Other students and research associates of Helmholtz at Berlin included Max Planck, Heinrich Kayser, Eugen Goldstein, Wilhelm Wien, Arthur König, Henry Augustus Rowland, Albert A. Michelson, Wilhelm Wundt, Fernando Sanford and Michael I. Pupin. Leo Koenigsberger, who was his colleague from 1869 to 1871 in Heidelberg, wrote the definitive biography of him in 1902.

== Honours and legacy ==
* In 1873, Helmholtz was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society.
*In 1881, Helmholtz was elected Honorary Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland.
* On 10 November 1881, he was awarded the Légion d&#x27;honneur: au grade de Commandeur, or Level 3 – a senior grade. (No. 2173).
* In 1883, Professor Helmholtz was honoured by the Emperor, being raised to the nobility, or &quot;Adel&quot;. The &quot;Adelung&quot; meant that he and his family were now styled: von Helmholtz. The distinction was not a peerage or title, but it was hereditary and conferred a certain social cachet.
* Helmholtz was conferred the Honorary Membership of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland in 1884.
* The largest German association of research institutions, the Helmholtz Association, is named after him.
* The asteroid 11573 Helmholtz and the lunar crater &quot;Helmholtz&quot; as well as the crater &quot;Helmholtz&quot; on Mars were named in his honour.
* In Charlottenburg, Berlin, the street &quot;Helmholtzstraße&quot; is named after von Helmholtz.


== Works ==
* 
* 
* 

===Translated works===
* &quot;On the Conservation of Force&quot; (1847) HathiTrust
* 
*&quot;On the Conservation of Force&quot; (1895) Introduction to a Series of Lectures Delivered at Carlsruhe in the Winter of 1862–1863, English translation
*&quot;On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music&quot; (downloadable from California Digital Library) Third Edition of English Translation, based on Fourth German Edition of 1877, By Hermann von Helmholtz, Alexander John Ellis, Published by Longmans, Green, 1895, 576 pages
*&quot; On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music&quot; (downloadable from Google Books) Fourth Edition, By Hermann von Helmholtz, Alexander John Ellis, Published by Longmans, Green, 1912, 575 pages
*&quot;Treatise on Physiological Optics&quot; (1910) three volumes. English translation by Optical Society of America (1924–25).
*&quot;Popular lectures on scientific subjects&quot; (1885)
*&quot;Popular lectures on scientific subjects&quot; second series (1908)

== See also ==
* Helmholtz coil
* List of people from Berlin
* List of things named after Hermann von Helmholtz
* Neo-Kantianism
* Theory of Colours

== References ==
=== Citations ===

=== Sources ===
* Cahan, David &quot;Helmholtz: A Life in Science.&quot; University of Chicago Press, 2018. .
* Cohen, Robert, and Wartofsky, Marx, eds. and trans. Reidel. &quot;Helmholtz: Epistemological Writings&quot;, 1977.
* Ewald, William B., ed. &quot;From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics&quot;, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press, 1996.
** 1876. &quot;The origin and meaning of geometrical axioms&quot;, 663–88.
** 1878. &quot;The facts in perception&quot;, 698–726.
** 1887. &quot;Numbering and measuring from an epistemological viewpoint&quot;, 727–52.
* Groundwater, Jennifer. &quot;Alexander Graham Bell: The Spirit of Invention&quot;. Calgary: Altitude Publishing, 2005. .
* Jackson, Myles W. &quot;Harmonious Triads: Physicists, Musicians, and Instrument Makers in Nineteenth-Century Germany&quot; (MIT Press, 2006).
* Kahl, Russell, ed. Wesleyan. &quot;Selected Writings of Hermann von Helmholtz&quot;, Uni. Press., 1971.
* Koenigsberger, Leo. &quot;Hermann von Helmholtz&quot;, translated by Frances A. Welby (Dover, 1965)
* MacKenzie, Catherine. &quot;Alexander Graham Bell&quot;. Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger Publishing, 2003. . Retrieved 29 July 2009.
* Shulman, Seth. &quot;The Telephone Gambit: Chasing Alexander Bell&#x27;s Secret&quot;. New York: Norton &amp; Company, 2008. .

== Further reading ==
* 
* David Cahan: &quot;Helmholtz: A Life in Science&quot; (University of Chicago, 2018). 
**Steven Shapin, &quot;A Theorist of (Not Quite) Everything&quot; (review of David Cahan, &quot;Helmholtz: A Life in Science&quot;, University of Chicago Press, 2018, , 937 pp.), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. 66, no. 15 (10 October 2019), pp. 29–31.

* David Cahan (Ed.): &quot;Hermann von Helmholtz and the Foundations of Nineteenth-Century Science.&quot; Univ. California, Berkeley 1994, .
* Gregor Schiemann: &quot;Hermann von Helmholtz&#x27;s Mechanism: The Loss of Certainty. A Study on the Transition from Classical to Modern Philosophy of Nature&quot;. Dordrecht: Springer 2009, .

* Franz Werner: &quot;Hermann Helmholtz´ Heidelberger Jahre (1858–1871)&quot;. (= Sonderveröffentlichungen des Stadtarchivs Heidelberg 8). Mit 52 Abbildungen. Berlin / Heidelberg (Springer) 1997.
* Kenneth L. Caneva: &quot;Helmholtz and the Conservation of Energy: Contexts of Creation and Reception&quot;. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2021, ISBN 978-0-262-04573-5

== External links ==

* &quot;Hermann von Helmholtz&quot; (Obituary). Royal Society (Great Britain). (1894). &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Society of London&quot;. London: Printed by Taylor and Francis. p. xvii.
* &quot;Hermann von Helmholtz&quot; in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, written by Lydia Patton
* 
* Biography, bibliography and access to digital sources in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science
* (&quot;Die Lehre von den Tonempfindungen&quot;)
* Helmholtz&#x27;s (1867) &quot;Handbuch der physiologischen Optik&quot; – digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="0" end="38" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="120" end="129" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="134" end="143" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138087" start="222" end="244" title="hydrodynamic stability" label="hydrodynamic stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q679913" start="250" end="271" title="Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres" label="Helmholtz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="307" end="327" title="research institution" label="research institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="373" end="383" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="388" end="398" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="454" end="457" title="Human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="459" end="477" title="Theory of vision" label="theories of vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="492" end="509" title="visual perception" label="visual perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="520" end="533" title="colour vision" label="colour vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="593" end="603" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="640" end="647" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="701" end="707" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q904857" start="730" end="742" title="Double layer (surface science)" label="double layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="752" end="767" title="electrodynamics" label="electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q739016" start="769" end="792" title="chemical thermodynamics" label="chemical thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="803" end="813" title="Mechanics" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="828" end="842" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57171" start="875" end="891" title="Julius von Mayer" label="Julius von Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8962" start="893" end="904" title="James Joule" label="James Joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q122366" start="910" end="926" title="Daniel Bernoulli" label="Daniel Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q179380" start="1006" end="1033" title="first law of thermodynamics" label="first law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1151" end="1162" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="1184" end="1205" title="philosophy of science" label="philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="1268" end="1282" title="physical law" label="laws of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="1299" end="1309" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q737560" start="1632" end="1646" title="neo-Kantianism" label="neo-Kantianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="1730" end="1737" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1760" end="1769" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1819" end="1838" title="classical philology" label="classical philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1843" end="1853" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q77154" start="1915" end="1938" title="Immanuel Hermann Fichte" label="Immanuel Hermann Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="1998" end="2020" title="Johann Gottlieb Fichte" label="Johann Gottlieb Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="2025" end="2038" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="2099" end="2109" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="2237" end="2254" title="medical doctorate" label="medical doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="2360" end="2367" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q935310" start="2549" end="2565" title="age of the Earth" label="age of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2592" end="2604" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q672420" start="2824" end="2848" title="University of Königsberg" label="University of Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="2956" end="2974" title="University of Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="3068" end="3092" title="University of Heidelberg" label="University of Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877935" start="3097" end="3102" title="Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="3230" end="3258" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Friedrich Wilhelm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="3372" end="3394" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="3534" end="3540" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="3541" end="3551" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051382" start="3780" end="3796" title="Naturphilosophie" label="Naturphilosophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="3807" end="3815" title="vitalism" label="vitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181685" start="4056" end="4067" title="Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot" label="Sadi Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313551" start="4069" end="4096" title="Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron" label="Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron"/>
<link wikidata="Q8962" start="4101" end="4121" title="James Prescott Joule" label="James Prescott Joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="4160" end="4169" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="4171" end="4175" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4177" end="4182" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="4184" end="4195" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="4200" end="4209" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="4283" end="4289" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="4503" end="4518" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q232149" start="4534" end="4549" title="William Rankine" label="William Rankine"/>
<link wikidata="Q139931" start="4584" end="4610" title="heat death of the universe" label="heat death of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q985009" start="4680" end="4705" title="Helmholtz&amp;#x27;s theorems" label="Helmholtz&amp;#x27;s theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q500096" start="4863" end="4876" title="psychophysics" label="psychophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q75814" start="5640" end="5653" title="Wilhelm Wundt" label="Wilhelm Wundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="5733" end="5743" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051382" start="5933" end="5949" title="Naturphilosophie" label="Naturphilosophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="5978" end="5989" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="6129" end="6142" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q837188" start="6169" end="6183" title="ophthalmoscope" label="ophthalmoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="6233" end="6242" title="human eye" label="human eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749840" start="6628" end="6644" title="depth perception" label="depth perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="6646" end="6659" title="colour vision" label="colour vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q852504" start="6665" end="6682" title="motion perception" label="motion perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341011" start="6877" end="6898" title="unconscious inference" label="unconscious inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140742" start="6999" end="7019" title="James P. C. Southall" label="James P. C. Southall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027280" start="7037" end="7063" title="Optical Society of America" label="Optical Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811856" start="7089" end="7102" title="accommodation reflex" label="accommodation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64556" start="7308" end="7320" title="Ewald Hering" label="Ewald Hering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179472" start="7795" end="7807" title="galvanometer" label="galvanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450963" start="8113" end="8131" title="Sensations of Tone" label="Sensations of Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569889" start="8293" end="8312" title="Helmholtz resonance" label="Helmholtz resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="8337" end="8348" title="audio frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="8352" end="8359" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="8372" end="8381" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8396" end="8436" title="Fourier analysis#Applications in signal processing" label="complex sounds containing multiple tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="8510" end="8515" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="8524" end="8545" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q424090" start="9038" end="9056" title="harmonic telegraph" label="harmonic telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q621776" start="9088" end="9106" title="Alexander J. Ellis" label="Alexander J. Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23645" start="9761" end="9771" title="Leyden jar" label="Leyden jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="9913" end="9929" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q860615" start="9939" end="9957" title="Helmholtz equation" label="Helmholtz equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="10043" end="10064" title="Heinrich Rudolf Hertz" label="Heinrich Rudolf Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="10107" end="10132" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154345" start="10134" end="10150" title="Oliver Heaviside" label="Oliver Heaviside"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="10238" end="10255" title="longitudinal wave" label="longitudinal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="10275" end="10299" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="10638" end="10659" title="philosophy of science" label="philosophy of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="10732" end="10746" title="physical law" label="laws of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="10789" end="10807" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="10868" end="10878" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="10883" end="10900" title="transcendentalism" label="transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="11375" end="11389" title="physical space" label="physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q737560" start="11647" end="11661" title="neo-Kantianism" label="neo-Kantianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="11789" end="11799" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q68556" start="11801" end="11816" title="Heinrich Kayser" label="Heinrich Kayser"/>
<link wikidata="Q61433" start="11818" end="11833" title="Eugen Goldstein" label="Eugen Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q57068" start="11835" end="11847" title="Wilhelm Wien" label="Wilhelm Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q106757" start="11849" end="11861" title="Arthur König" label="Arthur König"/>
<link wikidata="Q505197" start="11863" end="11885" title="Henry Augustus Rowland" label="Henry Augustus Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127234" start="11887" end="11906" title="Albert A. Michelson" label="Albert A. Michelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q75814" start="11908" end="11921" title="Wilhelm Wundt" label="Wilhelm Wundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444916" start="11923" end="11939" title="Fernando Sanford" label="Fernando Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q196287" start="11944" end="11960" title="Michael I. Pupin" label="Michael I. Pupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68531" start="11962" end="11979" title="Leo Koenigsberger" label="Leo Koenigsberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="12161" end="12191" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631327" start="12225" end="12240" title="Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons" label="Honorary Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124228" start="12248" end="12284" title="Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland" label="Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="12328" end="12349" title="Legion of Honour" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995187" start="12774" end="12827" title="Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland" label="Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="12873" end="12893" title="research institution" label="research institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q679913" start="12900" end="12921" title="Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres" label="Helmholtz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q922084" start="12958" end="12973" title="11573 Helmholtz" label="11573 Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603254" start="13001" end="13010" title="Helmholtz (lunar crater)" label="Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614530" start="13045" end="13054" title="Helmholtz (Martian crater)" label="Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q162049" start="13100" end="13114" title="Charlottenburg" label="Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="13116" end="13122" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="13403" end="13412" title="Karlsruhe" label="Carlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603273" start="14281" end="14295" title="Helmholtz coil" label="Helmholtz coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q168209" start="14298" end="14324" title="List of people from Berlin" label="List of people from Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967166" start="14327" end="14375" title="List of things named after Hermann von Helmholtz" label="List of things named after Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q737560" start="14378" end="14392" title="Neo-Kantianism" label="Neo-Kantianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q112667736" start="14395" end="14412" title="Theory of Colours" label="Theory of Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778601" start="14581" end="14596" title="Marx W. Wartofsky" label="Wartofsky, Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996071" start="15668" end="15688" title="The Telephone Gambit" label="The Telephone Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q967777" start="15890" end="15903" title="Steven Shapin" label="Steven Shapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="16073" end="16101" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="17113" end="17148" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527919" start="17240" end="17258" title="Virtual Laboratory" label="Virtual Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q318118" start="17266" end="17313" title="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science" label="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551622" start="17466" end="17484" title="Linda Hall Library" label="Linda Hall Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53313" wikidata="Q26220" url="?curid=53313" title="Vitaceae">
<text>The Vitaceae are a family of flowering plants, with 14 genera and around 910 known species, including common plants such as grapevines (&quot;Vitis&quot; spp.) and Virginia creeper (&quot;Parthenocissus quinquefolia&quot;). The family name is derived from the genus &quot;Vitis&quot;.

Most &quot;Vitis&quot; species have 38 chromosomes (n=19), but 40 (n=20) in subgenus &quot;Muscadinia&quot;, while &quot;Ampelocissus&quot;, &quot;Parthenocissus&quot;, and &quot;Ampelopsis&quot; also have 40 chromosomes (n=20) and &quot;Cissus&quot; has 24 chromosomes (n=12).

The family is economically important as the berries of &quot;Vitis&quot; species, commonly known as grapes, are an important fruit crop and, when fermented, produce wine.

Species of the genus &quot;Tetrastigma&quot; serve as hosts to parasitic plants in the family Rafflesiaceae.

==Taxonomy==
The name sometimes appears as Vitidaceae, but Vitaceae is a conserved name and therefore has priority over both Vitidaceae and another name sometimes found in the older literature, Ampelidaceae. In the APG III system (2009) onwards, the family is placed in its own order, Vitales. Molecular phylogenetic studies place the Vitales as the most basal clade in the rosids. In the Cronquist system, the family was placed near the family Rhamnaceae in order Rhamnales.

&quot;Plants of the World Online&quot; currently includes the following genera, placed in two subfamilies:
===Leeoideae===
* &quot;Leea&quot; : previously placed in its own monotypic family, Leeaceae, was included in Vitaceae by APG IV (2016) and the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website.
===Vitoideae===
Five tribes are now recognised in this subfamily:
;Ampelopsideae

# &quot;Ampelopsis&quot; (pepper-vines)
# &quot;Clematicissus&quot; 
# &quot;Nekemias&quot; 
# &quot;Rhoicissus&quot; 
;Cayratieae

# &quot;Acareosperma&quot; 
# &quot;Afrocayratia&quot; 
# &quot;Causonis&quot; 
# &quot;Cayratia&quot; 
# &quot;Cyphostemma&quot; 
# &quot;Pseudocayratia&quot; 
# &quot;Tetrastigma&quot; 
;Cisseae

# &quot;Cissus&quot; (treebinds) - widespread in tropics &amp; subtropics
;Parthenocisseae

# &quot;Parthenocissus&quot; 
# &quot;Yua&quot; 
;Viteae
# &quot;Ampelocissus&quot; 
# &quot;Vitis&quot; (includes grape vine)
;tribe &quot;incertae sedis&quot;
# &quot;Pterisanthes&quot; (Indochina, Malesia)

==Earliest fossil history==
Well preserved-fruits of &quot;Indovitis chitaleyae&quot; containing seeds with similar morphology to the Vitaceae have been recovered from Late Cretaceous Deccan Intertrappean beds of several sites in central India. These fruits and their dispersed seeds found in the same sediments, about 66 million years old, represent the oldest known fossils of the grape family. The fossil fruits containing 4 to 6 seeds are very similar to extant &quot;Vitis&quot;.

==References==
*
*Vitaceae at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Web
* Vitidaceae in L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, information retrieval. http://delta-intkey.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26220" start="4" end="12" title="Vitaceae" label="Vitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="29" end="44" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="124" end="134" title="Vitis" label="grapevines"/>
<link wikidata="Q157968" start="164" end="180" title="Parthenocissus quinquefolia" label="Virginia creeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="272" end="277" title="Vitis" label="Vitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="325" end="336" title="chromosomes" label="chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="377" end="387" title="Muscadinia" label="Muscadinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033940" start="407" end="419" title="Ampelocissus" label="Ampelocissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157587" start="433" end="447" title="Parthenocissus" label="Parthenocissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158192" start="465" end="475" title="Ampelopsis" label="Ampelopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046407" start="524" end="530" title="Cissus" label="Cissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="609" end="616" title="Berry (botany)" label="berries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="665" end="670" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="730" end="734" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981583" start="764" end="775" title="Tetrastigma" label="Tetrastigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q127498" start="800" end="815" title="parasitic plant" label="parasitic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q157019" start="831" end="844" title="Rafflesiaceae" label="Rafflesiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q941227" start="920" end="934" title="conserved name" label="conserved name"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="1062" end="1076" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1141" end="1163" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="Molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="1221" end="1227" title="rosids" label="rosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1236" end="1252" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156083" start="1292" end="1302" title="Rhamnaceae" label="Rhamnaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118512" start="1312" end="1321" title="Rhamnales" label="Rhamnales"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="1330" end="1356" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669468" start="1455" end="1459" title="Leea" label="Leea"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="1497" end="1506" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="1553" end="1559" title="APG IV" label="APG IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="1575" end="1585" title="Angiosperm" label="Angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q158192" start="1695" end="1705" title="Ampelopsis" label="Ampelopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8346874" start="1735" end="1748" title="Clematicissus" label="Clematicissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42791296" start="1764" end="1772" title="Nekemias" label="Nekemias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048257" start="1788" end="1798" title="Rhoicissus" label="Rhoicissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95745051" start="1807" end="1817" title="Cayratieae" label="Cayratieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576152" start="1827" end="1839" title="Acareosperma" label="Acareosperma"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413365" start="1855" end="1867" title="Afrocayratia" label="Afrocayratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64559015" start="1883" end="1891" title="Causonis" label="Causonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936085" start="1907" end="1915" title="Cayratia" label="Cayratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941482" start="1931" end="1942" title="Cyphostemma" label="Cyphostemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q94579136" start="1958" end="1972" title="Pseudocayratia" label="Pseudocayratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981583" start="1988" end="1999" title="Tetrastigma" label="Tetrastigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046407" start="2025" end="2031" title="Cissus" label="Cissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157587" start="2117" end="2131" title="Parthenocissus" label="Parthenocissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9097233" start="2147" end="2150" title="Yua (plant)" label="Yua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033940" start="2174" end="2186" title="Ampelocissus" label="Ampelocissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="2202" end="2207" title="Vitis" label="Vitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938345" start="2278" end="2290" title="Pterisanthes" label="Pterisanthes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2378" end="2398" title="Indovitis" label="Indovitis chitaleyae"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="2487" end="2502" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="2503" end="2509" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057215" start="2510" end="2528" title="Intertrappean beds" label="Intertrappean beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2557" end="2562" title="India" label="India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53314" wikidata="Q434218" url="?curid=53314" title="Henri Labrouste">
<text>Pierre-François-Henri Labrouste () (11 May 1801 – 24 June 1875) was a French architect from the famous school of architecture. After a six-year stay in Rome, Labrouste established an architectural training workshop, which soon became known for rationalism. He became noted for his use of iron-frame construction and was one of the first to realize the importance of its use.

==Biography==
Born in Paris, Labrouste was one of five children of , a lawyer and politician from Bordeaux and Anne-Dominique Gourg (1764–1851), daughter and granddaughter of cognac merchants. He entered the Collège Sainte-Barbe as a student in 1809. He was then admitted into the second class and the Lebas-Vaudoyer workshop in the École Royale des Beaux Arts in 1819. In 1820, he was promoted to the first class. Competing for the Grand Prix, Labrouste was awarded second place (the Palais de Justice scored first) by Guillaume-Abel Blouet in 1821. 

In 1823, he won the departmental prize and worked as a lieutenant-inspector (&quot;sous-inspecteur&quot;) for the director Étienne-Hippolyte Godde during the construction of the Saint-Pierre-du-Gros-Caillou parish in Paris. In 1824 Labrouste won the competition with a design of a Court of Appeals (Cour de cassation). In November, he left Paris for Italy, visiting Turin, Milan, Lodi, Piacenza, Parma, Modena, Bologna, Florence and Arezzo.

In July 1835 in Paris he was present at the scene when Giuseppe Marco Fieschi attempted the assassination of King Louis-Philippe using a home-made, multi-barrel gun fired from an upstairs window. Although the King only received a minor injury, 18 people were killed, including Henri&#x27;s father, Alexandre Labrouste.

==Stay in Rome==
Receiving a pension or stipend from the French government for five years, he and the other Académie française laureates stayed in the Medici Villa in Rome. The directors of the Académie stated in correspondence in French about the laureates that, in their studies of antiquity, they &quot;must research the laws of proportion and reduce them to formulas to be used by masters and students in Paris.&quot;

==Work==

His work was the subject of &quot;Henri Labrouste: Structure Brought to Light,&quot; the first solo exhibition in the U.S. of his work, at The Museum of Modern Art in New York City.

His buildings include:
* Sainte-Geneviève Library, Paris, built between 1843 and 1850
* The Salle Labrouste, a reading room in the in the Rue de Richelieu, Paris, and built between 1862 and 1868.

For the Société Centrale des Architectes, today called Académie d&#x27;Architecture, Labrouste designed several medals. 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q434218" start="0" end="31" title="Henri Labrouste" label="Pierre-François-Henri Labrouste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110002" start="584" end="604" title="Collège Sainte-Barbe" label="Collège Sainte-Barbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119629" start="896" end="917" title="Guillaume-Abel Blouet" label="Guillaume-Abel Blouet"/>
<link wikidata="Q289151" start="1052" end="1075" title="Étienne-Hippolyte Godde" label="Étienne-Hippolyte Godde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345609" start="1426" end="1448" title="Giuseppe Marco Fieschi" label="Giuseppe Marco Fieschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="1485" end="1499" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="2267" end="2287" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q517249" start="2332" end="2356" title="Sainte-Geneviève Library" label="Sainte-Geneviève Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="2418" end="2430" title="Reference library" label="reading room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915495" start="2445" end="2461" title="Rue de Richelieu" label="Rue de Richelieu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53315" wikidata="Q64556" url="?curid=53315" title="Ewald Hering">
<text>Karl Ewald Konstantin Hering (5 August 1834 – 26 January 1918) was a German physiologist who did much research in color vision, binocular perception, eye movements, and hyperacuity. He proposed opponent color theory in 1892.

Born in Alt-Gersdorf, Kingdom of Saxony, Hering studied at the University of Leipzig and became the first rector of the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague.

== Biography ==

===Early years===

Hering was born in Alt-Gersdorf in Saxony, Germany. He probably grew up in a poor family, son of a Lutheran pastor. Hering attended gymnasium in Zittau and entered the university of Leipzig in 1853. There he studied philosophy, zoology and medicine. He completed an M.D. degree in 1860.

It is somewhat unclear how Hering trained to do research. At the time Johannes Peter Müller was perhaps the most famous physiologist in Germany. Hering seems to have applied for studying under his direction but was rejected, which might have contributed to his animosity towards Hermann von Helmholtz, Müller&#x27;s protégé. However, in Leipzig, E. H. Weber and G. T. Fechner were conducting groundbreaking studies founding what would become the field of psychophysics. Although there is no evidence that Hering ever studied under their direction, in his later years he proudly acknowledged himself a &quot;student of Fechner&quot;.

After graduating, Hering practiced as a physician in Leipzig. Despite having little time to do research and having even scarcer financial resources, he turned to binocular vision (using both eyes together) and the problem of the horopter (the points in space that project on anatomically identical points on the two retinas). There, he surprised the scientific community when he published, as a completely unknown scientist, his own mathematical derivation of the horopter independently from Hermann von Helmholtz, who was by then considered one of the best German scientists and mathematicians. Hering went as far as ridiculing Helmholtz&#x27;s (unimportant) mathematical errors in his derivation of the horopter.

===University posts===

Hering was subsequently appointed professor of physiology at the military academy of Vienna until 1870. With better resources he conducted important studies in physiology, in particular on the cardiac and respiratory systems. In 1870, he succeeded Jan Evangelista Purkinje at the university of Prague where he remained for the next 25 years. There he became involved in fierce arguments between nationalistic Czechs who wanted the university taught in the language of the land, and a minority of German professors. Eventually a separate German university, Charles-Ferdinand University, was created in 1882 and Hering became its first rector.

In his late years, Hering returned to Germany, where he became professor at the university of Leipzig in 1895, aged 61. He retired in 1915 and died of tuberculosis three years later. He was an atheist.

==Research==

===Binocular vision===
Hering studied a broad range of subjects in vision, among them his outstanding studies on binocular vision.
 He derived, almost simultaneously with Helmholtz, the theoretical shape of the horopter. Despite identical results, Hering&#x27;s derivation was far more modern and elegant, using recently developed projective geometry. Indeed, Helmholtz himself qualified Hering&#x27;s approach as &quot;very elegant, comprehensive and complete&quot;. Subsequently, Hering empirically estimated the shape of the horopter. Alongside with Helmholtz and Hillebrand, he noticed that the empirical horopter does not match the theoretical horopter, a phenomenon now named the Hering–Hillebrand deviation.

Hering is also well known for his Law of Visual Direction which describes the perceived egocentric direction of an object from an observer. Unbeknownst to Hering and other visual scientists of the time, a similar law had been proposed by Alhazen (1021) and Wells (1792) 
although both their laws were different.

=== Hyperacuity ===

Hering did seminal work on what we now call hyperacuity: spatial resolution in certain visual tasks that exceeds visual acuity by about an order of magnitude. In his famous 1899 treatise &quot;On the Limits of Visual Acuity&quot; he summarized empirical data published 1863 by Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann and Ernst Anton Wülfing 1892 who found that there are visual tasks in which spatial resolution goes well below the size of receptor cells in the central retina. In an explanatory model, Hering superimposed a Vernier acuity stimulus – a disalignment among two line segments – onto an idealized receptor array. He argued that, by a mechanism of integration across small eye movements, the location information signalled by the involved receptors is coded to a much higher precision than would be possible by a single receptor, an explanation that still holds up today.

===Eye movements===
Hering further studied eye movements. He developed the Hering&#x27;s law of equal innervation to describe the conjugacy of eye movements in animals. According to this law eye movements are always equal in intensity in the two eyes but not in direction. Eye movements can therefore be either conjugate (in the same direction such as saccades or smooth pursuit) or disjunctive (such as vergence eye movements). Hering&#x27;s law of equal innervation is best described by Müller&#x27;s stimulus where the fixation point changes position in 1 eye but not the other eye. Simplicity conducts that only the misaligned eye should move to refoveate. Hering&#x27;s law predicts that because the eyes must always move by equal amounts, both eyes should move in the new binocular direction of the target (see Hering&#x27;s law of visual direction above), then move in opposite direction to adjust vergence to that of the target. In other words, the eye in which the target did not move will move away and then back at the target. This prediction was experimentally confirmed by Yarbus in his seminal work on eye movements. However it is now known that strong deviations from Hering&#x27;s law exist.

===Color theory===

Hering disagreed with the leading theory developed primarily by Thomas Young, James Clerk Maxwell and Hermann von Helmholtz. 
Young proposed that color vision is based on three primary colors: red, green, and blue. Maxwell demonstrated that any color can be matched by a mixture of three primary colors. This was interpreted by Helmholtz as proof that humans perceive colors through three types of receptors, while white and black would reflect the amount of light.

Hering instead held that the visual system works based on a system of color opponency. His evidence stemmed from color-adaptation experiments and the linguistic observation that certain color names cannot be combined into one. In this model, colors are perceived through mechanisms sensitive to three pairs of opponent colors: red-green, yellow-blue and white-black.

Johannes von Kries published in 1905 the &quot;zone theory&quot; that synthesizes both descriptions as one, where the Young-Helmholtz theory describes the interaction of light with receptors and Hering the image processing stage.
Later, in 1925, Erwin Schrödinger published a paper inspired by von Kries, titled &quot;On the relation of the four color to the three color theory&quot;. There he probes a formal relationship between the two color theories.

Both theories have solid empirical evidence. The conundrum was resolved by the discovery of color-opponent ganglion cells in the retina and lateral geniculate nucleus. We now know that the human eye possesses three types of color-sensitive receptors (as proposed by Young, Maxwell, and Helmholtz) which then combine their signals in three color-opponent channels as proposed by Hering. Thus, both the Hering and Young-Helmholtz theories are correct.

===Physiology===

Hering made significant contributions to the field of physiology as well as psychology. In particular he demonstrated with his student Breuer the Hering–Breuer reflex, or that artificially inflating the lungs triggers an automatic signal triggering expiration. Then deflating the lungs in turns triggers a new signal inducing respiration. That is, inspirations and expirations are an endless reflex loop triggering each other. He also showed the Traube-Hering reflex, or that inflating the lungs triggers an acceleration of the heart.

===Other research===

In 1861, Hering described an optical illusion which now bears his name – the Hering illusion. When two straight and parallel lines are presented in front of radial background (similar to the spokes of a bicycle), the lines appear as if they were bowed outwards. The Orbison illusion is one of its variants, while the Wundt illusion produces a similar, but inverted effect.

Hering first suggested the idea of organic memory in an 1870 lecture for the Imperial Academy of Science in Vienna. Hering took influence from the idea of inheritance of acquired characteristics and suggested that memories could be passed on through generations by germ cells.

==The Hering-Helmholtz controversy==

Hering spent most of his life arguing violently with Helmholtz. The controversy was not only scientific but also philosophical; Hering was a nativist, Helmholtz an empiricist. Helmholtz also came from a higher social class and was always considered a prodigy, whereas Hering had to go through a harder time in his early career. Hering and Helmholtz disagreed on almost everything and the controversy lasted long after the end of both of their lives. Hering however was by far the more aggressive of the two, and was always prompt to point out any mistake that Helmholtz might have made, sometimes even going so far as to insult him (&quot;It is likely that the great Helmholtz in his dozing state...&quot;). Helmholtz&#x27;s faction (though probably not Helmholtz himself) spread rumors which accorded to Hering the need for help to do his mathematical work and that he was clinically insane (&quot;He has been, as I have heard, mentally ill&quot;).

==Publications==

*&quot;The Theory of Binocular Vision&quot; [&quot;Die Lehre Vom Binocularen Sehen&quot;] (1868/1977)
*&quot;Spatial Sense and Movements of the Eye&quot; [&quot;Der Raumsinn und die Bewegungen des Auges&quot;] (1879/1942)
*&quot;On the Limits of Visual Acuity. [Ueber die Grenzen der Sehschärfe] &quot; (1899/2018)
*&quot;Outlines of a Theory of the Light Sense&quot; [&quot;Grundzüge der Lehre vom Lichtsinn&quot;] (1905/1964)
*&quot;Handbuch der Physiologie&quot; (1879)
*&quot;On Memory and the Specific Energies of the Nervous System&quot; (1897)

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
* Who Named It?, Karl Ewald Konstantin Hering</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64556" start="0" end="28" title="Ewald Hering" label="Karl Ewald Konstantin Hering"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="76" end="88" title="physiologist" label="physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="114" end="126" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q303997" start="194" end="215" title="opponent color theory" label="opponent color theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17117" start="234" end="246" title="Gersdorf, Saxony" label="Alt-Gersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="248" end="265" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Kingdom of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="289" end="310" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="346" end="381" title="Karl-Ferdinands-Universität" label="German Charles-Ferdinand University"/>
<link wikidata="Q57992" start="788" end="809" title="Johannes Peter Müller" label="Johannes Peter Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="997" end="1018" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q500096" start="1173" end="1186" title="psychophysics" label="psychophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q609543" start="1514" end="1530" title="binocular vision" label="binocular vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262259" start="1581" end="1589" title="horopter" label="horopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="1668" end="1674" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q159542" start="2340" end="2364" title="Jan Evangelista Purkinje" label="Jan Evangelista Purkinje"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="3505" end="3514" title="Helmholtz" label="Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785635" start="3519" end="3529" title="Hillebrand" label="Hillebrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304774" start="3638" end="3665" title="Hering–Hillebrand deviation" label="Hering–Hillebrand deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304733" start="3702" end="3725" title="Hering&amp;#x27;s law of visual direction" label="Law of Visual Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="3906" end="3913" title="Alhazen" label="Alhazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180413" start="3925" end="3930" title="William Charles Wells" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028356" start="4046" end="4057" title="hyperacuity" label="hyperacuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="4115" end="4128" title="visual acuity" label="visual acuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q70792" start="4279" end="4302" title="Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann" label="Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="4426" end="4440" title="cone cells" label="receptor cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142278" start="4511" end="4525" title="Vernier acuity" label="Vernier acuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316935" start="4665" end="4684" title="Microsaccade" label="small eye movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022581" start="4946" end="4984" title="Hering&amp;#x27;s law of equal innervation" label="Hering&amp;#x27;s law of equal innervation"/>
<link wikidata="Q369503" start="5223" end="5231" title="saccades" label="saccades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400677" start="5235" end="5249" title="smooth pursuit" label="smooth pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442519" start="5275" end="5283" title="vergence" label="vergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="6164" end="6176" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Thomas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="6178" end="6197" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="6202" end="6223" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166902" start="6277" end="6290" title="primary color" label="primary color"/>
<link wikidata="Q303997" start="6637" end="6652" title="Opponent process" label="color opponency"/>
<link wikidata="Q85929" start="6935" end="6953" title="Johannes von Kries" label="Johannes von Kries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6982" end="6993" title="zone theory" label="zone theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="7181" end="7198" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="7520" end="7526" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q719179" start="7531" end="7557" title="lateral geniculate nucleus" label="lateral geniculate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609987" start="8006" end="8026" title="Hering–Breuer reflex" label="Hering–Breuer reflex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8306" end="8319" title="Traube-Hering" label="Traube-Hering"/>
<link wikidata="Q174923" start="8447" end="8463" title="optical illusion" label="optical illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035662" start="8495" end="8510" title="Hering illusion" label="Hering illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661088" start="8684" end="8700" title="Orbison illusion" label="Orbison illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206122" start="8735" end="8749" title="Wundt illusion" label="Wundt illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304251" start="8827" end="8841" title="organic memory" label="organic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="8900" end="8906" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q208800" start="8947" end="8986" title="inheritance of acquired characteristics" label="inheritance of acquired characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="9057" end="9066" title="germ cell" label="germ cell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53316" wikidata="Q2946" url="?curid=53316" title="Palace of Versailles">
<text>The Palace of Versailles ( ; ) is a former royal residence commissioned by King Louis XIV located in Versailles, about west of Paris, in the Yvelines Department of Île-de-France region in France.

The palace is owned by the government of France and since 1995 has been managed, under the direction of the French Ministry of Culture, by the Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles. About 15,000,000 people visit the palace, park, or gardens of Versailles every year, making it one of the most popular tourist attractions in the world.

Louis XIII built a hunting lodge at Versailles in 1623. His successor, Louis XIV, expanded the château into a palace that went through several expansions in phases from 1661 to 1715. It was a favourite residence for both kings, and in 1682, Louis XIV moved the seat of his court and government to Versailles, making the palace the &quot;de facto&quot; capital of France. This state of affairs was continued by Kings Louis XV and Louis XVI, who primarily made interior alterations to the palace, but in 1789 the royal family and French court returned to Paris. For the rest of the French Revolution, the Palace of Versailles was largely abandoned and emptied of its contents, and the population of the surrounding city plummeted.

Napoleon, following his coronation as Emperor, used the subsidiary palace, Grand Trianon, as a summer residence from 1810 to 1814, but did not use the main palace. Following the Bourbon Restoration, when the king was returned to the throne, he resided in Paris and it was not until the 1830s that meaningful repairs were made to the palace. A museum of French history was installed within it, replacing the courtiers apartments of the southern wing.

The palace and park were designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1979 for its importance as the centre of power, art, and science in France during the 17th and 18th centuries. The French Ministry of Culture has placed the palace, its gardens, and some of its subsidiary structures on its list of culturally significant monuments.

==History==


In 1623, Louis XIII, king of France, built a hunting lodge on a hill in a favourite hunting ground, west of Paris, and from his primary residence, the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. The site, near a village named Versailles, was a wooded wetland that Louis XIII&#x27;s court scorned as being generally unworthy of a king; one of his courtiers, François de Bassompierre, wrote that the lodge &quot;would not inspire vanity in even the simplest gentleman&quot;. From 1631 to 1634, architect Philibert Le Roy replaced the lodge with a château for Louis XIII, who forbade his queen, Anne of Austria, from staying there overnight, even when an outbreak of smallpox at Saint-Germain-en-Laye in 1641 forced Louis XIII to relocate to Versailles with his three-year-old heir, the future Louis XIV.

When Louis XIII died in 1643, Anne became Louis XIV&#x27;s regent, and Louis XIII&#x27;s château was abandoned for the next decade. She moved the court back to Paris, where Anne and her chief minister, Cardinal Mazarin, continued Louis XIII&#x27;s unpopular monetary practices. This led to the Fronde, a series of revolts against royal authority from 1648 to 1653 that masked a struggle between Mazarin and the princes of the blood, Louis XIV&#x27;s extended family, for influence over him. In the aftermath of the Fronde, Louis XIV became determined to rule alone. Following Mazarin&#x27;s death in 1661, Louis XIV reformed his government to exclude his mother and the princes of the blood, moved the court back to Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and ordered the expansion of his father&#x27;s château at Versailles into a palace.

Louis XIV had hunted at Versailles in the 1650s, but did not take any special interest in Versailles until 1661. On 17 August 1661, Louis XIV was a guest at a sumptuous festival hosted by Nicolas Fouquet, the Superintendent of Finances, at his palatial residence, the Château de Vaux-le-Vicomte. Louis XIV was impressed by the château and its gardens, which were the work of Louis Le Vau, the court architect since 1654, André Le Nôtre, the royal gardener since 1657, and Charles Le Brun, a painter in royal service since 1647. Vaux-le-Vicomte&#x27;s scale and opulence led him to imprison Fouquet that September, as he had also built an island fortress and a private army. But Louis XIV was also inspired by Vaux-le-Vicomte, and he recruited its authors for his own projects. Louis XIV replaced Fouquet with Jean-Baptiste Colbert, a protégé of Mazarin and enemy of Fouquet, and charged him with managing the corps of artisans in royal employment. Colbert acted as the intermediary between them and Louis XIV, who personally directed and inspected the planning and construction of Versailles.

===Construction===
Work at Versailles was at first concentrated on gardens, and through the 1660s, Le Vau only added two detached service wings and a forecourt to the château. But in 1668–69, as a response to the growth of the gardens, and victory over Spain in the War of Devolution, Louis XIV decided to turn Versailles into a full-scale royal residence. He vacillated between replacing or incorporating his father&#x27;s château, but settled on the latter by the end of the decade, and from 1668 to 1671, Louis XIII&#x27;s château was encased on three sides in a feature dubbed the &quot;&quot;. This gave the château a new, Italianate façade overlooking the gardens, but preserved the courtyard façade, resulting in a mix of styles and materials that dismayed Louis XIV and that Colbert described as a &quot;patchwork&quot;. Attempts to homogenize the two façades failed, and in 1670 Le Vau died, leaving the post of First Architect to the King vacant for the next seven years.

Le Vau was succeeded at Versailles by his assistant, architect François d&#x27;Orbay. Work at the palace during the 1670s focused on its interiors, as the palace was then nearing completion, though d&#x27;Orbay expanded Le Vau&#x27;s service wings and connected them to the château, and built a pair of pavilions for government employees in the forecourt. In 1670, d&#x27;Orbay was tasked by Louis XIV with designing a city, also called Versailles, to house and service Louis XIV&#x27;s growing government and court. The granting of land to courtiers for the construction of townhouses that resembled the palace began in 1671. The next year, the Franco-Dutch War began and funding for Versailles was cut until 1674, when Louis XIV had work begun on the , a grand staircase for the reception of guests, and demolished the last of the village of Versailles.

Following the end of the Franco-Dutch War with French victory in 1678, Louis XIV appointed as First Architect Jules Hardouin-Mansart, an experienced architect in Louis XIV&#x27;s confidence, who would benefit from a restored budget and large workforce of former soldiers. Mansart began his tenure with the addition from 1678 to 1681 of the Hall of Mirrors, a renovation of the courtyard façade of Louis XIII&#x27;s château, and the expansion of d&#x27;Orbay&#x27;s pavilions to create the Ministers&#x27; Wings in 1678–79. Adjacent to the palace, Hardouin-Mansart built a pair of stables called the Grande and Petite Écuries from 1679 to 1682 and the , which housed the palace&#x27;s servants and general kitchens, from 1682 to 1684. Hardouin-Mansart also added two entirely new wings in Le Vau&#x27;s Italianate style to house the court, first at the south end of the palace from 1679 to 1681 and then at its north end from 1685 to 1689.

War and the resulting diminished funding slowed construction at Versailles for the rest of the 17th century. The Nine Years&#x27; War, which began in 1688, stopped work altogether until 1698. Three years later, however, the even more expensive War of the Spanish Succession began and, combined with poor harvests in 1693–94 and 1709–10, plunged France into crisis. Louis XIV thus slashed funding and cancelled some of the work Hardouin-Mansart had planned in the 1680s, such as the remodelling of the courtyard façade in the Italianate style. Louis XIV and Hardouin-Mansart focused on a permanent palace chapel, the construction of which lasted from 1699 to 1710.

Louis XIV&#x27;s successors, Louis XV and Louis XVI, largely left Versailles as they inherited it and focused on the palace&#x27;s interiors. Louis XV&#x27;s modifications began in the 1730s, with the completion of the Salon d&#x27;Hercule, a ballroom in the north wing, and the expansion of the king&#x27;s private apartment, which required the demolition of the Ambassadors&#x27; Staircase. In 1748, Louis XV began construction of a palace theatre, the Royal Opera of Versailles at the northernmost end of the palace, but completion was delayed until 1770; construction was interrupted in the 1740s by the War of the Austrian Succession and then again in 1756 with the start of the Seven Years&#x27; War. These wars emptied the royal treasury and thereafter construction was mostly funded by Madame du Barry, Louis XV&#x27;s favourite mistress. In 1771, Louis XV had the northern Ministers&#x27; Wing rebuilt in Neoclassical style by Ange-Jacques Gabriel, his court architect, as it was in the process of falling down. That work was also stopped by financial constraints, and it remained incomplete when Louis XV died in 1774. In 1784, Louis XVI briefly moved the royal family to the Château de Saint-Cloud ahead of more renovations to the Palace of Versailles, but construction could not begin because of financial difficulty and political crisis. In 1789, the French Revolution swept the royal family and government out of Versailles forever.

===Role in politics and culture===
The Palace of Versailles was key to Louis XIV&#x27;s politics, as an expression and concentration of French art and culture, and for the centralization of royal power. Louis XIV first used Versailles to promote himself with a series of nighttime festivals in its gardens in 1664, 1668, and 1674, the events of which were disseminated throughout Europe by print and engravings. As early as 1669, but especially from 1678, Louis XIV sought to make Versailles his seat of government, and he expanded the palace so as to fit the court within it. The moving of the court to Versailles did not come until 1682, however, and not officially, as opinion on Versailles was mixed among the nobility of France.

By 1687, however, it was evident to all that Versailles was the &quot;de facto&quot; capital of France, and Louis XIV succeeded in attracting the nobility to Versailles to pursue prestige and royal patronage within a strict court etiquette, thus eroding their traditional provincial power bases. It was at the Palace of Versailles that Louis XIV received the Doge of Genoa, Francesco Maria Imperiale Lercari in 1685, an embassy from the Ayutthaya Kingdom in 1686, and an embassy from Safavid Iran in 1715.

Louis XIV died at Versailles on 1 September 1715 and was succeeded by his five-year-old great-grandson, Louis XV, then the duke of Anjou, who was moved to the Château de Vincennes and then to Paris by Louis XV&#x27;s regent, Philippe II, Duke of Orléans. Versailles was neglected until 1722, when Philippe II removed the court to Versailles to escape the unpopularity of his regency, and when Louis XV began his majority. The 1715 move, however, broke the cultural power of Versailles, and during the reign of Louis XVI, courtiers spent their leisure in Paris, not Versailles.

During Christmas 1763, Mozart and his family visited Versailles and dined with the King. The 7-year-old Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart played several works during his stay and later dedicated his first two harpsichord sonatas, published in 1764 in Paris, to Madame Victoria, daughter of Louis XV.

In 1783, the palace was the site of the signing of the last two of the three treaties of the Peace of Paris (1783), which ended the American Revolutionary War. On 3 September, British and American delegates, led by Benjamin Franklin, signed the Treaty of Paris at the Hôtel d&#x27;York (now 56 Rue Jacob) in Paris, granting the United States independence. On 4 September, Spain and France signed separate treaties with Britain at the Palace of Versailles, formally ending the war.

The King and Queen learned of the Storming of the Bastille in Paris on 14 July 1789, while they were at the palace, and remained isolated there as the Revolution in Paris spread. The growing anger in Paris led to the Women&#x27;s March on Versailles on 5 October 1789. A crowd of several thousand men and women, protesting the high price and scarcity of bread, marched from the markets of Paris to Versailles. They took weapons from the city armoury, besieged the palace, and compelled the King and royal family and the members of the National Constituent Assembly to return with them to Paris the following day.

As soon as the royal family departed, the palace was closed. In 1792, the National Convention, the new revolutionary government, ordered the transfer of all the paintings and sculptures from the palace to the Louvre. In 1793, the Convention declared the abolition of the monarchy and ordered all of the royal property in the palace to be sold at auction. The auction took place between 25 August 1793 and 11 August 1794. The furnishings and art of the palace, including the furniture, mirrors, baths, and kitchen equipment, were sold in seventeen thousand lots. All fleurs-de-lys and royal emblems on the buildings were chambered or chiselled off. The empty buildings were turned into a storehouse for furnishings, art and libraries confiscated from the nobility. The empty grand apartments were opened for tours beginning in 1793, and a small museum of French paintings and art school was opened in some of the empty rooms.

By virtue of an order issued by the Versailles district directorate in August 1794, the Royal Gate was destroyed, the Cour Royale was cleared and the Cour de Marbre lost its precious floor.

=== 19th century – history museum and government venue ===


When Napoleon became Emperor of the French in 1804, he considered making Versailles his residence but abandoned the idea because of the cost of the renovation. Prior to his marriage with Marie-Louise in 1810, he had the Grand Trianon restored and refurnished as a springtime residence for himself and his family, in the style of furnishing that it is seen today.

In 1815, with the final downfall of Napoleon, Louis XVIII, the younger brother of Louis XVI, became king, and considered returning the royal residence to Versailles, where he had been born. He ordered the restoration of the royal apartments, but the task and cost was too great. Louis XVIII had the far end of the south wing of the &quot;Cour Royale&quot; demolished and rebuilt (1814–1824) to match the Gabriel wing of 1780 opposite, which gave greater uniformity of appearance to the front entrance. Neither he nor his successor Charles X lived at Versailles.

The French Revolution of 1830 brought a new monarch, Louis-Philippe to power, and a new ambition for Versailles. He did not reside at Versailles but began the creation of the Museum of the History of France, dedicated to &quot;all the glories of France&quot;, which had been used to house some members of the royal family. The museum was begun in 1833 and inaugurated on 30 June 1837. Its most famous room is the Galerie des Batailles (Hall of Battles), which lies on most of the length of the second floor of the south wing. The museum project largely came to a halt when Louis Philippe was overthrown in 1848, though the paintings of French heroes and great battles still remain in the south wing.

Emperor Napoleon III used the palace on occasion as a stage for grand ceremonies. One of the most lavish was the banquet that he hosted for Queen Victoria in the Royal Opera of Versailles on 25 August 1855.

During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871, the palace was occupied by the general staff of the victorious German Army. Parts of the château, including the Hall of Mirrors, were turned into a military hospital. The creation of the German Empire, combining Prussia and the surrounding German states under William I, was formally proclaimed in the Hall of Mirrors on 18 January 1871. The Germans remained in the palace until the signing of the armistice in March 1871. In that month, the government of the new Third French Republic, which had departed Paris during the war for Tours and then Bordeaux, moved into the palace. The National Assembly held its meetings in the Opera House.

The uprising of the Paris Commune in March 1871, prevented the French government, under Adolphe Thiers, from returning immediately to Paris. The military operation which suppressed the Commune at the end of May was directed from Versailles, and the prisoners of the Commune were marched there and put on trial in military courts. In 1875 a second parliamentary body, the French Senate, was created and held its meetings for the election of a President of the Republic in a new hall created in 1876 in the south wing of the palace. The French Senate and National Assembly continue to meet in the palace in joint session on special occasions, such as the amendment of the Constitution of France.

===20th century===
The end of the 19th and the early 20th century saw the beginning of restoration efforts at the palace, first led by Pierre de Nolhac, poet and scholar and the first conservator, who began his work in 1892. The conservation and restoration were interrupted by two world wars but have continued until the present day.

The palace returned to the world stage in June 1919, when, after six months of negotiations, the Treaty of Versailles, formally ending the First World War, was signed in the Hall of Mirrors. Between 1925 and 1928, the American philanthropist and multi-millionaire John D. Rockefeller, Jr. gave $2,166,000, the equivalent of about 38 million dollars in 2024, to restore and refurbish the palace.

More work took place after World War II, with the restoration of the Royal Opera of Versailles. The theatre was reopened in 1957, in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom.

In 1978, parts of the palace were heavily damaged in a bombing committed by Breton terrorists.

Starting in the 1950s, when the museum of Versailles was under the directorship of Gérald van der Kemp, the objective was to restore the palace to its state – or as close to it as possible – in 1789 when the royal family left the palace. Among the early projects was the repair of the roof over the Hall of Mirrors; the publicity campaign brought international attention to the plight of post-war Versailles and garnered much foreign money including a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation.

One of the more costly endeavours for the museum and the French Fifth Republic has been to repurchase as much of the original furnishings as possible. Consequently, because furniture with a royal provenance – and especially furniture that was made for Versailles – is a highly sought-after commodity on the international market, the museum has spent considerable funds on retrieving much of the palace&#x27;s original furnishings.

===21st century===

In 2003, a new restoration initiative – the &quot;Grand Versailles&quot; project – was started, which began with the replanting of the gardens, which had lost over 10,000 trees during Cyclone Lothar on 26 December 1999. One part of the initiative, the restoration of the Hall of Mirrors, was completed in 2006. Another major project was the further restoration of the backstage areas of the Royal Opera of Versailles in 2007 to 2009.

The Palace of Versailles is currently owned by the French state. Its formal title is the Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles. Since 1995, it has been run as a Public Establishment, with an independent administration and management supervised by the French Ministry of Culture.

The grounds of the palace hosted the equestrian competition during the 2024 Summer Olympics.

==Architecture and plan==
The Palace of Versailles is a visual history of French architecture from the 1630s to the 1780s. Its earliest portion, the &quot;corps de logis&quot;, was built for Louis XIII in the style of his reign with brick, marble, and slate, which Le Vau surrounded in the 1660s with &quot;Enveloppe&quot;, an edifice that was inspired by Renaissance-era Italian villas. When Jules Hardouin-Mansart made further expansions to the palace in the 1680s, he used the &quot;Enveloppe&quot; as the model for his work. Neoclassical additions were made to the palace with the remodelling of the Ministers&#x27; Wings in the 1770s, by Ange-Jacques Gabriel, and after the Bourbon Restoration.

The palace was largely completed by the death of Louis XIV in 1715. The eastern facing palace has a U-shaped layout, with the corps de logis and symmetrical advancing secondary wings terminating with the Dufour Pavilion on the south and the Gabriel Pavilion to the north, creating an expansive cour d&#x27;honneur known as the Royal Court (Cour Royale). Flanking the Royal Court are two enormous asymmetrical wings that result in a façade of in length. Covered by around of roof, the palace has 2,143 windows, 1,252 chimneys, and 67 staircases.

The palace and its grounds have had a great influence on architecture and horticulture from the mid-17th century to the end of the 18th century. Examples of works influenced by Versailles include Christopher Wren&#x27;s work at Hampton Court Palace, Berlin Palace, the Palace of La Granja, Stockholm Palace, Ludwigsburg Palace, Karlsruhe Palace, Rastatt Palace, Nymphenburg Palace, Schleissheim Palace, and Esterházy Palace.

==Royal Apartments==
The construction in 1668–1671 of Louis Le Vau&#x27;s &quot;enveloppe&quot; around the outside of Louis XIII&#x27;s red brick and white stone château added state apartments for the king and the queen. The addition was known at the time as the &quot;château neuf&quot; (new château). The &quot;grands appartements&quot; (Grand Apartments, also referred to as the State Apartments) include the &quot;grand appartement du roi&quot; and the &quot;grand appartement de la reine&quot;. They occupied the main or principal floor of the &quot;château neuf&quot;, with three rooms in each apartment facing the garden to the west and four facing the garden parterres to the north and south, respectively. The private apartments of the king (the &quot;appartement du roi&quot; and the &quot;petit appartement du roi&quot;) and those of the queen (the &quot;petit appartement de la reine&quot;) remained in the &quot;château vieux&quot; (old château). Le Vau&#x27;s design for the state apartments closely followed Italian models of the day, including the placement of the apartments on the main floor (the &quot;piano nobile&quot;, the next floor up from the ground level), a convention the architect borrowed from Italian palace design.

The king&#x27;s State Apartment consisted of an enfilade of seven rooms, each dedicated to one of the known planets and their associated titular Roman deity. The queen&#x27;s apartment formed a parallel enfilade with that of the &quot;grand appartement du roi&quot;. After the addition of the Hall of Mirrors (1678–1684) the king&#x27;s apartment was reduced to five rooms (until the reign of Louis XV, when two more rooms were added) and the queen&#x27;s to four.

The queen&#x27;s apartments served as the residence of three queens of France – Maria Theresa of Spain, wife of Louis XIV, Maria Leszczyńska, wife of Louis XV, and Marie Antoinette, wife of Louis XVI. Additionally, Louis XIV&#x27;s granddaughter-in-law, Princess Marie-Adélaïde of Savoy, duchess of Burgundy, wife of Louis, Duke of Burgundy, occupied these rooms from 1697 (the year of her marriage) to her death in 1712.

===Ambassador&#x27;s Staircase===
The (&quot;Escalier des Ambassadeurs&quot;) was an imperial staircase built from 1674 to 1680 by François d&#x27;Orbay. Until Louis XV had it demolished in 1752 to create a courtyard for his private apartments, the staircase was the primary entrance into the Palace of Versailles and the royal apartments especially. It was entered from the courtyard via a vestibule that, cramped and dark, contrasted greatly with the tall, open space of the staircase – famously lit naturally with a skylight – so as to overawe visitors.

The staircase and walls of the room that contained it were clad in polychrome marble and gilded bronze, with decor in the Ionic order. Charles Le Brun painted the walls and ceiling of the room according to a festive theme to celebrate Louis XIV&#x27;s victory in the Franco-Dutch War. On the wall immediately above the staircase were &quot;trompe-l&#x27;œil&quot; paintings of people from the Four Parts of the World looking into the staircase over a balustrade, a motif repeated on the ceiling fresco. There they were joined by allegorical figures for the twelve months of the year and various Classical Greek figures such as the Muses. A marble bust of Louis XIV, sculpted by Jean Warin in 1665–66, was placed in a niche above the first landing of the staircase.

===The State Apartments of the King===
The construction of the Hall of Mirrors between 1678 and 1686 coincided with a major alteration to the State Apartments. They were originally intended as his residence, but the King transformed them into galleries for his finest paintings, and venues for his many receptions for courtiers. During the season from All-Saints Day in November until Easter, these were usually held three times a week, from six to ten in the evening, with various entertainments.

====The Salon of Hercules====
This was originally a chapel. It was rebuilt beginning in 1712 under the supervision of the First Architect to the King, Robert de Cotte, to showcase two paintings by Paolo Veronese, &quot;Eleazar and Rebecca&quot; and &quot;Meal at the House of Simon the Pharisee&quot;, which was a gift to Louis XIV from the Republic of Venice in 1664. The painting on the ceiling, &quot;The Apotheosis of Hercules&quot;, by François Lemoyne, was completed in 1736, and gave the room its name.

====The Salon of Abundance====
The Salon of Abundance was the antechamber to the Cabinet of Curios (now the Games Room), which displayed Louis XIV&#x27;s collection of precious jewels and rare objects. Some of the objects in the collection are depicted in René-Antoine Houasse&#x27;s painting &quot;Abundance and Liberality&quot; (1683), located on the ceiling over the door opposite the windows.

====The Salon of Venus====
This salon was used for serving light meals during evening receptions. The principal feature in this room is Jean Warin&#x27;s life-size statue of Louis XIV in the costume of a Roman emperor. On the ceiling in a gilded oval frame is another painting by Houasse, &quot;Venus subjugating the Gods and Powers&quot; (1672–1681). &quot;Trompe-l&#x27;œil&quot; paintings and sculpture around the ceiling illustrate mythological themes.

====The Salon of Mercury====
The Salon of Mercury was the original State Bedchamber when Louis XIV officially moved the court and government to the palace in 1682. The bed is a replica of the original commissioned by King Louis-Philippe in the 19th century when he turned the palace into a museum. The ceiling paintings by the Flemish artist Jean Baptiste de Champaigne depict the god Mercury in his chariot, drawn by a rooster, and Alexander the Great and Ptolemy surrounded by scholars and philosophers. The Automaton Clock was made for the King by the royal clockmaker Antoine Morand in 1706. When it chimes the hour, figures of Louis XIV and Fame descend from a cloud.

====The Salon of Mars====
The Salon of Mars was used by the royal guards until 1782, and was decorated on a military theme with helmets and trophies. It was turned into a concert room between 1684 and 1750, with galleries for musicians on either side. Portraits of Louis XV and his Queen, Marie Leszczyńska, by the Flemish artist Carle Van Loo decorate the room today.

====The Salon of Apollo====
The Salon of Apollo was the royal throne room under Louis XIV, and was the setting for formal audiences. The eight-foot-high silver throne was melted down in 1689 to help pay the costs of an expensive war, and was replaced by a more modest throne of gilded wood. The central painting on the ceiling, by Charles de la Fosse, depicts the Sun Chariot of Apollo, the King&#x27;s favourite emblem, pulled by four horses and surrounded by the four seasons.

====The Salon of Diana====
The Salon of Diana was used by Louis XIV as a billiards room, and had galleries from which courtiers could watch him play. The decoration of the walls and ceiling depicts scenes from the life of the goddess Diana. The celebrated bust of Louis XIV by Bernini made during the famous sculptor&#x27;s visit to France in 1665 is on display here.

===Private apartments of the King and Queen===
====Private apartments of the King====
The apartments of the King were the heart of the château; they were in the same location as the rooms of Louis XIII, the creator of the château, on the first floor (second floor US style). They were set aside for the personal use of Louis XIV in 1683. He and his successors Louis XV and Louis XVI used these rooms for official functions, such as the ceremonial &quot;lever&quot; (&quot;waking up&quot;) and the &quot;coucher&quot; (&quot;going to bed&quot;) of the monarch, which was attended by a crowd of courtiers.

The King&#x27;s apartment was accessed from the Hall of Mirrors from the &quot;Oeil de Boeuf&quot; antechamber or from the Guardroom and the &quot;Grand Couvert&quot;, the ceremonial room where Louis XIV often took his evening meals, seated alone at a table in front of the fireplace. His spoon, fork, and knife were brought to him in a golden box. The courtiers could watch as he dined.

The King&#x27;s bedchamber had originally been a Drawing Room before Louis XIV transformed it into his own bedroom in 1701. He died there on 1 September 1715. Both Louis XV and Louis XVI continued to use the bedroom for their official awakening and going to bed. On 6 October 1789, from the balcony of this room Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, joined by the Marquis de Lafayette, looked down on the hostile crowd in the courtyard, shortly before the King was forced to return to Paris.

The bed of the King is placed beneath a carved relief by Nicolas Coustou entitled &quot; France watching over the sleeping King&quot;. The decoration includes several paintings set into the panelling, including a self-portrait of Antony van Dyck.

====Private apartments of The Queen====
The &quot;petit appartement de la reine&quot; is a suite of rooms that were reserved for the personal use of the queen. Originally arranged for the use of the Maria Theresa of Spain, consort of Louis XIV, the rooms were later modified for use by Marie Leszczyńska and finally for Marie Antoinette. The Queen&#x27;s apartments and the King&#x27;s Apartments were laid out on the same design, each suite having seven rooms. Both suites had ceilings painted with scenes from mythology; the King&#x27;s ceilings featured male figures, the Queen&#x27;s featured females.

==Hall of Mirrors==

The Hall of Mirrors is a long gallery at the westernmost part of the palace that looks out onto the gardens. The hall was built from 1678 to 1681 on the site of a terrace Le Vau built between the king and queen&#x27;s suites. The hall is clad in marble and decorated in a modified version of the Corinthian order, with 578 mirrors facing 17 windows and reflecting the light provided by them. The ceiling fresco, painted by Le Brun over the next four years, embellishes the first 18 years of Louis XIV&#x27;s reign in 30 scenes, 17 of which are military victories over the Dutch. The fresco depicts Louis XIV himself alongside Classical figures in the scenes celebrating moments in his reign such as the beginning of personal rule in 1661, breaking from earlier frescoes at Versailles that used allegories derived from Classical and mythological scenes.

The and the bookend the Hall of Mirrors on its northern and southern ends respectively. The Salon of War, constructed and decorated from 1678 to 1686, celebrates French victories in the Franco-Dutch War with marble panels, gilded bronze trophies of arms, and a stucco &quot;bas-relief&quot; of Louis XIV on horsebask riding over his enemies. The Salon of Peace is decorated in the same fashion but according to its eponymous theme.

==Royal Chapel==

The Royal Chapel of Versailles is located at the southern end of the north wing. The building stands high, and measures long and wide. The chapel is rectangular with a semicircular apse, combining traditional, Gothic royal French church architecture with the French Baroque style of Versailles. The ceiling of the chapel is constituted by an unbroken vault, divided into three frescos by Antoine Coypel, Charles de La Fosse, and Jean Jouvenet. The palette of motifs beneath the frescoes glorify the deeds of Louis IX, and include images of David, Constantine, Charlemagne, and Louis IX, &quot;fleur de lis&quot;, and Louis XIV&#x27;s monogram. The organ of the chapel was built by Robert Clicquot and Julien Tribuot in 1709–1710.

Louis XIV commissioned the chapel, its sixth, from Hardouin-Mansart and Le Brun in 1683–84. It was the last building constructed at Versailles during Louis XIV&#x27;s reign. Construction was delayed until 1699, however, and it was not completed until 1710. The only major modification to the chapel since its completion was the removal of a lantern from its roof in 1765. A full restoration of the chapel began in late 2017 and lasted into early 2021.

==Royal Opera==

The Royal Opera of Versailles was originally commissioned by Louis XIV in 1682 and was to be built at the end of the North Wing with a design by Hardouin-Mansart and Carlo Vigarani. However, due to the expense of the King&#x27;s continental wars, the project was put aside. The idea was revived by Louis XV with a new design by Ange-Jacques Gabriel in 1748, but this was also temporarily put aside. The project was revived and rushed ahead for the planned celebration of the marriage of the Dauphin, the future Louis XVI, and Marie Antoinette. For economy and speed, the new opera was built almost entirely of wood, which also gave it very high quality acoustics. The wood was painted to resemble marble, and the ceiling was decorated with a painting of the Apollo, the god of the arts, preparing crowns for illustrious artists, by Louis Jean-Jacques Durameau. The sculptor Augustin Pajou added statuary and reliefs to complete the decoration. The new Opera was inaugurated on 16 May 1770, as part of the celebration of the royal wedding.

In October 1789, early in the French Revolution, the last banquet for the royal guardsmen was hosted by the King in the opera, before he departed for Paris. Following the Franco-German War in 1871 and then the Paris Commune until 1875, the French National Assembly met in the opera, until the proclamation of the French Third Republic and the return of the government to Paris.

==Museum of the History of France==


Shortly after becoming king in 1830, Louis Philippe I decided to transform the palace into a museum devoted to &quot;All the Glories of France,&quot; with paintings and sculpture depicting famous French victories and heroes. Most of the apartments of the palace were entirely demolished (in the main building, practically all of the apartments were annihilated, with only the apartments of the king and queen remaining almost intact), and turned into a series of several large rooms and galleries: the Coronation Room (whose original volume was left untouched by Louis-Philippe), which displays the celebrated painting of the coronation of Napoleon I by Jacques-Louis David; the Hall of Battles; commemorating French victories with large-scale paintings; and the 1830 room, which celebrated Louis-Philippe&#x27;s own coming to power in the French Revolution of 1830. Some paintings were brought from the Louvre, including works depicting events in French history by Philippe de Champaigne, Pierre Mignard, Laurent de La Hyre, Charles Le Brun, Adam Frans van der Meulen, Nicolas de Largillière, Hyacinthe Rigaud, Jean-Antoine Houdon, Jean-Marc Nattier, Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun, Hubert Robert, Thomas Lawrence, Jacques-Louis David, and Antoine-Jean Gros. Others were commissioned especially for the museum by prominent artists of the early 19th century, including Eugène Delacroix, who painted Saint Louis at the French victory over the British in the Battle of Taillebourg in 1242. Other painters featured include Horace Vernet and François Gérard. A monumental painting by Vernet features Louis Philippe himself, with his sons, posing in front of the gates of the palace.

The overthrow of Louis Philippe in 1848 put an end to his grand plans for the museum, but the Gallery of Battles is still as it was, and is passed through by many visitors to the royal apartments and grand salons. Another set of rooms on the first floor has been made into galleries on Louis XIV and his court, displaying furniture, paintings, and sculptures. In recent years, eleven rooms on the ground floor between the Chapel and the Opera have been turned into a history of the palace, with audiovisual displays and models.

==Estate of Versailles==
The estate of Versailles consists of the palace, the subsidiary buildings around it, and and gardens. As of June 2021, the estate altogether covers an area of , with the park and gardens laid out to the south, west, and north of the palace. The palace is approached from the east by the Avenue de Paris, measuring from Paris to a gate between the Grande and Petite Écuries. Beyond these stables is the Place d&#x27;Armes, where the Avenue de Paris meets the Avenue de Sceaux and Avenue de Saint-Cloud (see map), the three roads that formed the main arteries of the city of Versailles. Exactly where the three roads meet is a gate leading into the &quot;cour d&#x27;honneur&quot;, hemmed in by the Ministers&#x27; Wings. Beyond is the Royal Gate and the main palace, which wraps around the and finally .

The estate was established by Louis XIII as a hunting retreat, with a park just to the west of his château. From 1661, Louis XIV expanded the estate until, at its greatest extent, the estate was made up by the , a hunting ground of , and the gardens, called the Petit Parc, which covered . A , wall with 24 gateways enclosed the estate.

The landscape of the estate had to be created from the bog that surrounded Louis XIII&#x27;s château using landscape architecture usually employed in fortress building. The approach to the palace and the gardens were carefully laid out via the moving of earth and construction of terraces. The water from the marsh was marshalled into a series of lakes and ponds around Versailles, but these reservoirs were not sufficient for the palace, city, or gardens. Great lengths were taken to supply Versailles with water, such as the damming of the river Bièvre to create an inflow in the 1660s, the construction of an enormous pumping station at the river Seine near Marly-le-Roi in 1681, and an attempt to divert water from the river Eure with a canal in the later 1680s.

===Gardens===

The gardens of Versailles, as they have existed since the reign of Louis XIV, are the work of André Le Nôtre. Le Nôtre&#x27;s gardens were preceded by a simple garden laid out in the 1630s by landscape architects Jacques Boyceau and Jacques de Nemours, which he rearranged along an east–west axis that, because of Louis XIV&#x27;s land purchases and the clearing of woodland, were expanded literally as far as could be seen. The resulting gardens were a collaboration between Le Nôtre, Le Brun, Colbert, and Louis XIV, marked by rigid order, discipline, and open space, with axial paths, flowerbeds, hedges, and ponds and lakes as motifs. They became the epitome of the French formal garden style, and have been very influential and widely imitated or reproduced.

===Subsidiary structures===

The first of the subsidiary structures of the Palace of Versailles was the , built by Le Vau between the years 1662 and 1664, at the southern end of the Grand Canal. The apartments, overlooking the pens, were renovated by Hardouin-Mansart from 1698 to 1700, but the Menagerie fell into disuse in 1712. After a long period of decay, it was demolished in 1801. The Versailles Orangery, just to the south of the palace, was first built by Le Vau in 1663, originally as part of the general moving of earth to create the Estate. It was also modified by Mansart, who, from 1681 to 1685, totally rebuilt it and doubled its size.

In late 1679, Louis XIV commissioned Mansart to build the Château de Marly, a retreat at the edge of Versailles&#x27;s estate, about from the palace. The château consisted of a primary residential building and twelve pavilions, in Palladian style placed in two rows on either side of the main building. Construction was completed in 1686, when Louis XIV spent his first night there. The château was nationalized and sold in 1799, and subsequently demolished and replaced with industrial buildings. These were themselves demolished in 1805, and then in 1811 the estate was purchased by Napoleon. On 1 June 2009, the grounds of the Château de Marly were ceded to the Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles.

La Lanterne, is a hunting lodge named after the lantern that topped the nearby Menagerie that was built in 1787 by Philippe Louis de Noailles, then the palace governor. It has since 1960 been a state residence.

=== Petit Trianon ===

The Petit Trianon, whose construction from 1762 to 1768 led to the advent of the names &quot;Grand&quot; and &quot;Petit Trianon&quot;, was constructed for Louis XV and the Madame du Barry in the Neoclassical style by Gabriel. The building has a &quot;piano nobile&quot;, basement, and attic, with five windows on each floor. On becoming king, Louis XVI gave the Petit Trianon to Marie Antoinette, who remodeled it, relaid its gardens in the then-current English and Oriental styles, and formed her own court there.

In 1668, Louis XIV purchased and demolished the hamlet of Trianon, near the northern tip of the Grand Canal, and in its place, he commissioned Le Vau to construct a retreat from court, remembered as the Porcelain Trianon. Designed and built by Le Vau in 1670, it was the first example of &quot;Chinoiserie&quot; (faux Chinese) architecture in Europe, though it was largely designed in French style. The roof was clad not with porcelain but with delftware, and was thus prone to leaks, so in 1687 Louis XIV ordered it demolished. Nevertheless, the Porcelain Trianon was itself influential and copycats were built across Europe.

===The Grand Trianon ===
To replace the Porcelain Trianon, Louis XIV tasked Hardouin-Mansart with the construction in 1687 of the Grand Trianon, built from marble in three months. The Grand Trianon has a single story, except for its attached service wing, which was modified by Hardouin-Mansart in 1705–06. The east façade has a courtyard while the west faces the gardens of the Grand Trianon, and between them a peristyle. The interiors are mostly original, and housed Louis XIV, the Madame de Maintenon, Marie Leszczyńska, and Napoleon, who ordered restorations to the building. Under Charles de Gaulle, the north wing of the Grand Trianon became a residence of the President of France.

===The Queen&#x27;s hamlet and Theatre===

Near the Trianons are the French pavilion, built by Gabriel in 1750 between the two residences, and the Queen&#x27;s Theatre and Queen&#x27;s Hamlet, built by architect Richard Mique in 1780 and from 1783 to 1785 respectively. These were both built at the behest of Marie Antoinette; the theatre, hidden in the gardens, indulged her appreciation of opera and is absolutely original, and the hamlet to extend her gardens with rustic amenities. The building scheme of the Queen&#x27;s Hamlet includes a farmhouse (the farm was to produce milk and eggs for the queen), a dairy, a dovecote, a boudoir, a barn that burned down during the French Revolution, a mill and a tower in the form of a lighthouse.

==Modern political and ceremonial functions==
The palace still serves political functions. Heads of state are regaled in the Hall of Mirrors; the bicameral French Parliament—consisting of the Senate (&quot;Sénat&quot;) and the National Assembly (&quot;Assemblée nationale&quot;)—meet in joint session (a congress of the French Parliament) in Versailles to revise or otherwise amend the French Constitution, a tradition that came into effect with the promulgation of the 1875 Constitution. For example, the Parliament met in joint session at Versailles to pass constitutional amendments in June 1999 (for domestic applicability of International Criminal Court decisions and for gender equality in candidate lists), in January 2000 (ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam), in March 2003 (specifying the &quot;decentralized organization&quot; of the French Republic), and in March 2024 (to enshrine the freedom of women to have recourse to abortion).

In 2009, President Nicolas Sarkozy addressed the Great Recession before a congress in Versailles, the first time that this had been done since 1848, when Louis Napoleon Bonaparte gave an address before the French Second Republic. Following the November 2015 Paris attacks, President François Hollande gave a speech before a rare joint session of parliament at the Palace of Versailles. This was the third time since 1848 that a French president addressed a joint session of the French Parliament at Versailles. The president of the National Assembly has an official apartment at the Palace of Versailles. In 2023 a state visit by Charles III to France included a state banquet at the Palace.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Bureau du Roi
* Fresh pavilion
* List of Baroque residences
* List of tourist attractions in Paris
* Louis XIV style
* Paris Peace Conference, 1919
* Potager du roi, Versailles (Kitchen Garden of the King)
* Tennis Court Oath () in the Saint-Louis district
* Versailles Cathedral
* Éléphante de Louis XIV

==Notes==
==Citations==
===References===
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
** 
* Garrigues, Dominique (2001). &quot;Jardins et jardiniers de Versailles au grand siècle&quot;. Seyssel: Champ Vallon. .
* Also at Oxford Art Online (subscription required).
* 
* 
* Michelin Tyre PLC (1989). &quot;Île-de-France: The Region Around Paris&quot;. Harrow [England]: Michelin Tyre Public Ltd. Co. .
* 
* 
* 


===Web sources===
* 

====French Ministry of Culture====
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Mansel, Philip. &quot;King of the World: The Life of Louis XIV&quot; (2020) chapters 8, 13.

==External links==
* 
* Palace of Versailles&#x27;s 360x180 degree panorama virtual tour
* Versailles on Paper (exhibition website) 
* Versailles Multimedia Gallery
*Virtual tour of the Palace of Versailles provided by Google Arts &amp; Culture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="4" end="24" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="80" end="89" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="101" end="111" title="Versailles, Yvelines" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="127" end="132" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12820" start="141" end="160" title="Yvelines" label="Yvelines Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="164" end="184" title="Île-de-France" label="Île-de-France region"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="188" end="194" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q384602" start="305" end="331" title="Ministry of Culture (France)" label="French Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591574" start="340" end="416" title="Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles" label="Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162464" start="469" end="490" title="gardens of Versailles" label="gardens of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="572" end="582" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="909" end="917" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="988" end="996" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="1001" end="1010" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1152" end="1169" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1302" end="1310" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q973118" start="1322" end="1347" title="Coronation of Napoleon" label="his coronation as Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049" start="1377" end="1390" title="Grand Trianon" label="Grand Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="1480" end="1499" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329787" start="1645" end="1669" title="Musée de l&amp;#x27;Histoire de France (Versailles)" label="museum of French history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1791" end="1810" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1814" end="1820" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632001" start="2018" end="2039" title="Subsidiary structures of the Palace of Versailles" label="subsidiary structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q809830" start="2047" end="2087" title="Base Mérimée" label="list of culturally significant monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="2113" end="2123" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="2125" end="2139" title="king of France" label="king of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128472" start="2149" end="2162" title="Pavillon de chasse" label="hunting lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2212" end="2217" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="2255" end="2287" title="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q960741" start="2451" end="2475" title="François de Bassompierre" label="François de Bassompierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q348069" start="2596" end="2612" title="Philibert Le Roy" label="Philibert Le Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751876" start="2639" end="2646" title="château" label="château"/>
<link wikidata="Q151209" start="2686" end="2701" title="Anne of Austria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2758" end="2766" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q60847808" start="2770" end="2791" title="Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="2885" end="2894" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2956" end="2962" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403515" start="3083" end="3097" title="Chief minister of France" label="chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="3099" end="3115" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Cardinal Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q656186" start="3187" end="3197" title="the Fronde" label="the Fronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753066" start="3308" end="3328" title="princes of the blood" label="princes of the blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q312794" start="3909" end="3924" title="Nicolas Fouquet" label="Nicolas Fouquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809082" start="3930" end="3956" title="Superintendent of Finances" label="Superintendent of Finances"/>
<link wikidata="Q739976" start="3989" end="4015" title="Château de Vaux-le-Vicomte" label="Château de Vaux-le-Vicomte"/>
<link wikidata="Q310530" start="4096" end="4108" title="Louis Le Vau" label="Louis Le Vau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401663" start="4114" end="4129" title="First Architect to the King" label="court architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q273849" start="4142" end="4156" title="André Le Nôtre" label="André Le Nôtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q271676" start="4193" end="4208" title="Charles Le Brun" label="Charles Le Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188971" start="4530" end="4551" title="Jean-Baptiste Colbert" label="Jean-Baptiste Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162464" start="4882" end="4889" title="Gardens of Versailles" label="gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q25857" start="5081" end="5098" title="War of Devolution" label="War of Devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="5443" end="5453" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270258" start="5861" end="5882" title="François d&amp;#x27;Orbay" label="François d&amp;#x27;Orbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="6235" end="6245" title="Versailles, Yvelines" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365179" start="6373" end="6383" title="Hôtel particulier" label="townhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="6444" end="6460" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053" start="6765" end="6787" title="Jules Hardouin-Mansart" label="Jules Hardouin-Mansart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583447" start="6995" end="7010" title="Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495021" start="7144" end="7165" title="Ministers&amp;#x27; Wings" label="Ministers&amp;#x27; Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="7235" end="7242" title="stables" label="stables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542972" start="7254" end="7260" title="Grande Écurie" label="Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377428" start="7265" end="7279" title="Petite Écurie" label="Petite Écuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="7708" end="7728" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="7839" end="7868" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095189" start="8192" end="8205" title="Chapels of Versailles" label="palace chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="8289" end="8297" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="8302" end="8311" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603989" start="8479" end="8499" title="Salon d&amp;#x27;Hercule" label="Salon d&amp;#x27;Hercule"/>
<link wikidata="Q805353" start="8503" end="8511" title="ballroom" label="ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073127" start="8556" end="8585" title="Petit appartement du roi" label="king&amp;#x27;s private apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796145" start="8715" end="8740" title="Royal Opera of Versailles" label="Royal Opera of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="8868" end="8898" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="8944" end="8965" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q230677" start="9054" end="9069" title="Madame du Barry" label="Madame du Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q352451" start="9196" end="9216" title="Ange-Jacques Gabriel" label="Ange-Jacques Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q662491" start="9446" end="9468" title="Château de Saint-Cloud" label="Château de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747486" start="9593" end="9609" title="Causes of the French Revolution" label="political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="9624" end="9641" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498581" start="9844" end="9854" title="French art" label="French art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985804" start="9859" end="9866" title="French culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450700" start="10422" end="10440" title="nobility of France" label="nobility of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="10513" end="10521" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712541" start="10802" end="10815" title="Doge of Genoa" label="Doge of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080998" start="10817" end="10850" title="Francesco Maria Imperiale Lercari" label="Francesco Maria Imperiale Lercari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506753" start="10860" end="10870" title="Siamese embassy to France (1686)" label="an embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="10880" end="10897" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536917" start="10911" end="10921" title="Persian embassy to Louis XIV" label="an embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="10927" end="10939" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavid Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="11054" end="11062" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q770768" start="11073" end="11086" title="duke of Anjou" label="duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q663673" start="11109" end="11129" title="Château de Vincennes" label="Château de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="11175" end="11203" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="11460" end="11469" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q189444" start="11551" end="11580" title="Mozart family grand tour" label="Mozart and his family visited"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="11632" end="11655" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189979" start="11779" end="11794" title="Victoire of France (1733–1799)" label="Madame Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776326" start="11912" end="11933" title="Peace of Paris (1783)" label="Peace of Paris (1783)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="11951" end="11977" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="12034" end="12051" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="12064" end="12079" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="12335" end="12359" title="Storming of the Bastille" label="Storming of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="12452" end="12462" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151917" start="12518" end="12550" title="Women&amp;#x27;s March on Versailles" label="Women&amp;#x27;s March on Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="12836" end="12865" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="National Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="12989" end="13008" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="13124" end="13130" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116701" start="13929" end="13939" title="The Royal Gate of the Palace of Versailles" label="Royal Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="14098" end="14106" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157491" start="14280" end="14292" title="Marie-Louise of Austria" label="Marie-Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049" start="14313" end="14326" title="Grand Trianon" label="Grand Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="14503" end="14514" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="14988" end="14997" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="15024" end="15049" title="French Revolution of 1830" label="French Revolution of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="15073" end="15087" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329787" start="15195" end="15226" title="Musée de l&amp;#x27;Histoire de France (Versailles)" label="Museum of the History of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817455" start="15433" end="15454" title="Galerie des Batailles" label="Galerie des Batailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="15729" end="15741" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="15861" end="15875" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796145" start="15883" end="15908" title="Royal Opera of Versailles" label="Royal Opera of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="15940" end="15959" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="16005" end="16018" title="German General Staff" label="general staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="16161" end="16174" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="16186" end="16193" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="16234" end="16243" title="William I, German Emperor" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354157" start="16258" end="16291" title="Proclamation of the German Empire" label="proclaimed in the Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="16438" end="16459" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="16505" end="16510" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="16520" end="16528" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="16557" end="16574" title="National Assembly (France)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="16634" end="16647" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738" start="16702" end="16716" title="Adolphe Thiers" label="Adolphe Thiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="16985" end="16998" title="French Senate" label="French Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993145" start="17219" end="17232" title="Congress of the French Parliament" label="joint session"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="17284" end="17306" title="Constitution of France" label="Constitution of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387652" start="17444" end="17460" title="Pierre de Nolhac" label="Pierre de Nolhac"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="17742" end="17762" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583447" start="17819" end="17834" title="Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="17909" end="17933" title="John D. Rockefeller, Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1796145" start="18110" end="18135" title="Royal Opera of Versailles" label="Royal Opera of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18196" end="18208" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869995" start="18288" end="18326" title="1978 Palace of Versailles bombing" label="bombing committed by Breton terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="18796" end="18818" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="18878" end="18899" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q520286" start="19457" end="19471" title="Cyclone Lothar" label="Cyclone Lothar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583447" start="19544" end="19559" title="Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796145" start="19664" end="19689" title="Royal Opera of Versailles" label="Royal Opera of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591574" start="19797" end="19873" title="Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles" label="Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q384602" start="19998" end="20024" title="French Ministry of Culture" label="French Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="20098" end="20118" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135108" start="20276" end="20290" title="corps de logis" label="corps de logis"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="20312" end="20322" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323065" start="20330" end="20348" title="Louis XIII style" label="style of his reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="20373" end="20378" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="20477" end="20492" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053" start="20514" end="20536" title="Jules Hardouin-Mansart" label="Jules Hardouin-Mansart"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="20650" end="20662" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495021" start="20725" end="20746" title="Ministers&amp;#x27; Wings" label="Ministers&amp;#x27; Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q352451" start="20764" end="20784" title="Ange-Jacques Gabriel" label="Ange-Jacques Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="20800" end="20819" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q869423" start="21116" end="21135" title="cour d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="cour d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="21564" end="21580" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="21596" end="21616" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="21618" end="21631" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540732" start="21637" end="21656" title="Royal Palace of La Granja de San Ildefonso" label="Palace of La Granja"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="21658" end="21674" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q704831" start="21676" end="21694" title="Ludwigsburg Palace" label="Ludwigsburg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q517334" start="21696" end="21712" title="Karlsruhe Palace" label="Karlsruhe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q315030" start="21714" end="21728" title="Schloss Rastatt" label="Rastatt Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131631" start="21730" end="21748" title="Nymphenburg Palace" label="Nymphenburg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q680166" start="21750" end="21769" title="Schleissheim Palace" label="Schleissheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q686787" start="21775" end="21791" title="Schloss Esterházy" label="Esterházy Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q310530" start="21848" end="21860" title="Louis Le Vau" label="Louis Le Vau"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="21912" end="21922" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113503" start="22212" end="22236" title="grand appartement du roi" label="grand appartement du roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885782" start="22257" end="22286" title="grand appartement de la reine" label="grand appartement de la reine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072717" start="22555" end="22573" title="appartement du roi" label="appartement du roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073127" start="22594" end="22618" title="petit appartement du roi" label="petit appartement du roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q748003" start="22660" end="22689" title="petit appartement de la reine" label="petit appartement de la reine"/>
<link wikidata="Q815421" start="22915" end="22927" title="piano nobile" label="piano nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341702" start="23090" end="23098" title="enfilade (architecture)" label="enfilade"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="23150" end="23157" title="Solar System" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="23187" end="23198" title="Roman deity" label="Roman deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583447" start="23335" end="23350" title="Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="23435" end="23443" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q152549" start="23588" end="23610" title="Maria Theresa of Spain" label="Maria Theresa of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="23620" end="23629" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q231674" start="23631" end="23648" title="Maria Leszczyńska" label="Maria Leszczyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="23672" end="23688" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="23698" end="23707" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q231409" start="23762" end="23794" title="Princess Marie-Adélaïde of Savoy" label="Princess Marie-Adélaïde of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127505" start="23825" end="23848" title="Louis, Duke of Burgundy" label="Louis, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588965" start="24016" end="24034" title="imperial staircase" label="imperial staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270258" start="24062" end="24083" title="François d&amp;#x27;Orbay" label="François d&amp;#x27;Orbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q869423" start="24306" end="24315" title="cour d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="courtyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q301276" start="24322" end="24331" title="Vestibule (architecture)" label="vestibule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712955" start="24450" end="24458" title="skylight" label="skylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="24556" end="24566" title="polychrome" label="polychrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="24578" end="24584" title="gilded" label="gilded"/>
<link wikidata="Q271676" start="24624" end="24639" title="Charles Le Brun" label="Charles Le Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="24756" end="24772" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="24829" end="24846" title="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475656" start="24882" end="24905" title="Four Parts of the World" label="Four Parts of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="25120" end="25125" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751100" start="25167" end="25177" title="Jean Warin" label="Jean Warin"/>
<link wikidata="Q695992" start="25206" end="25211" title="Niche (architecture)" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="25607" end="25621" title="All-Saints Day" label="All-Saints Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="25640" end="25646" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401663" start="25876" end="25903" title="First Architect to the King" label="First Architect to the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q568839" start="25905" end="25920" title="Robert de Cotte" label="Robert de Cotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9440" start="25951" end="25965" title="Paolo Veronese" label="Paolo Veronese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="26095" end="26113" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q732468" start="26195" end="26211" title="François Lemoyne" label="François Lemoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053142" start="26521" end="26541" title="René-Antoine Houasse" label="René-Antoine Houasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751100" start="26799" end="26809" title="Jean Warin" label="Jean Warin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="27021" end="27038" title="Trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="Trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="27343" end="27357" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164509" start="27463" end="27490" title="Jean Baptiste de Champaigne" label="Jean Baptiste de Champaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="27506" end="27513" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="27554" end="27573" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="27578" end="27585" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="28060" end="28068" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q231674" start="28084" end="28101" title="Marie Leszczyńska" label="Marie Leszczyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q686597" start="28125" end="28138" title="Carle Van Loo" label="Carle Van Loo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066580" start="28496" end="28515" title="Charles de la Fosse" label="Charles de la Fosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="28544" end="28550" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="28879" end="28884" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928781" start="28901" end="28929" title="Bust of Louis XIV (Bernini)" label="bust of Louis XIV by Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="29205" end="29215" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="29333" end="29342" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="29374" end="29382" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="29387" end="29396" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281546" start="29467" end="29472" title="Levee (ceremony)" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="30366" end="30386" title="Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151917" start="30407" end="30420" title="Women&amp;#x27;s March on Versailles" label="hostile crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348290" start="30552" end="30567" title="Nicolas Coustou" label="Nicolas Coustou"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="30725" end="30740" title="Antony van Dyck" label="Antony van Dyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q152549" start="30942" end="30964" title="Maria Theresa of Spain" label="Maria Theresa of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="30977" end="30986" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q231674" start="31029" end="31046" title="Marie Leszczyńska" label="Marie Leszczyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="31063" end="31079" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583447" start="31375" end="31390" title="Hall of Mirrors" label="Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q164419" start="31396" end="31408" title="long gallery" label="long gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="31667" end="31683" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="32499" end="32509" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="32857" end="32861" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="32886" end="32892" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="32906" end="32925" title="church architecture" label="church architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501689" start="32935" end="32955" title="French Baroque architecture" label="French Baroque style"/>
<link wikidata="Q585926" start="33064" end="33078" title="Antoine Coypel" label="Antoine Coypel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066580" start="33080" end="33099" title="Charles de La Fosse" label="Charles de La Fosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q712455" start="33105" end="33118" title="Jean Jouvenet" label="Jean Jouvenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="33184" end="33192" title="Louis IX" label="Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="33216" end="33221" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="33223" end="33234" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="33236" end="33247" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="33269" end="33281" title="fleur de lis" label="fleur de lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q168346" start="33310" end="33318" title="monogram" label="monogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q363875" start="33357" end="33372" title="Robert Clicquot" label="Robert Clicquot"/>
<link wikidata="Q843494" start="33748" end="33755" title="Lantern (architecture)" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878912" start="34043" end="34057" title="Carlo Vigarani" label="Carlo Vigarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="34175" end="34183" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q352451" start="34205" end="34225" title="Ange-Jacques Gabriel" label="Ange-Jacques Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="34388" end="34397" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="34403" end="34419" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262314" start="34709" end="34736" title="Louis Jean-Jacques Durameau" label="Louis Jean-Jacques Durameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q524291" start="34751" end="34765" title="Augustin Pajou" label="Augustin Pajou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="34947" end="34964" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="35088" end="35105" title="Franco-German War" label="Franco-German War"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="35127" end="35140" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="35230" end="35251" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="35371" end="35387" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="35988" end="36007" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="36174" end="36199" title="French Revolution of 1830" label="French Revolution of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q314814" start="36300" end="36322" title="Philippe de Champaigne" label="Philippe de Champaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q360010" start="36324" end="36338" title="Pierre Mignard" label="Pierre Mignard"/>
<link wikidata="Q59894" start="36340" end="36358" title="Laurent de La Hyre" label="Laurent de La Hyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q271676" start="36360" end="36375" title="Charles Le Brun" label="Charles Le Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q349377" start="36377" end="36402" title="Adam Frans van der Meulen" label="Adam Frans van der Meulen"/>
<link wikidata="Q550302" start="36404" end="36426" title="Nicolas de Largillière" label="Nicolas de Largillière"/>
<link wikidata="Q49898" start="36428" end="36444" title="Hyacinthe Rigaud" label="Hyacinthe Rigaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q318741" start="36446" end="36465" title="Jean-Antoine Houdon" label="Jean-Antoine Houdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q277738" start="36467" end="36484" title="Jean-Marc Nattier" label="Jean-Marc Nattier"/>
<link wikidata="Q213163" start="36486" end="36509" title="Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun" label="Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q548205" start="36511" end="36524" title="Hubert Robert" label="Hubert Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q312096" start="36526" end="36541" title="Thomas Lawrence" label="Thomas Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="36543" end="36562" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q216999" start="36568" end="36585" title="Antoine-Jean Gros" label="Antoine-Jean Gros"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="36696" end="36712" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="36726" end="36737" title="Louis IX of France" label="Saint Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669489" start="36784" end="36805" title="Battle of Taillebourg" label="Battle of Taillebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q161145" start="36847" end="36860" title="Horace Vernet" label="Horace Vernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163543" start="36865" end="36880" title="François Gérard" label="François Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632001" start="37614" end="37634" title="Subsidiary structures of the Palace of Versailles" label="subsidiary buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162464" start="37654" end="37661" title="Gardens of Versailles" label="gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873935" start="37848" end="37863" title="Paris Avenue (Versailles)" label="Avenue de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542972" start="37908" end="37914" title="Grande Écurie" label="Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377428" start="37919" end="37933" title="Petite Écurie" label="Petite Écuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390199" start="37963" end="37981" title="Place d&amp;#x27;Armes (Versailles)" label="Place d&amp;#x27;Armes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873948" start="38019" end="38035" title="Avenue de Sceaux" label="Avenue de Sceaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873943" start="38040" end="38061" title="Avenue de Saint-Cloud (Versailles)" label="Avenue de Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q869423" start="38214" end="38233" title="cour d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="cour d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495021" start="38258" end="38279" title="Ministers&amp;#x27; Wings" label="Ministers&amp;#x27; Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116701" start="38295" end="38305" title="The Royal Gate of the Palace of Versailles" label="Royal Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q879306" start="39251" end="39257" title="Bièvre (river)" label="Bièvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="39271" end="39277" title="Inflow (hydrology)" label="inflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466299" start="39315" end="39339" title="Machine de Marly" label="enormous pumping station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="39353" end="39358" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656505" start="39364" end="39376" title="Marly-le-Roi" label="Marly-le-Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23798" start="39432" end="39436" title="Eure (river)" label="Eure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936055" start="39442" end="39449" title="Canal de l&amp;#x27;Eure" label="a canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q273849" start="39580" end="39594" title="André Le Nôtre" label="André Le Nôtre"/>
<link wikidata="Q349207" start="39699" end="39714" title="Jacques Boyceau" label="Jacques Boyceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994840" start="40074" end="40084" title="flowerbeds" label="flowerbeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="40086" end="40091" title="hedge" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12774" start="40156" end="40176" title="French formal garden" label="French formal garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524243" start="40643" end="40662" title="Versailles Orangery" label="Versailles Orangery"/>
<link wikidata="Q736185" start="40961" end="40977" title="Château de Marly" label="Château de Marly"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="41134" end="41149" title="Palladian style" label="Palladian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209959" start="41647" end="41658" title="La Lanterne (Versailles)" label="La Lanterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q163508" start="41762" end="41788" title="Philippe Louis de Noailles" label="Philippe Louis de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q815421" start="42134" end="42146" title="piano nobile" label="piano nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783" start="42337" end="42344" title="English landscape garden" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538718" start="42602" end="42619" title="Trianon de Porcelaine" label="Porcelain Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q863679" start="42693" end="42704" title="Chinoiserie" label="Chinoiserie"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="42825" end="42834" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184151" start="42844" end="42853" title="delftware" label="delftware"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049" start="43157" end="43170" title="Grand Trianon" label="Grand Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q725453" start="43440" end="43449" title="peristyle" label="peristyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="43614" end="43631" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63502874" start="43786" end="43801" title="French pavilion" label="French pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322463" start="43864" end="43884" title="Théâtre de la Reine" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051" start="43889" end="43908" title="Hameau de la Reine" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860756" start="43929" end="43942" title="Richard Mique" label="Richard Mique"/>
<link wikidata="Q632552" start="44617" end="44634" title="French Parliament" label="French Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="44653" end="44659" title="Senate (France)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="44688" end="44705" title="National Assembly (France)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993145" start="44765" end="44798" title="congress of the French Parliament" label="congress of the French Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379161" start="44817" end="44842" title="Constitutional amendments under the French Fifth Republic" label="revise or otherwise amend"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="44847" end="44866" title="Constitution of France" label="French Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="45091" end="45119" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="45206" end="45225" title="Treaty of Amsterdam" label="Treaty of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="45425" end="45440" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="45455" end="45470" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="45560" end="45584" title="Napoleon III" label="Louis Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="45612" end="45634" title="French Second Republic" label="French Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479779" start="45650" end="45677" title="November 2015 Paris attacks" label="November 2015 Paris attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="45689" end="45706" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269551" start="45735" end="45748" title="joint session" label="joint session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704225" start="45921" end="45955" title="List of Presidents of the National Assembly of France" label="president of the National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="45963" end="45981" title="Official residence" label="official apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q122955734" start="46021" end="46057" title="state visit by Charles III to France" label="state visit by Charles III to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010501" start="46126" end="46139" title="Bureau du Roi" label="Bureau du Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373111" start="46142" end="46156" title="Fresh pavilion" label="Fresh pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563418" start="46159" end="46185" title="List of Baroque residences" label="List of Baroque residences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403319" start="46188" end="46224" title="List of tourist attractions in Paris" label="List of tourist attractions in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517921" start="46227" end="46242" title="Louis XIV style" label="Louis XIV style"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="46245" end="46273" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference, 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399930" start="46276" end="46302" title="Potager du roi, Versailles" label="Potager du roi, Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60022" start="46334" end="46351" title="Tennis Court Oath" label="Tennis Court Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124804" start="46385" end="46405" title="Versailles Cathedral" label="Versailles Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326205" start="46408" end="46430" title="Éléphante de Louis XIV" label="Éléphante de Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q369089" start="47251" end="47276" title="Google Arts &amp;amp; Culture" label="Google Arts &amp;amp; Culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53318" wikidata="Q15362022" url="?curid=53318" title="Malpighia emarginata">
<text>Malpighia emarginata is a tropical fruit-bearing shrub or small tree in the family Malpighiaceae.

Common names include acerola (from &quot;azarole&quot; for a similar looking old-world fruit), Guarani cherry, Barbados cherry, West Indian cherry, and wild crepe myrtle. 
Acerola is native to Paraguay and Brazil in South America, Central America and southern Mexico, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic and Haiti, but is now also being grown as far north as Texas and in subtropical areas of Asia, such as India.

==Distribution==
&quot;Malpighia emarginata&quot; is originally from Yucatán, and can be found in Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, South America as far south as Peru and Colombia, and the southeast region of Brazil, and in the southernmost parts of the contiguous United States (southern Florida and the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas). In Florida, it can be grown in protected locations as far north as Cape Canaveral. It is cultivated in the tropics and subtropics throughout the world, including the Canary Islands, Ghana, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Zanzibar, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, India, Java, Hawaii, and Australia.

== Production ==

=== Brazil ===
Brazil is the largest producer of acerola worldwide. On , Brazil produces of acerola per year. In order to preserve the genetic variability of acerola, the federal rural University of Pernambuco in Brazil established an &quot;Acerola Active Germplasm Bank&quot; in June 1998.

== Growth conditions ==
Acerola can be propagated by seed, cutting, or other methods. It prefers dry, well-drained, sandy soil and full sun, and cannot endure temperatures lower than . Because of its shallow roots, it has very low tolerance to winds. Furthermore, a sufficient water supply is advantageous for good growth and maximum yields of large fruits. This is especially important during fruiting and flowering. The optimal growth conditions are reached at a mean temperature of and of rainfall annually.

==Description==

Acerola is an evergreen shrub or small tree with spreading branches on a short trunk. It is usually tall, but sometimes reaches in height. The chromosome number is 2&quot;n&quot; = 40.

=== Bark ===
The bark of young branches is green and sparsely covered with curly-haired trichomes, which fall off with age. The greyish to brownish bark is relatively smooth and covered with conspicuous cork pores when young. With age, it is thick and cracked.

===Leaves===
The leaves are simple, ovate to elliptic-lanceolate in outline, long, wide, with an entire or undulating margin. They are attached oppositely on the stem on short petioles. The leaves have small hairs, which can irritate skin.

===Flowers===

The tree flowers from April to November. Flowers are bisexual and in diameter. They have five pale to deep pink or red fringed petals, 10 stamens, and six to 10 glands on the calyx. The three to five flowers per inflorescence are sessile or short-peduncled axillary cymes.

===Fruits and seeds===

Three years after planting, trees start producing fruits. 3–4 weeks after flowering, a number of bright red drupes in diameter with a mass of mature. The shell of the fruit is smooth and very thin. Its shelf life of 2–3 days at ambient temperature makes it highly perishable. Drupes are in pairs or groups of three, and each contains three triangular seeds. The drupes are juicy and high in vitamin C () and other nutrients. They are divided into three obscure lobes and are usually acidic to subacidic, giving them a sour taste, but may be sweet if grown well.

== Cultivation methods ==

=== Yield and harvest ===
Acerola flowers and fruits already in the first year after planting but increases its production in the following years, reaching up to per plant in the sixth year. The fruiting season usually extends from April to November. The fruits should be picked frequently, as they are not stored on the tree. Ripe fruit should be handled carefully to avoid bruising and should be utilized as soon as possible or frozen for later use. Semi-ripe fruit will usually keep for several days in the refrigerator. Pollination by wild insects increases the fruit yield.

=== Sowing ===
Plants can be set at any time of the year, but the best time is spring, just before the rainy season. Choose a location with good water drainage and in a sheltered spot.

== Pests and diseases ==
Malpighia emarginata is a host plant for the caterpillars of the white-patched skipper (&quot;Chiomara asychis&quot;), Florida duskywing (&quot;Ephyriades brunneus&quot;), and brown-banded skipper (&quot;Timochares ruptifasciatus&quot;). Larvae of the acerola weevil () feed on the fruits, while adults consume young leaves.

== Nutritional values ==
Acerola fruit is 91% water, and 8% carbohydrates, and contains negligible protein and fat (table). The fruit also supplies manganese at 29% DV, while other micronutrients are uniformly low in content (table). Acerola fruit provides an exceptional content of vitamin C at some 20 times the Daily Value (DV) in a reference amount (table). Whereas the content of sugar, soluble solids and titratable acids increases with the ripening process of the fruit, the vitamin C content decreases. Therefore, the immature green fruit is harvested for industrial use of the vitamin C. Besides the high vitamin C content, acerola also contains phytonutrients like phenolic acids, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and carotenoids.

==Uses==

===Culinary===
The sour fruits of acerola are high in vitamin C, and acerola cherry is used as a food supplement. Acerola fruit may be eaten raw or used as a juice that is mixed with other, usually sweeter fruit juices. The fruits are also made into jams, jellies, concentrates, and liqueurs.

Acerola cherry powder is also used in some commercially produced breads as a bread improver.

===Others===
Acerola is a popular bonsai subject because of its small leaf and fruit, and fine ramification. It is also grown as an ornamental and for hedges. Because acerola also contains pigments like anthocyanins and carotenoids, it could also be used as a food colorant.

==References==
==External links==
*University of Florida: Acerola</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="26" end="34" title="Tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="35" end="40" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="49" end="54" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="64" end="68" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q632563" start="83" end="96" title="Malpighiaceae" label="Malpighiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15362022" start="120" end="127" title="Malpighia emarginata" label="acerola"/>
<link wikidata="Q793606" start="140" end="147" title="azarole" label="azarole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15362022" start="194" end="208" title="Malpighia emarginata" label="Guarani cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15362022" start="210" end="225" title="Malpighia emarginata" label="Barbados cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15362022" start="227" end="245" title="Malpighia emarginata" label="West Indian cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15362022" start="251" end="268" title="Malpighia emarginata" label="wild crepe myrtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="292" end="300" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="305" end="311" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="315" end="328" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="330" end="345" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="359" end="365" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="367" end="378" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="380" end="398" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="403" end="408" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="454" end="459" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="502" end="507" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="579" end="586" title="Yucatán region" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="608" end="614" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="616" end="631" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="637" end="646" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="648" end="661" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="678" end="682" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="687" end="695" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088815" start="705" end="721" title="Southeast Brazil" label="southeast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="725" end="731" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="770" end="794" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="805" end="812" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644904" start="827" end="844" title="Rio Grande Valley (Texas)" label="Rio Grande Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="848" end="853" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="923" end="937" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="963" end="970" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="975" end="985" title="subtropics" label="subtropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="1022" end="1036" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1038" end="1043" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1045" end="1053" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="1055" end="1065" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="1067" end="1075" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="1077" end="1086" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1088" end="1094" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1096" end="1101" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="1103" end="1107" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="1109" end="1115" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1121" end="1130" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1166" end="1172" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374271" start="1286" end="1305" title="genetic variability" label="genetic variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894399" start="1336" end="1360" title="University of Pernambuco" label="University of Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="1996" end="2001" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="2011" end="2015" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="2115" end="2132" title="chromosome number" label="chromosome number"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="2175" end="2179" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="2189" end="2195" title="branch" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="2246" end="2254" title="trichome" label="trichome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="2361" end="2365" title="Cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2437" end="2443" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="2456" end="2484" title="Leaf shape" label="ovate to elliptic-lanceolate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2538" end="2544" title="Leaf#Margins (edge)" label="margin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2564" end="2574" title="Phyllotaxis#Leaf arrangement" label="oppositely"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="2596" end="2604" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="2717" end="2723" title="Flower" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="2729" end="2737" title="Plant sexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="2803" end="2808" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="2814" end="2820" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="2851" end="2856" title="Stamen" label="calyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="2888" end="2901" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331384" start="2923" end="2932" title="Peduncle (botany)" label="peduncled"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="3002" end="3006" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="3024" end="3029" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712" start="3082" end="3087" title="drupe" label="drupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="4088" end="4099" title="Pollination" label="Pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="4381" end="4385" title="Host (biology)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="4400" end="4411" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q108073442" start="4449" end="4465" title="Chiomara asychis" label="Chiomara asychis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13608996" start="4499" end="4518" title="Ephyriades brunnea" label="Ephyriades brunneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806891" start="4559" end="4584" title="Timochares ruptifasciatus" label="Timochares ruptifasciatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="4741" end="4754" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="4780" end="4787" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="4792" end="4795" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="4829" end="4838" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="4995" end="5011" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value (DV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="5066" end="5071" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="5073" end="5087" title="Solubility" label="soluble solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q539479" start="5092" end="5107" title="titratable acid" label="titratable acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="5336" end="5350" title="phytonutrients" label="phytonutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q419836" start="5356" end="5369" title="phenolic acid" label="phenolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="5372" end="5381" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q262547" start="5384" end="5395" title="anthocyanin" label="anthocyanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="5402" end="5412" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q64365" start="5848" end="5854" title="bonsai" label="bonsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="5946" end="5956" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="5965" end="5970" title="hedge" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q262547" start="6017" end="6028" title="anthocyanin" label="anthocyanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="6034" end="6044" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53319" wikidata="Q3471805" url="?curid=53319" title="Sand Hill Road">
<text>Sand Hill Road, often shortened to just &quot;Sand Hill&quot; or &quot;SHR&quot;, is an arterial road in western Silicon Valley, California, running through Palo Alto, Menlo Park, and Woodside, notable for its concentration of venture capital firms. The road has become a metonym for that industry; nearly every top Silicon Valley company has been the beneficiary of early funding from firms on Sand Hill Road.

Its significance as a symbol of private equity and venture capitalism in the United States has been compared to that of Wall Street and the stock market.

==Location==
Connecting El Camino Real and Interstate 280, the road provides easy access to Stanford University and the northwestern area of Silicon Valley. The road also runs southwest of Interstate 280 into a residential neighborhood of Woodside, California, but the private equity companies are concentrated to the east of the freeway on the main stretch of the road in Menlo Park. On its northeast end, it crosses into and runs briefly through Palo Alto before ending at El Camino Real.

Sand Hill Road is also home to the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory.

==History==

For many years, Sand Hill Road&#x27;s northern end terminated in the middle of Stanford Shopping Center&#x27;s parking lot, and the only four-lane segment was the section from Interstate 280 to Santa Cruz Avenue (the section where all the venture capitalists are housed). This situation resulted in two severe bottlenecks which made it difficult to travel to and from Stanford Shopping Center, Stanford University, and Menlo Park. 

Extension and widening of the road were fiercely opposed by environmentalists, who were concerned about the road&#x27;s proximity to San Francisquito Creek, and by residents of Menlo Park, who feared that completion of the road would increase traffic congestion in their area due to the mid-Peninsula region&#x27;s lack of a direct north–south arterial. After three decades of lobbying, negotiation, and litigation, the road was finally completed to El Camino Real in 2001. Only the existing portion from just &quot;north&quot; of Alameda de las Pulgas to just &quot;south&quot; of Stanford Shopping Center was widened to four lanes; the new extension past the shopping center was built only as two lanes. 

The bottleneck near Santa Cruz Avenue was widened in 2006 and features a high faux rock wall at the junction of Sand Hill Road and Santa Cruz Avenue. The project was delayed because the stretch of land at issue runs through Menlo Park, not Palo Alto; the city reversed its opposition to widening only after seeing the results of the widening of the northern Palo Alto segment.

==Venture capital==

In 1972, the firm now known as Kleiner Perkins was the first venture capital firm to open an office on Sand Hill Road. The stellar performance of Kleiner Perkins&#x27;s first $8 million fund quickly attracted other similar firms to the Menlo Park area, resulting in &quot;the most important cluster of venture capital firms in the world&quot;, an author later wrote. Despite this, in the mid-1970s, Kleiner Perkins began to shift operations to Downtown San Francisco, but years later moved back most of its operations to rejoin the many other venture capital firms that had put down roots around its original office location. Since then, beneficiaries of funding from Sand Hill Road have included Microsoft, Amazon.com, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Skype.

When Microsoft&#x27;s Silicon Valley office moved to Sand Hill Road in 1988 it paid US$2.02 per square foot, less than the US$3 average for Palo Alto and Menlo Park. Robert Gaskins wrote, &quot;There could not be a better location for accessibility coupled with privacy and natural beauty&quot;, and &quot;appropriate for a top-tier company like Microsoft&quot;. For several years during the dot-com boom of the late 1990s, commercial real estate on Sand Hill Road was more expensive than almost anywhere else in the world. The annual rent in the area around Sand Hill Road peaked at around US$144 per square foot ($1550 per m2) in mid-2000; at the time, this was higher than rates in Manhattan and London&#x27;s West End.

In 1997, the Harvard Business School opened the California Research Center at 3000 Sand Hill Road, whose aim is to enable HBS faculty to write business cases about Silicon Valley.

As of December 2014, Sand Hill Road still had the most expensive office space in the United States with annual rent reported at $111 per square foot, which was higher than Manhattan&#x27;s Fifth Avenue at $102 per square foot.

As of June 2022, Sand Hill Road was still home to the most expensive office space in the United States, with Newmark Group reporting monthly rent at $10.66 per square foot (equivalent to annual rent of $127.92 per square foot), which was reportedly higher than other top-tier markets like Manhattan&#x27;s Park Avenue and Greenwich, Connecticut. However, prices were under pressure from the shift to remote work during the COVID-19 pandemic, which had reduced the necessity of maintaining a physical headquarters on Sand Hill Road. Other issues included the dated appearance of Sand Hill Road&#x27;s of &quot;low-rise woody walk-ups, most of them built in the 1970s and ’80s&quot;, and their distance from the restaurants and stores of downtown Menlo Park and its Caltrain station. After vacancies on Sand Hill Road peaked at around 15 percent at the end of 2020, landlords responded to these issues by renovating buildings and adding amenities like farm-to-table restaurants to justify their demands for high rent.

=== Venture capital firms ===

Venture capital and private equity firms located on Sand Hill Road include:
==In popular culture==
The season two premiere episode of the HBO television series &quot;Silicon Valley&quot;, in which the show&#x27;s protagonists try to secure venture capital for their startup, was titled &quot;Sand Hill Shuffle&quot;.

In the second episode of HBO miniseries &quot;The Dropout&quot;, Elizabeth Holmes visits several venture capital firms on Sand Hill Road in the hopes of securing investment for Theranos.

In the 2010 film &quot;&quot;, protagonist Rod visits a VC firm on Sand Hill Road to get financing for his solar energy startup.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3471805" start="0" end="14" title="Sand Hill Road" label="Sand Hill Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471805" start="46" end="55" title="Sand Hill Road" label="Sand Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471805" start="71" end="74" title="Sand Hill Road" label="SHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304276" start="88" end="101" title="arterial road" label="arterial road"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="113" end="127" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="129" end="139" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="157" end="166" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="168" end="178" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q984177" start="184" end="192" title="Woodside, California" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="227" end="242" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="272" end="279" title="metonym" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="444" end="458" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="463" end="481" title="venture capitalism" label="venture capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="532" end="543" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="552" end="564" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q805831" start="591" end="605" title="El Camino Real (California)" label="El Camino Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q399994" start="610" end="624" title="Interstate 280 (California)" label="Interstate 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="659" end="678" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="708" end="722" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q984177" start="806" end="826" title="Woodside, California" label="Woodside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="1015" end="1024" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q915217" start="1094" end="1130" title="SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory" label="SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598790" start="1225" end="1249" title="Stanford Shopping Center" label="Stanford Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="1257" end="1268" title="parking lot" label="parking lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q399994" start="1322" end="1336" title="Interstate 280 (California)" label="Interstate 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598790" start="1514" end="1538" title="Stanford Shopping Center" label="Stanford Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1540" end="1559" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q805831" start="2029" end="2043" title="El Camino Real (California)" label="El Camino Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346838" start="2717" end="2732" title="Kleiner Perkins" label="Kleiner Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q599301" start="3130" end="3152" title="Downtown San Francisco" label="Downtown San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="3383" end="3392" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="3394" end="3404" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="3406" end="3414" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="3416" end="3423" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="3425" end="3434" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="3439" end="3444" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729205" start="3613" end="3627" title="Robert Gaskins" label="Robert Gaskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="3839" end="3851" title="Dot-com bubble" label="dot-com boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="3882" end="3893" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="3982" end="3986" title="Economic rent" label="rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="4132" end="4141" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4146" end="4152" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="4160" end="4168" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="4184" end="4207" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896170" start="4314" end="4327" title="business case" label="business case"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="4541" end="4553" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018524" start="4689" end="4702" title="Newmark Group" label="Newmark Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="4886" end="4897" title="Park Avenue" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="4902" end="4924" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135326" start="4980" end="4991" title="remote work" label="remote work"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5003" end="5020" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="5080" end="5092" title="headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q166817" start="5344" end="5352" title="Caltrain" label="Caltrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435464" start="5530" end="5543" title="farm-to-table" label="farm-to-table"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="5766" end="5769" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15956708" start="5794" end="5808" title="Silicon Valley (TV series)" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65056901" start="5992" end="6003" title="The Dropout" label="The Dropout"/>
<link wikidata="Q17503525" start="6011" end="6027" title="Elizabeth Holmes" label="Elizabeth Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956307" start="6123" end="6131" title="Theranos" label="Theranos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53321" wikidata="Q364187" url="?curid=53321" title="Frederick Law Olmsted">
<text>Frederick Law Olmsted (April 26, 1822 – August 28, 1903) was an American landscape architect, journalist, social critic, and public administrator. He is considered to be the father of landscape architecture in the United States. Olmsted was famous for co-designing many well-known urban parks with his partner Calvert Vaux. Olmsted and Vaux&#x27;s first project was Central Park in New York City, which led to many other urban park designs. These included Prospect Park in Brooklyn; Cadwalader Park in Trenton, New Jersey; and Forest Park in Portland, Oregon. In 1883, Olmsted established the preeminent landscape architecture and planning consultancy of the late 19th-century United States, which was carried on and expanded by his sons, Frederick Jr. and John C., under the name Olmsted Brothers.

Other projects that Olmsted was involved in include the country&#x27;s first and oldest coordinated system of public parks and parkways in Buffalo, New York; the country&#x27;s oldest state park, the Niagara Reservation in Niagara Falls, New York; one of the first planned communities in the United States, Riverside, Illinois; Mount Royal Park in Montreal, Quebec; The Institute of Living in Hartford, Connecticut; Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut; Waterbury Hospital in Waterbury, Connecticut; the Emerald Necklace in Boston, Massachusetts; Highland Park in Rochester, New York; the Grand Necklace of Parks in Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Cherokee Park and parks and parkway system in Louisville, Kentucky; Walnut Hill Park in New Britain, Connecticut; the Biltmore Estate in Asheville, North Carolina; the master plans for the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Maine, Stanford University near Palo Alto, California, Mount Holyoke College, The Lawrenceville School; and Montebello Park in St. Catharines, Ontario. In Chicago his projects include Jackson Park, Washington Park, the main park ground for the 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, the southern portion of Chicago&#x27;s emerald necklace boulevard ring, and the University of Chicago campus. In Washington, D.C., he worked on the landscape surrounding the United States Capitol building.

The quality of Olmsted&#x27;s landscape architecture was recognized by his contemporaries, who showered him with prestigious commissions. Daniel Burnham said of him, &quot;He paints with lakes and wooded slopes; with lawns and banks and forest-covered hills; with mountainsides and ocean views...&quot; His work, especially in Central Park, set a standard of excellence that continues to influence landscape architecture in the United States. He was an early and important activist in the conservation movement, including in his work at Niagara Falls, the Adirondack region of upstate New York, and the National Park system. As head of the U.S. Sanitary Commission, he also played a major role in organizing and providing medical services to the Union Army during the Civil War.

==Early life and education==

Olmsted was born in Hartford, Connecticut, on April 26, 1822. His father, John Olmsted, was a prosperous merchant who took a lively interest in nature, people, and places; Frederick Law and his younger brother, John Hull Olmsted, also showed this interest. His mother, Charlotte Law (née Hull) Olmsted, died from an overdose before his fourth birthday in 1826. His father remarried in 1827 to Mary Ann Bull, who shared her husband&#x27;s strong love of nature and had perhaps a more cultivated taste. Their children were Charlotte, Mary, Owen, Bertha, Ada, and Albert Olmsted. The Olmsted ancestors arrived in the early 1600s from Essex, England.

When he was almost ready to enter Yale College at a young age, sumac poisoning weakened his eyes, so he abandoned college plans. After working as an apprentice seaman, merchant, and journalist, he settled on a farm in January 1848 on the south shore of Staten Island. His father helped him acquire this farm, and he renamed it from Akerly Homestead to Tosomock Farm. It was later renamed &quot;The Woods of Arden&quot; by owner Erastus Wiman. The house in which Olmsted lived still stands at 4515 Hylan Boulevard, near Woods of Arden Road.

==Career==
===Journalism===
Olmsted had a significant career in journalism. In 1850 he traveled to England to visit public gardens, where he was greatly impressed by Joseph Paxton&#x27;s Birkenhead Park. He subsequently wrote and published &quot;Walks and Talks of an American Farmer in England&quot; in 1852. This supported his getting additional work. His visit to Birkenhead Park inspired his later contribution to the design of Central Park in New York City.

Interested in the slave economy, he was commissioned by the &quot;New York Daily Times&quot; (now &quot;The New York Times&quot;) to embark on an extensive research journey through the American South and Texas from 1852 to 1857. His dispatches to the &quot;Times&quot; were collected into three volumes (&quot;A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States&quot; (1856), &quot;A Journey Through Texas&quot; (1857), &quot;A Journey in the Back Country in the Winter of 1853–4&quot; (1860).

These are considered vivid first-person accounts of the antebellum South. A one-volume abridgment, &quot;Journeys and Explorations in the Cotton Kingdom&quot; (1861), was published in England during the first six months of the American Civil War, at the suggestion of Olmsted&#x27;s English publisher.

To this, he wrote a new introduction (on &quot;The Present Crisis&quot;). He stated his views on the effect of slavery on the economy and social conditions of the southern states:

He argued that slavery had made the slave states inefficient (a set amount of work took 4 times as long in Virginia as in the North) and backward both economically and socially. He said that the profits of slavery were enjoyed by no more than 8,000 owners of large plantations; a somewhat larger group had about the standard of living of a New York City policeman, but the proportion of the free white men who were as well-off as a Northern working man was small. Slavery meant that &#x27;the proportion of men improving their condition was much less than in any Northern community; and that the natural resources of the land were strangely unused, or were used with poor economy.&#x27;

He thought that the lack of a Southern white middle class and the general poverty of lower-class whites prevented the development of many civil amenities that were taken for granted in the North.

Between his travels in Europe and the South, Olmsted served as an editor for &quot;Putnam&#x27;s Magazine&quot; for two years and as an agent with Dix, Edwards and Co., before the company&#x27;s insolvency during the Panic of 1857. Olmsted provided financial support for, and occasionally wrote for, the magazine &quot;The Nation&quot;, which was founded in 1865. &quot;Olmsted spent much of his free time working without pay as an editorial assistant to [the magazine&#x27;s first editor, Edwin L.] Godkin. It was a labor of love.&quot;

===New York City&#x27;s Central Park===


Andrew Jackson Downing, the landscape architect from Newburgh, New York, was one of the first to propose developing New York City&#x27;s Central Park in his role as publisher of &quot;The Horticulturist&quot; magazine. A friend and mentor to Olmsted, Downing introduced him to the English-born architect Calvert Vaux, whom Downing had brought to the U.S. as his architectural collaborator. After Downing died in July 1852 in a widely publicized fire on the Hudson River steamboat Henry Clay, Olmsted and Vaux entered the Central Park design competition together, against Egbert Ludovicus Viele among others. Vaux had invited the less experienced Olmsted to participate in the design competition with him, having been impressed with Olmsted&#x27;s theories and political contacts. Prior to this, in contrast with the more experienced Vaux, Olmsted had never designed or executed a landscape design.

Their Greensward Plan was announced in 1858 as the winning design. On his return from the South, Olmsted began executing their plan almost immediately. Olmsted and Vaux continued their informal partnership to design Prospect Park in Brooklyn from 1865 to 1873. That was followed by other projects. Vaux remained in the shadow of Olmsted&#x27;s grand public personality and social connections.

The design of Central Park embodies Olmsted&#x27;s social consciousness and commitment to egalitarian ideals. Influenced by Downing and his observations regarding social class in England, China, and the American South, Olmsted believed that the common green space must always be equally accessible to all citizens, and was to be defended against private encroachment. This principle is now fundamental to the idea of a &quot;public park&quot;, but was not assumed as necessary then. Olmsted&#x27;s tenure as Central Park commissioner was a long struggle to preserve that idea.

===U.S. Sanitary Commission===
In 1861, Olmsted took leave as director of Central Park to work in Washington, D.C., as Executive Secretary of the U.S. Sanitary Commission, a precursor to the Red Cross. He tended to the wounded during the American Civil War. In 1862, during Union General George B. McClellan&#x27;s Peninsula Campaign, he headed the medical effort for the sick and wounded at White House plantation in New Kent County, which had a boat landing on the Pamunkey River.

He was one of the six founding members of the Union League Club of New York.

He helped to recruit and outfit three African-American regiments of the United States Colored Troops in New York City. He contributed to organizing a Sanitary Fair, which raised one million dollars for the United States Sanitary Commission.

He worked for the Sanitary Commission to the point of exhaustion: &quot;Part of the problem was his need to maintain control over all aspects of the commission&#x27;s work. He refused to delegate and he had an appetite for authority and power.&quot; By January 1863 a friend wrote: &quot;Olmsted is in an unhappy, sick, sore mental state ... He works like a dog all day and sits up nearly all night ... works with steady, feverish intensity till four in the morning, sleeps on a sofa in his clothes, and breakfasts on strong coffee and pickles!!!&quot; His overwork and lack of sleep led to his being in a perpetual state of irritability, which wore on the people with whom he worked: &quot;Exhausted, ill and having lost the support of the men who put him in charge, Olmsted resigned on Sept. 1, 1863.&quot; Yet within a month he was on his way to California.

===Gold mining project in California===
In 1863, Olmsted went west to become the manager of the newly established Rancho Las Mariposas–Mariposa gold mining estate in the Sierra Nevada mountains in California. The estate had been sold by John C. Fremont to New York banker, Morris Ketchum, in January of that same year. The mine was unsuccessful. &quot;By 1865, the Mariposa Company was bankrupt, Olmsted returned to New York, and the land and mines were sold at a sheriff&#x27;s sale.&quot;

In 1865, he was appointed to the first board of commissioners for managing the newly established Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove land grants.

===U.S. park designer===
In 1865, he and Vaux formed Olmsted, Vaux &amp; Co. When Olmsted returned to New York, he and Vaux designed Prospect Park; the planned Chicago suburb of Riverside, Illinois; the park system for Buffalo, New York; Milwaukee&#x27;s grand necklace of parks; and the Niagara Reservation at Niagara Falls and Belle Isle in Detroit.

Olmsted conceived of entire systems of parks and interconnecting parkways to connect certain cities to green spaces. Some of the best examples of the scale on which he worked are the park system designed for Buffalo, one of the largest projects; the system he designed for Milwaukee, and the park system designed for Louisville, Kentucky, which was one of only four completed Olmsted-designed park systems in the world.

Olmsted was a frequent collaborator with architect Henry Hobson Richardson, for whom he devised the landscaping schemes for half a dozen projects, including Richardson&#x27;s commission for the Buffalo State Asylum. In 1871, Olmsted and Vaux designed the grounds for the Hudson River State Hospital for the Insane in Poughkeepsie.

In 1883, Olmsted established what is considered to be the first full-time landscape architecture firm in Brookline, Massachusetts. He called the home and office compound &quot;Fairsted&quot;. It is now the restored Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site. From there Olmsted designed Boston&#x27;s Emerald Necklace, the campuses of Wellesley College, Smith College, Stanford University and the University of Chicago, as well as the 1893 World&#x27;s Fair in Chicago, among many other projects.

Olmsted was one of the planners of the National Zoo in Washington, D.C., which was founded in 1889.

===Conservationist===
Olmsted was an important early leader of the conservation movement in the United States. An expert on California, he was likely one of the gentlemen &quot;of fortune, of taste and of refinement&quot; who proposed, through Senator John Conness, that Congress designate Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Big Tree Grove as public reserves. This was the first land set aside by Congress for public use. Olmsted served a one-year appointment on the Board of Commissioner of the state reserve, and his 1865 report to Congress on the board&#x27;s recommendations laid an ethical framework for the government to reserve public lands, to protect their &quot;value to posterity&quot;. He described the &quot;sublime&quot; and &quot;stately&quot; landscape, emphasizing that the value of the landscape was not in any one individual waterfall, cliff, or tree, but in the &quot;miles of scenery where cliffs of awful height and rocks of vast magnitude and of varied and exquisite coloring, are banked and fringed and draped and shadowed by the tender foliage of noble and lovely trees and bushes, reflected from the most placid pools, and associated with the most tranquil meadows, the most playful streams, and every variety of soft and peaceful pastoral beauty&quot;.

In the 1880s, he was active in efforts to conserve the natural wonders of Niagara Falls, threatened with industrialization by the building of electrical power plants. At the same time, he campaigned to preserve the Adirondack region in upstate New York. He was one of the founders of the American Society of Landscape Architects in 1898.

Olmsted was also known to oppose park projects on conservationist grounds. In 1891, Olmsted refused to develop a plan for Presque Isle Park in Marquette, Michigan, saying that it &quot;should not be marred by the intrusion of artificial objects&quot;.

== Legacy ==

After Olmsted&#x27;s retirement and death, his sons John Charles Olmsted and Frederick Law Olmsted Jr., continued the work of their firm, doing business as the Olmsted Brothers. The firm lasted until 1980. Many works by the Olmsted sons are mistakenly credited to Frederick Law Olmsted today. For instance, the Olmsted Brothers firm did a park plan for Portland, Maine, in 1905, creating a series of connecting parkways between existing parks and suggesting improvements to those parks. The oldest of these parks, Deering Oaks, had been designed by City Engineer William Goodwin in 1879 but is today frequently described as a Frederick Law Olmsted-designed park.

A residence hall at the University of Hartford was named in his honor. Olmsted Point, located in Yosemite National Park, was named after Olmsted and his son Frederick.

The Olmsted Center located in Queens, NY pays an homage to Frederick Law Olmsted.

The Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site is located in Brookline, Massachusetts in his former home. Olmsted is known as the &quot;father of American Landscape Architecture&quot;.

== Personal life ==
On June 13, 1859, Olmsted married Mary Cleveland (Perkins) Olmsted, the widow of his brother John, who died in 1857. Daniel Fawcett Tiemann, the mayor of New York, officiated the wedding. Olmsted adopted Mary&#x27;s three children (his nephews and niece), John Charles Olmsted (born 1852), Charlotte Olmsted (born 1855), and Owen Frederick Olmsted (born 1857).

Frederick and Mary also had two children together who survived infancy: a daughter, Marion (born October 28, 1861), and a son Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. (born July 24, 1870). Their first child, John Theodore Olmsted, was born on June 13, 1860, and died in infancy.

In recognition of his services during the Civil War, Olmsted was elected a Third Class member of the Massachusetts Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States (MOLLUS) on May 2, 1888, and was assigned insignia number 6345. Olmsted&#x27;s election to MOLLUS is significant in that he was one of the few civilians elected to membership in an organization composed almost exclusively of military officers and their descendants. In 1891 he joined the Connecticut Society of the Sons of the American Revolution by right of his descent from his grandfather Benjamin Olmsted who served in the 4th Connecticut Regiment in 1775.

In 1895, senility forced Olmsted to retire. By 1898 he moved to Belmont, Massachusetts, and took up residence as a patient at the McLean Hospital, for whose grounds he had submitted a design which was never executed. He remained there until he died in 1903.

== Principles of design ==
Drawing influences from English landscape and gardening, Olmsted emphasized design that encourages the full use of the naturally occurring features of a given space, its &quot;genius&quot;; the subordination of individual details to the whole so that decorative elements do not take precedence, but rather the whole space is enhanced; concealment of design, design that does not call attention to itself; design that works on the unconscious to produce relaxation; and utility or purpose over ornamentation. A bridge, a pathway, a tree, a pasture: any and all elements are brought together to produce a particular effect.

Olmsted designed primarily in pastoral and picturesque styles, each to achieve a particular effect. The pastoral style featured vast expanses of green with small lakes, trees, and groves and produced a soothing, restorative effect on the viewer. The picturesque style covered rocky, broken terrain teeming with shrubs and creepers, to express nature&#x27;s richness. The picturesque style played with light and shade to lend the landscape a sense of mystery.

Scenery was designed to enhance the sense of space: indistinct boundaries using plants, brush, and trees as opposed to sharp ones; the interplay of light and shadow close up, and blurred detail farther away. He employed a vast expanse of greenery at the end of which would lie a grove of yellow poplar; a path that winds through a bit of landscape and intersects with others, dividing the terrain into triangular islands of successive new views.

Subordination strove to use all objects and features in the service of the design and its intended effect. It can be seen in the subtle use of naturally occurring plants throughout the park. Non-native species planted for the sake of their own uniqueness was seen as defeating the purpose of design, as that very uniqueness would draw attention to itself where the intention is to enable relaxation: utility above all else was an objective. Separation applied to areas designed in different styles and different uses enhancing safety and reducing distraction. A key feature of Central Park is the use of sunken roadways which traverse the park and are specifically dedicated to vehicles as opposed to the winding pathways designated specifically for pedestrians.

An example of this mix of principles is seen in the Central Park Mall, a large promenade leading to the Bethesda Terrace, and the single formal feature in Olmsted and Vaux&#x27;s original naturalistic design. The designers wrote that a &quot;&#x27;grand promenade&#x27; was an &#x27;essential feature of a metropolitan park&#x27;&quot;; however, its formal symmetry, its style, although something of an aberration, was designed to be subordinate to the natural view surrounding it. Wealthy passengers were let from their carriages at its south end. The carriage would then drive around to the Terrace, which overlooked the Lake and Ramble to pick them up, saving them the trouble of needing to double back on foot. The Promenade was lined with slender elms and offered views of Sheep Meadow.
Affluent New Yorkers, who rarely walked through the park, mixed with the less well-to-do in the Terrace areas, and all enjoyed an escape from the hustle and bustle of the surrounding city. However, the most wealthy among them employed the firm to landscape their country estates in a similar fashion for their private enjoyment, such as that of Frederick T. van Beuren Jr. in New Jersey. He is a descendant of a Dutch physician who settled in Manhattan in 1700 and whose family members became prominent property owners in the city and various other locations. Initially, that country estate was one of several self-sufficient retreats from Manhattan held by the family that included a supporting farm for produce, livestock, and a livery as well as several houses for permanent staff. The estate later became a more permanent residence as van Beuren&#x27;s career shifted to founding a hospital in the growing community nearby. At that time the shingled structure in New Vernon was renovated into a brick structure that is described as one of the notable mansions of the area. At the time of the renovation, the mature landscape plan for the residence was not altered. A widening of Spring Valley Road during the late twentieth century did eliminate some Olmsted landscaping that included a cascading bank of native ferns lining a roadside stretch of the property that extended along the road from Blackberry Lane to the eponymous van Beuren Road that divided the family property from its northern boundary to its southern boundary at Blue Mill Road.

==In popular culture==
* In June 2022, a baby giraffe at the Seneca Park Zoo in Rochester, New York, was named Olmsted, in recognition of the designer of Seneca Park and other parks in Rochester.

==See also==
* List of Olmsted works
* Frederick E. Olmsted
* Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site
* Charles Loring Brace
* Landscape designer
* History of gardening
* &quot;Devil in the White City&quot;

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* Diamant, Rolf and Carr, Ethan (2022). &quot;Olmsted and Yosemite: Civil War, Abolition, and The National Park Idea&quot;. Amherst, Massachusetts: Library of American Landscape History 
* Drabelle, Dennis (2021). &quot;The Power of Scenery: Frederick Law Olmsted and the Origin of National Parks&quot;. Bison Books. 
* Review by David W. Blight.
* 
* Martin, Justin (2011). &quot;Genius of Place: The Life of Frederick Law Olmsted&quot;. Da Capo Press. 
* Muccigrosso, Robert, ed. (1988). &quot;Research Guide to American Historical Biography&quot; 5:2666-74
* Ott, Jennifer. &quot;Olmsted in Seattle: Creating a Park System for a Modern City&quot; (Seattle: History Link and Documentary Media, 2019) online review
* Roper, Laura Wood (1973). &quot;FLO: A Biography of Frederick Law Olmsted&quot;. online edition
* 
* Schlesinger, Arthur M. Sr. &quot;Was Olmsted an Unbiased Critic of the South?&quot; &quot;Journal of Negro History&quot; (1952), 37#2 pp. 173–187 in JSTOR
* Sears, Stephen W. (1992). &quot;To the Gates of Richmond: the Peninsula Campaign&quot;. New York: Ticknor and Fields 
* Wilson, Edmund (1962). &quot;Patriotic Gore: Studies in the Literature of the American Civil War&quot;, New York: Oxford University Press. Chapter VI is titled &quot;Northerners in the South: Frederick L. Olmsted, John T. Trowbridge&quot;. Reviewing &quot;Patriotic Gore&quot;, David W. Blight wrote, &quot;But who knew that the travel writings of Frederick Law Olmsted, who was much more famous as the designer of Central Park in New York, or the poet, John T. Trowbridge, provided such vivid depictions of slavery and the ruined South both before and after the war?&quot; &quot;Slate&quot;, March 22, 2012.

===Primary sources===
* Beveridge, Charles E., ed., Lauren Meier, ed., and Irene Mills, ed. &quot;Frederick Law Olmsted: Plans and Views of Public Parks&quot;. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015. xvi, 429 pp.
* Available online from the Internet Archive.
* Available online from the University of North Texas.
* Olmsted, Frederick Law (1860). &quot;A Journey in the Back Country&quot;
* (2 vols.). New York: Mason Brothers The one-volume British edition was titled &quot;Journeys and explorations in the cotton kingdom. A traveller&#x27;s observations on cotton and slavery in the American slave states. Based upon three former volumes of journeys and investigations by the same author&quot;. London: S. Low, Son &amp; Co. This book is an abridgment of &quot;his three earlier volumes, &#x27;A Journey in the Seaboard [Slave] States&#x27; (1856), &#x27;A Journey Through Texas&#x27; (1857) and &#x27;A Journey in the Back Country&#x27; (1860).&quot; Masur, Louis P., &quot;Olmsted&#x27;s Southern Landscapes,&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot;, July 9, 2011 
* Available online from the Internet Archive.
* Olmsted, Frederick Law (1865). &quot;&quot;Yosemite Valley&quot; and the &quot;Mariposa Big Tree Grove&quot; in the Statutes of California&quot;. The National Park Service 
* Olmsted, Frederick Law (August 1865), &quot;Preliminary Report upon the Yosemite and Big Tree Grove&quot;, in Diamant, Rolf and Carr, Ethan (2022). &quot;Olmsted and Yosemite: Civil War, Abolition, and The National Park Idea&quot;, pp. 121–149.
* Robert Twombly, ed. (2010): &quot;Frederick Law Olmsted: Essential Texts&quot;, W. W. Norton &amp; Company, New York.

==External links==


* Frederick Law Olmsted: A bibliography by the Buffalo History Museum
* The National Association for Olmsted Parks
* The Frederick Law Olmsted Society of Riverside
* The Olmsted Plan KCET Departures Olmsted Plan
* &quot;Olmsted and America&#x27;s Urban Parks&quot; , 2010 documentary; supplemental materials at OlmstedFilm.org
* &quot;Booknotes&quot; interview with Witold Rybczynski on &quot;A Clearing in the Distance&quot;, October 17, 1999.
* Frederick Law Olmsted &quot;Explore Capitol Hill&quot;
* Fine Arts Garden , Cleveland Museum of Art
* Frederick Law Olmsted: Designing America (2014 documentary)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="0" end="21" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="73" end="92" title="landscape architect" label="landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508663" start="106" end="119" title="Social criticism" label="social critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="184" end="206" title="landscape architecture" label="landscape architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577471" start="310" end="322" title="Calvert Vaux" label="Calvert Vaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="366" end="378" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049632" start="456" end="469" title="Prospect Park (Brooklyn)" label="Prospect Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="473" end="481" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016638" start="483" end="498" title="Cadwalader Park" label="Cadwalader Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="502" end="521" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077165" start="527" end="538" title="Forest Park (Portland, Oregon)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="542" end="558" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="781" end="797" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="939" end="956" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031716" start="1000" end="1019" title="Niagara Reservation" label="Niagara Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133" start="1023" end="1046" title="Niagara Falls, New York" label="Niagara Falls, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462183" start="1107" end="1126" title="Riverside, Illinois" label="Riverside, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757764" start="1128" end="1144" title="Mount Royal Park" label="Mount Royal Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1148" end="1156" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1158" end="1164" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742201" start="1166" end="1189" title="The Institute of Living" label="The Institute of Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927705" start="1216" end="1231" title="Trinity College (Connecticut)" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335396" start="1308" end="1324" title="Emerald Necklace" label="Emerald Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1328" end="1334" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1336" end="1349" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758940" start="1351" end="1364" title="Highland Park, Rochester, New York" label="Highland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="1368" end="1387" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1393" end="1416" title="Milwaukee#Parks and recreation" label="Grand Necklace of Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1420" end="1429" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1431" end="1440" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962763" start="1442" end="1455" title="Cherokee Park" label="Cherokee Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="1488" end="1508" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q31823831" start="1510" end="1526" title="Walnut Hill Park" label="Walnut Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49172" start="1530" end="1554" title="New Britain, Connecticut" label="New Britain, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q585521" start="1560" end="1575" title="Biltmore Estate" label="Biltmore Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="1579" end="1604" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1631" end="1665" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="1671" end="1690" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1692" end="1711" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="1717" end="1738" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="1740" end="1761" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351132" start="1763" end="1787" title="The Lawrenceville School" label="The Lawrenceville School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905013" start="1793" end="1808" title="Montebello Park" label="Montebello Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1812" end="1826" title="St. Catharines" label="St. Catharines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1828" end="1835" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157432" start="1869" end="1881" title="Jackson Park (Chicago)" label="Jackson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972096" start="1883" end="1898" title="Washington Park (Chicago park)" label="Washington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="1934" end="1967" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808671" start="1993" end="2039" title="Chicago park and boulevard system" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s emerald necklace boulevard ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2049" end="2070" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2082" end="2098" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2143" end="2164" title="United States Capitol#Grounds" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="2314" end="2328" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="2649" end="2657" title="Activism" label="activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="2665" end="2686" title="conservation movement" label="conservation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="2779" end="2799" title="National Park System" label="National Park system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321035" start="2816" end="2840" title="U.S. Sanitary Commission" label="U.S. Sanitary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="2922" end="2932" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="3006" end="3027" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16880715" start="3567" end="3574" title="Olmsted (name)" label="Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="3617" end="3622" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="3668" end="3680" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002291" start="3697" end="3712" title="Poison sumac" label="sumac poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="3887" end="3900" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700641" start="3966" end="3982" title="Akerly Homestead" label="Akerly Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700641" start="3986" end="3999" title="Tosomock Farm" label="Tosomock Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385020" start="4062" end="4075" title="Erastus Wiman" label="Erastus Wiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700641" start="4126" end="4146" title="Akerly Homestead" label="4515 Hylan Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318372" start="4341" end="4354" title="Joseph Paxton" label="Joseph Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916438" start="4362" end="4377" title="Birkenhead Park" label="Birkenhead Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="4607" end="4619" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4743" end="4761" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4824" end="4838" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4843" end="4848" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5348" end="5366" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262311" start="6573" end="6595" title="Putnam&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Putnam&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000158" start="6707" end="6720" title="Panic of 1857" label="Panic of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="6809" end="6819" title="The Nation (U.S. periodical)" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787055" start="6990" end="6996" title="Edwin Lawrence Godkin" label="Godkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q505402" start="7071" end="7093" title="Andrew Jackson Downing" label="Andrew Jackson Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044808" start="7124" end="7142" title="Newburgh, New York" label="Newburgh, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="7208" end="7220" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847707" start="7255" end="7273" title="The Horticulturist (magazine)" label="The Horticulturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577471" start="7375" end="7387" title="Calvert Vaux" label="Calvert Vaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="7528" end="7540" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975626" start="7551" end="7561" title="Henry Clay (steamboat)" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347713" start="7642" end="7664" title="Egbert Ludovicus Viele" label="Egbert Ludovicus Viele"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="7976" end="7991" title="Greensward Plan" label="Greensward Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049632" start="8186" end="8211" title="Prospect Park (Brooklyn)" label="Prospect Park in Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321035" start="9088" end="9112" title="U.S. Sanitary Commission" label="U.S. Sanitary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="9133" end="9142" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9180" end="9198" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="9230" end="9249" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="9257" end="9275" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566904" start="9334" end="9345" title="White House (plantation)" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q337270" start="9360" end="9375" title="New Kent County, Virginia" label="New Kent County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054792" start="9409" end="9423" title="Pamunkey River" label="Pamunkey River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549996" start="9472" end="9501" title="Union League Club of New York" label="Union League Club of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550735" start="9576" end="9604" title="United States Colored Troops" label="United States Colored Troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q112156923" start="9654" end="9667" title="Sanitary Fair" label="Sanitary Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321035" start="9710" end="9743" title="United States Sanitary Commission" label="United States Sanitary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291057" start="10722" end="10751" title="Rancho Las Mariposas" label="Rancho Las Mariposas–Mariposa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="10778" end="10791" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="10805" end="10815" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="10845" end="10860" title="John C. Fremont" label="John C. Fremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324407" start="10881" end="10895" title="Morris Ketchum" label="Morris Ketchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="11197" end="11231" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049632" start="11379" end="11392" title="Prospect Park (Brooklyn)" label="Prospect Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="11398" end="11405" title="Planned community" label="planned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462183" start="11424" end="11443" title="Riverside, Illinois" label="Riverside, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="11465" end="11482" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="11484" end="11493" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031716" start="11534" end="11553" title="Niagara Reservation" label="Niagara Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34221" start="11557" end="11570" title="Niagara Falls" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q458588" start="11575" end="11585" title="Belle Isle Park (Michigan)" label="Belle Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="11916" end="11936" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q723234" start="12071" end="12094" title="Henry Hobson Richardson" label="Henry Hobson Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628289" start="12214" end="12234" title="Buffalo State Asylum" label="Buffalo State Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928866" start="12291" end="12333" title="Hudson River State Hospital" label="Hudson River State Hospital for the Insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="12337" end="12349" title="Poughkeepsie" label="Poughkeepsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="12457" end="12481" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498250" start="12567" end="12611" title="Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site" label="Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335396" start="12655" end="12671" title="Emerald Necklace" label="Emerald Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="12689" end="12706" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="12708" end="12721" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="12723" end="12742" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="12751" end="12772" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="12794" end="12811" title="World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043283" start="12891" end="12903" title="National Zoological Park (United States)" label="National Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="13020" end="13041" title="conservation movement" label="conservation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="13243" end="13258" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34221" start="14302" end="14315" title="Niagara Falls" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="14443" end="14460" title="Adirondack mountains" label="Adirondack region"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546056" start="14689" end="14706" title="Presque Isle Park" label="Presque Isle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12443" start="14710" end="14729" title="Marquette, Michigan" label="Marquette, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557841" start="14886" end="14906" title="John Charles Olmsted" label="John Charles Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q538025" start="14911" end="14936" title="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr." label="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="14994" end="15010" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="15187" end="15202" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q747053" start="15522" end="15544" title="University of Hartford" label="University of Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088437" start="15569" end="15582" title="Olmsted Point" label="Olmsted Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="15595" end="15617" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498250" start="15754" end="15798" title="Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site" label="Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="15813" end="15837" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="15907" end="15929" title="Landscape architecture" label="Landscape Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217103" start="16075" end="16097" title="Daniel Fawcett Tiemann" label="Daniel Fawcett Tiemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557841" start="16214" end="16234" title="John Charles Olmsted" label="John Charles Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q538025" start="16446" end="16471" title="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr." label="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3314195" start="16718" end="16773" title="Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States" label="Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072229" start="17089" end="17120" title="Sons of the American Revolution" label="Sons of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="17245" end="17253" title="senility" label="senility"/>
<link wikidata="Q816096" start="17300" end="17322" title="Belmont, Massachusetts" label="Belmont, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354672" start="17366" end="17381" title="McLean Hospital" label="McLean Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19656" end="19671" title="Central Park#Transverse roads" label="sunken roadways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061610" start="19868" end="19885" title="Central Park Mall" label="Central Park Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996182" start="20953" end="20980" title="Frederick T. van Beuren Jr." label="Frederick T. van Beuren Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q962499" start="21518" end="21534" title="Morristown, New Jersey" label="community nearby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012245" start="21575" end="21585" title="New Vernon, New Jersey" label="New Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="22206" end="22213" title="giraffe" label="giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650302" start="22221" end="22236" title="Seneca Park Zoo" label="Seneca Park Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="22240" end="22259" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000898" start="22372" end="22393" title="List of Olmsted works" label="List of Olmsted works"/>
<link wikidata="Q112054679" start="22396" end="22416" title="Frederick E. Olmsted" label="Frederick E. Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498250" start="22419" end="22463" title="Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site" label="Frederick Law Olmsted National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080337" start="22466" end="22486" title="Charles Loring Brace" label="Charles Loring Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071177" start="22489" end="22507" title="Landscape designer" label="Landscape designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361707" start="22510" end="22530" title="History of gardening" label="History of gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q283445" start="22539" end="22562" title="Devil in the White City" label="Devil in the White City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240690" start="22937" end="22952" title="David W. Blight" label="David W. Blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799614" start="23426" end="23452" title="Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr." label="Schlesinger, Arthur M. Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7610776" start="23583" end="23600" title="Stephen W. Sears" label="Sears, Stephen W."/>
<link wikidata="Q704931" start="23703" end="23717" title="Edmund Wilson" label="Wilson, Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261093" start="23917" end="23935" title="John Townsend Trowbridge" label="John T. Trowbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240690" start="23981" end="23996" title="David W. Blight" label="David W. Blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985761" start="26044" end="26066" title="Buffalo History Museum" label="Buffalo History Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53324" wikidata="Q115783" url="?curid=53324" title="Othmar Ammann">
<text>Othmar Hermann Ammann (March 26, 1879 – September 22, 1965) was a Swiss-American civil engineer whose bridge designs include the George Washington Bridge, Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge, and Bayonne Bridge. He also directed the planning and construction of the Lincoln Tunnel.

==Biography==

Othmar Ammann was born near Schaffhausen, Switzerland, in 1879. His father was a manufacturer and his mother was a hat maker. He received his engineering education at the Polytechnikum in Zürich, Switzerland. He studied with Swiss engineer Wilhelm Ritter. In 1904, he emigrated to the United States, spending much of his career working in New York City. He became a naturalized citizen in 1924.

In 1905 he briefly returned to Switzerland to marry Lilly Selma Wehrli. Together they had three children Werner, George, and Margotbefore she died in 1933. He then married Klary Vogt Noetzli, herself recently widowed, in 1935 in California.

Ammann wrote two reports about bridge collapses, the collapse of the Quebec Bridge and the collapse of the original Tacoma Narrows Bridge (Galloping Gertie). It was the report that he wrote about the failure of the Quebec Bridge in 1907 that first earned him recognition in the field of bridge design engineering. Because of this report, he was able to obtain a position working for Gustav Lindenthal on the Hell Gate Bridge. By 1925, he had been appointed bridge engineer to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. His design for a bridge over the Hudson River was accepted over one developed by his mentor, Lindenthal. (Lindenthal&#x27;s &quot;North River Bridge&quot; designs show an enormous, 16+ lane bridge that would have accommodated pedestrians, freight trains, rapid transit, and automobile traffic. The bridge, which would have entered Manhattan at 57th Street, was rejected in favor of Ammann&#x27;s designs primarily due to cost reasons.)

Due to his reputation, he was chosen as one of three engineers tasked with investigating the 1940 collapse of the Tacoma Narrows bridge. Along with Theodore Von Kármán and Glenn B. Woodruff, he published the 1941 report &quot;The Failure of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge&quot;, which guided the next half century of suspension bridge design.

Ultimately, this became the George Washington Bridge. Under Ammann&#x27;s direction, it was completed six months ahead of schedule for less than the original $60 million budget. Ammann&#x27;s designs for the George Washington Bridge, and, later, the Bayonne Bridge, caught the attention of master builder Robert Moses, who drafted Ammann into his service. The last four of Ammann&#x27;s six New York City bridges — Triborough, Bronx-Whitestone, Throgs Neck, and Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge were all built for Moses&#x27; Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. In 1946, Ammann and Charles Whitney founded the firm Ammann &amp; Whitney. In 1964, Ammann opened the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge in New York, that had the world&#x27;s longest suspended span of , and was the world&#x27;s heaviest suspension bridge of its time. The Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge is currently the eleventh-longest span in the world and longest in the Western Hemisphere. Ammann also assisted in the building of the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, currently ranked twelfth.

==Works==
Ammann was known for being able to create bridges that were light and inexpensive, yet they were still simple and beautiful. He was able to do this by using the deflection theory. He believed that the weight per foot of the span and the cables would provide enough stiffness so that the bridge would not need any stiffening trusses. This made him popular during the depression era when being able to reduce the cost was crucial. Famous bridges by Ammann include the following:
*George Washington Bridge (opened October 24, 1931)
*Bayonne Bridge (opened November 15, 1931)
*Triborough Bridge (opened July 11, 1936)
*Bronx–Whitestone Bridge (opened April 29, 1939)
*Delaware Memorial Bridge (with HNTB, first span opened 1951)
*Walt Whitman Bridge (opened May 16, 1957)
*Throgs Neck Bridge (opened January 11, 1961)
*Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge (opened November 21, 1964)

The George Washington Bridge was originally designed to have its steel structure clad in dressed stone, omitted from the final design due to cost constraints stemming from the Great Depression. Ammann&#x27;s managerial skills saw the bridge completed ahead of schedule and under budget.

The arched Bayonne Bridge is the only Othmar design that is not a suspension bridge.

The Bronx-Whitestone Bridge had to be reinforced after only one year of operation because of perceptible movement during high winds. Warren trusses were initially implemented to stiffen the bridge, spoiling its classic streamlined looks. They have been removed and the wind problem solved using triangular shaped lightweight fiberglass aerodynamic fairing along both sides that slices the wind as it passes over the bridge.

In addition to his work on bridges, Ammann also directed the planning and construction of the Lincoln Tunnel.

==Legacy==
Ammann was the recipient of several awards, including the Thomas Fitch Rowland Prize (1919), the Metropolitan Section Civil Engineer of the Year (1958), the Ernest E. Howard Award (1960) and the National Medal of Science (1964).

In 1962, a bronze bust of Ammann was unveiled in the lobby of the George Washington Bridge Bus Station. A residence hall called Ammann College was dedicated in his honor on February 18, 1968 on the campus of Stony Brook University. To mark the hundredth anniversary of his birth, a memorial plaque for Ammann was placed near the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge on June 28, 1979.

== See also ==
* Austin Tobin
* Robert Moses
* Eugenius Harvey Outerbridge
* Christopher O. Ward

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* https://www.nae.edu/MembersSection/51314/51355.aspx
* &quot;Engines of Our Ingenuity.&quot; (Radio program.) Episode No. 698. University of Houston, Texas.


== External links ==

*Ammann &amp; Whitney 
*Othmar Ammann’s Glory: Genius, willpower and thousands of miles of steel wire went into the George Washington Bridge
*Othmar Ammann&#x27;s Glory: A description of the design of the George Washington Bridge and Ammann&#x27;s rivalry with Lindenthal
*Othmar Ammann: Provides dates of death, election to the academy, and citation
*Photo
*Othmar Ammann: Facts and Quotes from ASCE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115783" start="0" end="21" title="Othmar Ammann" label="Othmar Hermann Ammann"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="81" end="95" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="129" end="153" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125673" start="155" end="180" title="Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge" label="Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q812580" start="186" end="200" title="Bayonne Bridge" label="Bayonne Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125805" start="256" end="270" title="Lincoln Tunnel" label="Lincoln Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="316" end="328" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="459" end="472" title="ETH Zürich" label="Polytechnikum"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="476" end="482" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q122696" start="528" end="542" title="Karl Wilhelm Ritter" label="Wilhelm Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="627" end="640" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427489" start="995" end="1008" title="Quebec Bridge" label="Quebec Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985269" start="1042" end="1063" title="Tacoma Narrows Bridge (1940)" label="Tacoma Narrows Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q90350" start="1309" end="1326" title="Gustav Lindenthal" label="Gustav Lindenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035131" start="1334" end="1350" title="Hell Gate Bridge" label="Hell Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="1406" end="1447" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="1482" end="1494" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q164384" start="2034" end="2053" title="Theodore von Kármán" label="Theodore Von Kármán"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339931" start="2058" end="2075" title="Glenn B. Woodruff" label="Glenn B. Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="2530" end="2542" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q999168" start="2744" end="2782" title="Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority" label="Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747163" start="2837" end="2857" title="Ammann &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Ammann &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q125673" start="2886" end="2911" title="Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge" label="Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2915" end="2923" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q468464" start="2938" end="2973" title="List of largest suspension bridges" label="world&amp;#x27;s longest suspended span"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="3013" end="3030" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="3145" end="3163" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="3209" end="3227" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3231" end="3244" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="3761" end="3785" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q812580" start="3813" end="3827" title="Bayonne Bridge" label="Bayonne Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125450" start="3856" end="3873" title="Robert F. Kennedy Bridge" label="Triborough Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125543" start="3898" end="3921" title="Bronx–Whitestone Bridge" label="Bronx–Whitestone Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397465" start="3947" end="3971" title="Delaware Memorial Bridge" label="Delaware Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635344" start="3978" end="3982" title="HNTB" label="HNTB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396791" start="4009" end="4028" title="Walt Whitman Bridge" label="Walt Whitman Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125575" start="4052" end="4070" title="Throgs Neck Bridge" label="Throgs Neck Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125673" start="4098" end="4123" title="Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge" label="Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4328" end="4344" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q158438" start="4444" end="4450" title="arch bridge" label="arched"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4659" end="4671" title="Truss bridge#Warren truss" label="Warren truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q125805" start="5045" end="5059" title="Lincoln Tunnel" label="Lincoln Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="5268" end="5293" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101988" start="5369" end="5405" title="George Washington Bridge Bus Station" label="George Washington Bridge Bus Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="5511" end="5533" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872120" start="5694" end="5706" title="Austin Tobin" label="Austin Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="5709" end="5721" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218388" start="5724" end="5751" title="Eugenius Harvey Outerbridge" label="Eugenius Harvey Outerbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112985" start="5754" end="5773" title="Christopher O. Ward" label="Christopher O. Ward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53325" wikidata="Q6610050" url="?curid=53325" title="List of civil engineers">
<text>This list of civil engineers is a list of notable people who have been trained in or have practiced civil engineering.

== A ==
== B ==
== C ==
== D ==
== E ==
== F ==
== G ==
== H ==
== I ==
== J ==
== K ==
== L ==
== M ==
== N ==
== O ==
== P ==
== Q ==
== R ==
== S ==
== T ==
== U ==
== V ==
== W ==
== X ==
== Y ==
== Z ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6610050" start="5" end="28" title="List of civil engineers" label="list of civil engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="100" end="117" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53327" wikidata="Q191084" url="?curid=53327" title="Val Kilmer">
<text>Val Edward Kilmer (born December 31, 1959) is an American actor. Originally a stage actor, he found fame after appearances in comedy films, starting with &quot;Top Secret!&quot; (1984) and &quot;Real Genius&quot; (1985), as well as the military action film &quot;Top Gun&quot; (1986) and the fantasy film &quot;Willow&quot; (1988). Kilmer gained acclaim for his portrayal of Jim Morrison in Oliver Stone&#x27;s &quot;The Doors&quot; (1991). He was cast as a main character in films such as the western &quot;Tombstone&quot; (1993), and the crime dramas &quot;True Romance&quot; (1993) and &quot;Heat&quot; (1995). He portrayed Batman in Joel Schumacher&#x27;s &quot;Batman Forever&quot; (1995), and continued to star in films such as &quot;The Ghost and the Darkness&quot; (1996), &quot;The Saint&quot; (1997), &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot; (1998), &quot;Alexander&quot; (2004), &quot;Kiss Kiss Bang Bang&quot; (2005), and &quot;The Snowman&quot; (2017). In 2022, Kilmer reprised his role as Iceman in &quot;Top Gun: Maverick&quot; (2022).

In 2015, Kilmer was diagnosed with throat cancer; he had a procedure on his trachea that damaged his vocal cords to the point where he had extreme difficulty speaking. He also underwent chemotherapy and two tracheotomies. In 2020, he published his memoir, titled &quot;I&#x27;m Your Huckleberry: A Memoir&quot;. The 2021 documentary film &quot;Val&quot; documents his health issues and career. It premiered at the Cannes Film Festival to critical acclaim. He was one of the best-paid actors of the 1990s; films featuring him have grossed over $3.5 billion at the worldwide box-office. In 1992, critic Roger Ebert wrote, &quot;if there is an award for the most unsung leading man of his generation, Kilmer should get it&quot;.

==Early life==
Kilmer was born December 31, 1959, in Los Angeles, California, the second of three sons to Gladys Swanette () and Eugene Dorris Kilmer. His mother was of Swedish descent. His other ancestry includes Irish, German and Cherokee roots. His parents divorced in 1968 when he was 8 years old. His mother later married William Bernard Leach in 1970. Kilmer&#x27;s grandfather was a gold miner in New Mexico, near the border with Arizona. In 1977, Kilmer&#x27;s younger brother Wesley, who had epilepsy, drowned in a jacuzzi at age 15.

He attended Chatsworth High School with Kevin Spacey. His high school girlfriend was Mare Winningham. He became the youngest person at the time to be accepted into the Juilliard School&#x27;s Drama Division, where he was a member of Group 10.

==Career==

===1980s===
Kilmer declined a role in Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s 1983 film &quot;The Outsiders&quot;, as he had prior theater commitments. In 1983, he appeared off Broadway in &quot;The Slab Boys&quot; with Kevin Bacon, Sean Penn, and Jackie Earle Haley. That same year, his first off-stage acting role (excluding television commercials) came in the form of an episode of &quot;ABC Afterschool Special&quot; called &quot;One Too Many&quot;, which was an educational drama on drinking and driving; it also starred a young Michelle Pfeiffer. Also in 1983, Kilmer self-published a collection of his own poetry entitled &quot;My Edens After Burns,&quot; that included poems inspired by his time with Pfeiffer. The book of poems is difficult to obtain and expensive; known second-hand copies cost $300 and up.

His big break came when he received top billing in the comedy spoof of spy movies &quot;Top Secret!&quot;, in which he played an American rock and roll star. Kilmer sang all the songs in the film and released an album under the film character&#x27;s name, &quot;Nick Rivers&quot;.

During a brief hiatus, he backpacked throughout Europe before going on to play the lead character in the 1985 comedy &quot;Real Genius&quot;. He turned down a role in David Lynch&#x27;s &quot;Blue Velvet&quot; before being cast as naval aviator &quot;Iceman&quot; in the action film &quot;Top Gun&quot; alongside Tom Cruise. &quot;Top Gun&quot; grossed a total of over $344 million worldwide and made Kilmer a major star. Following roles in the television films &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; and &quot;The Man Who Broke 1,000 Chains,&quot; Kilmer portrayed Madmartigan in the fantasy &quot;Willow;&quot; he met his future wife, co-star Joanne Whalley, on the film&#x27;s set. Kilmer starred in the Colorado Shakespeare Festival production of &quot;Hamlet&quot; in 1988. In 1989, Kilmer played the lead in both &quot;Kill Me Again&quot;, again opposite Whalley, and in TNT&#x27;s &quot;Billy the Kid&quot;.

===1990s===
====1990–1995====
After several delays, director Oliver Stone finally started production on the film &quot;The Doors&quot;, based on the story of the band of the same name. Kilmer spoke with Oliver Stone early on, concerned about what he might want to do with the story because Kilmer did not believe in or want to promote substance abuse. Kilmer saw Jim Morrison as having picked the wrong heroes, who had different issues, which were not part of the creativity or inspiration. Kilmer saw Morrison&#x27;s story as one that could be told &quot;a thousand different ways&quot; and did not want to tell it by playing the role in the style of drugs, with which Oliver Stone agreed. Kilmer memorized the lyrics to all of lead singer Morrison&#x27;s songs prior to his audition and sent a video of himself performing some Doors songs to director Stone. Stone was not impressed with the tape, but Paul A. Rothchild (the original producer of the Doors) said &quot;I was shaken by it&quot; and suggested they record Kilmer in the studio. After Kilmer was cast as Morrison, he prepared for the role by attending Doors tribute concerts and reading Morrison&#x27;s poetry.

He spent close to a year before production dressing in Morrison-like clothes, and spent time at Morrison&#x27;s old hangouts along the Sunset Strip. His portrayal of Morrison was praised and members of the Doors noted that Kilmer did such a convincing job that they had trouble distinguishing his voice from Morrison&#x27;s. Paul Rothchild played Kilmer&#x27;s version of &quot;The End&quot; for the band&#x27;s guitarist, Robby Krieger, who told him, &quot;I&#x27;m really glad they got &#x27;The End&#x27;. We never got a recording of that live with Jim and now we&#x27;ve got it.&quot; However, Doors keyboardist Ray Manzarek was less than enthusiastic with how Morrison was portrayed in Stone&#x27;s interpretation.

In the early 1990s, Kilmer starred in the mystery thriller &quot;Thunderheart&quot;, the action comedy &quot;The Real McCoy&quot;, and again teamed with &quot;Top Gun&quot; director Tony Scott to play Elvis Presley in &quot;True Romance&quot;, which was written by Quentin Tarantino. In 1993, Kilmer played Doc Holliday in the western &quot;Tombstone&quot; alongside Kurt Russell. In the film, Doc Holliday performs Chopin&#x27;s Nocturne in E minor, Op.72, No. 1; however, Kilmer does not play the piano and he practiced that one piece for months in preparation. In 1995, Kilmer starred in &quot;Wings of Courage&quot;, a 3D IMAX film, and that same year, he starred opposite Al Pacino and Robert De Niro in &quot;Heat&quot;, which is now considered one of the best crime/drama films of the 1990s.

====Batman====
In December 1993 &quot;Batman Forever&quot; director Joel Schumacher had seen &quot;Tombstone&quot; and was most impressed with Kilmer&#x27;s performance as Doc Holliday. Schumacher felt him to be perfect for the role of Batman, though at the time, the role was still Michael Keaton&#x27;s. In July 1994, Keaton decided not to return for a third Batman film after 1992&#x27;s &quot;Batman Returns&quot;, due to &quot;creative differences&quot;. William Baldwin (who previously worked with Schumacher on &quot;Flatliners&quot;) was reported to be a top contender, though just days after Keaton dropped out, Kilmer was cast. Kilmer took the role without even knowing who the new director was and without reading the script.

Released in June 1995, &quot;Batman Forever&quot; was a success at the box office, despite receiving mixed reviews from critics. There was debate about Kilmer&#x27;s performance: some critics, like &quot;The New York Times&quot;″ Janet Maslin, thought Kilmer was a poor successor to Keaton in the part; while others, such as Roger Ebert, had kind words for Kilmer. &quot;Batman&quot; co-creator Bob Kane said in a &quot;Cinescape&quot; interview that of all the actors to have played Batman up to that point, he felt Kilmer had given the best interpretation. Film critic Leonard Maltin (who criticized the dark tone contained in &quot;Batman Returns&quot;) complimented Kilmer&#x27;s portrayal when he reviewed the film for his expanding collection of film reviews. Defenders of &quot;Batman Forever&quot; praised the film for portraying Batman as a more heroic, less ruthless, and more human character than in the Tim Burton films. The film also brought the film interpretation of Bruce Wayne more into line with his comic book counterpart, showing him as a socialite and a very public figure rather than the neurotic recluse of the previous films.

In February 1996, Kilmer decided not to return for another Batman feature film, feeling that Batman was being marginalized in favor of the villains and because of scheduling problems with &quot;The Saint&quot;. George Clooney replaced Kilmer as Batman in 1997&#x27;s &quot;Batman &amp; Robin&quot;. There were also reports that Kilmer had a bad working relationship with Schumacher, as another reason for not reprising the role.

====1996–1999====
In 1996 he appeared in a largely unknown film, &quot;Dead Girl&quot;, and starred alongside Marlon Brando in the poorly received &quot;The Island of Dr. Moreau&quot;. That year, Kilmer starred alongside Michael Douglas in the thriller &quot;The Ghost and the Darkness&quot;. In 1997 he played Simon Templar in the popular action film, &quot;The Saint&quot;. Kilmer looked forward to the title role as a change toward a more fun, less serious action thriller, while enjoying the &quot;master of disguise&quot; chameleon characters like a mad artist, a nerdy British scientist, a cleaner, and a Russian mob boss. Kilmer also wrote the poetry in the film. He received a salary of $6 million for the movie. &quot;The Saint&quot; was a financial success, grossing $169.4 million worldwide.

In 1998, he voiced Moses in the animated film &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot;, before starring in the independent film &quot;Joe the King&quot; (1999). Also in 1999, he played a blind man in the drama/romance &quot;At First Sight&quot;, which he described as being, of then, the hardest role he had ever had.

===2000s===

Kilmer&#x27;s first role in 2000 was in the big budget Warner Bros. box office disaster &quot;Red Planet&quot;. That same year, he had a supporting role in the film &quot;Pollock&quot; and hosted &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; for the first time. In 2002, he starred in the thriller &quot;The Salton Sea&quot;, which was generally well-reviewed, but received only a limited release. The same year, he teamed with his &quot;True Romance&quot; co-star, Christian Slater to appear in the low-budget film, &quot;Hard Cash&quot;, also known as &quot;Run for the Money&quot;.

In 2003, Kilmer starred alongside Kate Bosworth in the drama/thriller &quot;Wonderland&quot;, portraying porn star John Holmes. He also appeared in &quot;The Missing&quot;, where he again worked with &quot;Willow&quot; director Ron Howard. The next year, he starred in David Mamet&#x27;s &quot;Spartan&quot;, where he played a United States government secret agent who is assigned the task of rescuing the kidnapped daughter of the President. He received Delta Force-like training in preparation for the role. Subsequently, he had a role in the drama, &quot;Stateside&quot;, and starred (again with Slater) in the thriller &quot;Mindhunters&quot;, which was filmed in 2003 but not released until 2005. Kilmer next appeared in the big budget Oliver Stone production, &quot;Alexander&quot;, which received poor reviews.

Also in 2004, Kilmer returned to the theater to play Moses in a Los Angeles musical production of &quot;The Ten Commandments: The Musical&quot;, produced by BCBG founder Max Azria. The production played at the Kodak Theatre in Hollywood and also featured Adam Lambert. Kilmer had previously played Moses in the animated film &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot;.
Finally in 2004, Kilmer appeared in an episode of &quot;Entourage&quot;, where he played a Sherpa whose primary source of income was growing, harvesting and distributing high-quality cannabis, all under a guise of metaphysical insights.
Kilmer was in negotiations with Richard Dutcher (a leading director of Mormon-related films) to play the lead role in a film entitled &quot;Prophet: The Story of Joseph Smith&quot;, although the project never materialized.

Kilmer performed in &quot;The Postman Always Rings Twice&quot; on the London stage from June to September 2005. In 2005, he co-starred with Robert Downey, Jr. in the action-comedy film &quot;Kiss Kiss Bang Bang&quot;. His performance was praised and the film was well reviewed, but it received only a limited release. It later won the award for &quot;Overlooked Film of the Year&quot; from the Phoenix Film Critics Society.

In 2006, he reunited with director Tony Scott a third time for a supporting role opposite Denzel Washington in the box-office hit &quot;Déjà Vu&quot;. The song &quot;Val Kilmer&quot; was named after him on Bowling for Soup&#x27;s 2006 album &quot;The Great Burrito Extortion Case&quot;. The song was later used for a Ford Motors commercial on season 10 of &quot;American Idol&quot; in 2011. In 2007, he guest-starred on the hit TV series &quot;Numb3rs&quot; in the episode &quot;Trust Metric&quot;, portraying torture expert Mason Lancer. That same year, he released a CD, proceeds of which went to his charity interests. In 2008, Kilmer starred alongside Stephen Dorff in the Sony and Stage 6 film &quot;Felon&quot;. The film was given only a limited theatrical release in New York and Los Angeles in 2008, but it developed into a success secondary to positive word of mouth.

Kilmer was the voice of the car KITT for the 2008 &quot;Knight Rider&quot; TV pilot film and the following television series. He replaced Will Arnett, who had to step down from the role due to contractual conflict with General Motors. In keeping with tradition established by the original &quot;Knight Rider&quot; series and original KITT actor William Daniels, Kilmer was uncredited for the role on-screen. He next starred alongside Nicolas Cage in the Werner Herzog film &quot;Bad Lieutenant: Port of Call New Orleans&quot;, and alongside Curtis &quot;50 Cent&quot; Jackson in &quot;Streets of Blood&quot;. Both were released in 2009. He appeared as the main antagonist &quot;Mongoose&quot; in a live TV series adaptation of the comic/video game of &quot;XIII&quot; on NBC in 2009.

===2010s===
In 2010 Kilmer starred in Michael Oblowitz&#x27;s horror film &quot;The Traveler&quot;, in which he played the vengeful spirit of a man who had been tortured and murdered while in police custody. In November 2010, Kilmer was filming in Kelseyville, California. He was finally able to work with his lifelong friend Francis Ford Coppola and star in the film &quot;Twixt&quot;. The film was filmed mostly on Coppola&#x27;s estate in Napa County. The filming was expected to take five weeks and was being independently funded by Coppola. In 2010, Kilmer appeared as the villain Dieter Von Cunth in &quot;MacGruber&quot; and had a small cameo role in the music video for Tenacious D&#x27;s &quot;To Be the Best&quot;.

Kilmer spoke at the May 5, 2010, commencement ceremonies of William Woods University in Fulton, Missouri. During his week-long visit on campus, he also performed his one-man play, &quot;Citizen Twain&quot;. He received an honorary doctorate &quot;in recognition of his creative abilities and his contributions to art and theater.&quot;

In 2012, Kilmer received a Grammy nomination for Best Spoken Word. He also starred in Harmony Korine&#x27;s short film &quot;The Lotus Community Workshop&quot;, part of the collaborative film &quot;The Fourth Dimension&quot;. He plays a version of himself from an alternate reality: a former actor turned self-help guru. &quot;The Fourth Dimension&quot; is a collection of three standalone short films about parallel universes produced by Vice Films in collaboration with Grolsch Film Works, a new division of the namesake beer company. Kilmer notes that his addition to the list of actors, including John Malkovich (&quot;Being John Malkovich&quot;) and Al Pacino (&quot;Jack and Jill&quot;), that mock their real-life persona in fictional movies was an accident and says, &quot;I still love saying the premise because it makes me laugh every time.&quot;

In 2002, Kilmer worked on a film about the life of Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of the Christian Science church, and Mark Twain, one of her most famous critics. The film is about the lives and relationship of Eddy and Twain as &quot;a quirky, tender, tragicomic portrait of two contrasting lives, set against the backdrop of Gilded Age America.&quot; &quot;Citizen Twain&quot; was initially performed as a one-man show Hollywood workshop in April 2012; it then became the basis of Kilmer&#x27;s film project, which would be his directorial debut. The 90-minute film version of his one-man stage show was released as &quot;Cinema Twain&quot;. 

In 2013, he reunited with his &quot;Top Gun&quot; co-star Anthony Edwards in the Disney animated movie &quot;&quot;Planes&quot;&quot;. Kilmer voiced the character Bravo, while Edwards supplied Echo. Kilmer also played the role of Detective Dobson in the series finale of the television show &quot;Psych&quot;.

In 2017, Kilmer appeared in &quot;Song to Song&quot; opposite Rooney Mara and Ryan Gosling and directed by Terrence Malick. Kilmer also appeared in the 2017 film &quot;The Snowman&quot;, opposite Michael Fassbender and Rebecca Ferguson and directed by Tomas Alfredson.

=== 2020s ===
In August 2020, Kilmer shared the screen with his daughter, Mercedes Kilmer, for the first time in &quot;Paydirt&quot;.

Kilmer reprised his role as Tom &quot;Iceman&quot; Kazansky for the &quot;Top Gun&quot; sequel &quot;Top Gun: Maverick&quot; (2022).

==Personal life==
Kilmer is a lifelong Christian Scientist, and upon his throat cancer diagnosis referred to it in the press as &quot;the suggestion of throat cancer,&quot; opting not to explicitly associate himself with such a diagnosis. He underwent chemotherapy despite it being conventionally against his religion.

In 2011, Kilmer sold his ranch in New Mexico, where he would trek, hike, fish, and raise bison. 

=== Relationships and family ===
Kilmer has dated Cher, Lesley Ann Warren, Cindy Crawford, Angelina Jolie, Daryl Hannah and Ellen Barkin.

Kilmer was married to actress Joanne Whalley from March 1988 to February 1996. The two met while working together on the film &quot;Willow&quot;. They have two children, a daughter, Mercedes (b. 1991), and a son, Jack (b. 1995).

=== Reputation ===
Kilmer has a reputation for being difficult to work with and having feuds with some of the actors with whom he has worked, notably &quot;The Island of Dr. Moreau&quot; co-star Marlon Brando and &quot;Red Planet&quot; and &quot;Heat&quot; co-star Tom Sizemore. Kilmer&#x27;s &quot;Tombstone&quot; co-star, Michael Biehn, said: &quot;People ask me what it&#x27;s like to work with Val Kilmer. I don&#x27;t know. Never met him. Never shook his hand. I know Doc Holliday, but I don&#x27;t know [Kilmer].&quot;

Richard Stanley, who directed Kilmer for three days in &quot;The Island of Dr. Moreau&quot; before being fired, recalled, &quot;Val would arrive, and an argument would happen.&quot; John Frankenheimer, who replaced Stanley, said &quot;I don&#x27;t like Val Kilmer, I don&#x27;t like his work ethic, and I don&#x27;t want to be associated with him ever again.&quot; &quot;Batman Forever&quot; director Joel Schumacher called Kilmer &quot;childish and impossible&quot;.

When Kilmer&#x27;s &quot;At First Sight&quot; co-star Mira Sorvino was asked about his reputation as &quot;difficult to work with&quot;, she responded: &quot;You know what, he was real easy to work with. I just hate furthering rumors about people being difficult, because it can do such enormous damage to their careers. My experience with him was nothing but positive. He was really professional and gentlemanly, and a terrific actor.&quot;

=== Political views and charity work ===
Kilmer made several trips to New Orleans to help in the 2005 Hurricane Katrina disaster relief. He is a supporter of Native American affairs and an advocate of environmental protection. Kilmer briefly considered running for Governor of New Mexico in 2010, but decided against it.

In May 2013, Kilmer lobbied Congress on behalf of the Equitable Access to Care and Health Act, or EACH Act (H.R. 1814), a bill &quot;to provide an additional religious exemption from the individual health coverage mandate&quot; of Obamacare.

Kilmer is an avid musician; he released a CD called &quot;Sessions with Mick&quot; in 2007.

=== Health ===
In January 2015, Kilmer was hospitalized for what his representative said were tests for a possible tumor. Kilmer said on social media, &quot;I have not had a tumor, or a tumor operations , or any operation. I had a complication where the best way to receive care was to stay under the watchful eye of the UCLA ICU.&quot; After previously denying persistent rumors that he had been diagnosed with cancer, Kilmer said in April 2017 that he had experienced a &quot;healing of cancer&quot;. In December 2017, &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; revealed that Kilmer had gone through a &quot;two-year battle with throat cancer&quot; and that &quot;a procedure on his trachea has reduced his voice to a rasp and rendered him short of breath&quot;. In order to speak, Kilmer plugs an electric voice box in his trachea. Although initially reluctant to start medical treatment due to his beliefs, Kilmer underwent chemotherapy and two tracheotomies.

Kilmer reported in 2020 that he had been cancer-free for four years, but he detailed ongoing struggles with medical treatments including the use of a feeding tube to eat. In 2021, Kilmer worked with Sonantic, a London-based software company, to digitally recreate his voice using AI technology and archived audio recordings of his voice. Over 40 vocal models were generated to find the closest match, which could then be used in future projects. For the 2022 film &quot;Top Gun: Maverick&quot;, director Joseph Kosinski said that, despite reports to the contrary, they did not use Sonantic&#x27;s AI technology in the film, and instead used Kilmer&#x27;s actual voice, although it was digitally altered for clarity.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Theater===
===Video games===
===Music videos===
==Bibliography==

==References==
==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="0" end="17" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Edward Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506452" start="160" end="171" title="Top Secret!" label="Top Secret!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730419" start="195" end="206" title="Real Genius" label="Real Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q110138" start="263" end="270" title="Top Gun" label="Top Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q515931" start="311" end="317" title="Willow (1988 film)" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="375" end="387" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="391" end="403" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q937087" start="417" end="426" title="The Doors (film)" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="494" end="501" title="Western (genre)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420651" start="508" end="517" title="Tombstone (film)" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127709" start="559" end="571" title="True Romance" label="True Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42198" start="595" end="599" title="Heat (1995 film)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="627" end="633" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="637" end="652" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q221345" start="666" end="680" title="Batman Forever" label="Batman Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q728488" start="740" end="766" title="The Ghost and the Darkness" label="The Ghost and the Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753817" start="787" end="796" title="The Saint (1997 film)" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="817" end="836" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q162277" start="857" end="866" title="Alexander (2004 film)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423695" start="887" end="906" title="Kiss Kiss Bang Bang" label="Kiss Kiss Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350825" start="931" end="942" title="The Snowman (2017 film)" label="The Snowman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1010" end="1027" title="Top Gun: Maverick" label="Top Gun: Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="1078" end="1091" title="Laryngeal cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="1119" end="1126" title="trachea" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="1229" end="1241" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="1250" end="1263" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q107202403" start="1387" end="1390" title="Val (film)" label="Val"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="1457" end="1477" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="1644" end="1655" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767025" start="2002" end="2016" title="Cherokee roots" label="Cherokee roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="2174" end="2184" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2207" end="2214" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087816" start="2326" end="2348" title="Chatsworth High School" label="Chatsworth High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="2354" end="2366" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q235189" start="2399" end="2414" title="Mare Winningham" label="Mare Winningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="2482" end="2498" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575474" start="2547" end="2556" title="List of Juilliard School people" label="Group 10."/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="2608" end="2628" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055332" start="2652" end="2665" title="The Outsiders (film)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764719" start="2753" end="2766" title="The Slab Boys Trilogy" label="The Slab Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="2778" end="2789" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="2791" end="2800" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q314841" start="2806" end="2824" title="Jackie Earle Haley" label="Jackie Earle Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600481" start="2949" end="2972" title="ABC Afterschool Special" label="ABC Afterschool Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="3092" end="3109" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506452" start="3465" end="3476" title="Top Secret!" label="Top Secret!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730419" start="3782" end="3793" title="Real Genius" label="Real Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="3826" end="3837" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q660950" start="3851" end="3862" title="Blue Velvet (film)" label="Blue Velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q110138" start="3948" end="3955" title="Top Gun" label="Top Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="3972" end="3982" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q459667" start="4127" end="4156" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue" label="The Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q515931" start="4261" end="4267" title="Willow (1988 film)" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q164069" start="4307" end="4321" title="Joanne Whalley" label="Joanne Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148913" start="4369" end="4398" title="Colorado Shakespeare Festival" label="Colorado Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="4419" end="4425" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503911" start="4487" end="4500" title="Kill Me Again" label="Kill Me Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="4539" end="4542" title="Turner Network Television" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824831" start="4556" end="4569" title="Billy the Kid (1989 film)" label="Billy the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="4639" end="4651" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q937087" start="4697" end="4706" title="The Doors (film)" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="4736" end="4761" title="The Doors" label="the band of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="4941" end="4953" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q464178" start="5481" end="5498" title="Paul A. Rothchild" label="Paul A. Rothchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301193" start="5888" end="5900" title="Sunset Strip" label="Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q154187" start="6131" end="6138" title="The End (The Doors song)" label="The End"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="6176" end="6189" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q108912" start="6369" end="6381" title="Ray Manzarek" label="Ray Manzarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570275" start="6539" end="6551" title="Thunderheart" label="Thunderheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729274" start="6583" end="6597" title="The Real McCoy (film)" label="The Real McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="6656" end="6666" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="6675" end="6688" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127709" start="6698" end="6710" title="True Romance" label="True Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="6739" end="6756" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q44987" start="6781" end="6793" title="Doc Holliday" label="Doc Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420651" start="6815" end="6824" title="Tombstone (film)" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q103157" start="6841" end="6853" title="Kurt Russell" label="Kurt Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="6890" end="6896" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11431260" start="6904" end="6937" title="Nocturne in E minor, Op. posth. 72 (Chopin)" label="Nocturne in E minor, Op.72, No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120510" start="7071" end="7087" title="Wings of Courage" label="Wings of Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="7100" end="7104" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="7151" end="7160" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="7165" end="7179" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42198" start="7189" end="7193" title="Heat (1995 film)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q221345" start="7312" end="7326" title="Batman Forever" label="Batman Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="7342" end="7357" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420651" start="7373" end="7382" title="Tombstone (film)" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44987" start="7446" end="7458" title="Doc Holliday" label="Doc Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q94496874" start="7510" end="7516" title="Bruce Wayne (1989 film series character)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="7557" end="7571" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189054" start="7671" end="7685" title="Batman Returns" label="Batman Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q313546" start="7734" end="7749" title="William Baldwin" label="William Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q514348" start="7798" end="7808" title="Flatliners" label="Flatliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8216" end="8234" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="8242" end="8254" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8337" end="8348" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q313048" start="8407" end="8415" title="Bob Kane" label="Bob Kane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8432" end="8441" title="Cinescape" label="Cinescape"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="8583" end="8597" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753817" start="9357" end="9366" title="The Saint (1997 film)" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="9374" end="9388" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q276523" start="9436" end="9454" title="Batman &amp;amp; Robin (film)" label="Batman &amp;amp; Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149140" start="9664" end="9673" title="Dead Girl (film)" label="Dead Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="9703" end="9716" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091580" start="9746" end="9770" title="The Island of Dr. Moreau (1996 film)" label="The Island of Dr. Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="9814" end="9829" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q728488" start="9852" end="9878" title="The Ghost and the Darkness" label="The Ghost and the Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q388271" start="9904" end="9917" title="Simon Templar" label="Simon Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753817" start="9952" end="9961" title="The Saint (1997 film)" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="10416" end="10421" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="10449" end="10468" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="10499" end="10515" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932706" start="10522" end="10534" title="Joe the King" label="Joe the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q759389" start="10612" end="10626" title="At First Sight (1999 film)" label="At First Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="10775" end="10787" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q945685" start="10814" end="10824" title="Red Planet (film)" label="Red Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466736" start="10891" end="10898" title="Pollock (film)" label="Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="10922" end="10941" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544258" start="11010" end="11024" title="The Salton Sea (2002 film)" label="The Salton Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204590" start="11172" end="11188" title="Christian Slater" label="Christian Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584981" start="11229" end="11238" title="Hard Cash (2002 film)" label="Hard Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q236822" start="11326" end="11339" title="Kate Bosworth" label="Kate Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q112635" start="11368" end="11378" title="Wonderland (2003 film)" label="Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q312688" start="11407" end="11418" title="John Holmes (actor)" label="John Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637139" start="11446" end="11457" title="The Missing (2003 film)" label="The Missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="11520" end="11530" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="11561" end="11572" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296427" start="11586" end="11593" title="Spartan (film)" label="Spartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="11644" end="11656" title="secret agent" label="secret agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="11747" end="11758" title="Delta Force" label="Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q287188" start="11850" end="11859" title="Stateside (film)" label="Stateside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358271" start="11921" end="11932" title="Mindhunters" label="Mindhunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="12033" end="12045" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162277" start="12064" end="12073" title="Alexander (2004 film)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="12164" end="12169" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12215" end="12248" title="The Ten Commandments: The Musical" label="The Ten Commandments: The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q961437" start="12281" end="12290" title="Max Azria" label="Max Azria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180615" start="12321" end="12334" title="Kodak Theatre" label="Kodak Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190231" start="12366" end="12378" title="Adam Lambert" label="Adam Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q253205" start="12525" end="12534" title="Entourage (U.S. TV series)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q200513" start="12560" end="12566" title="Sherpa people" label="Sherpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="12652" end="12660" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="12683" end="12695" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325329" start="12738" end="12753" title="Richard Dutcher" label="Richard Dutcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="12777" end="12783" title="Mormon" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="12868" end="12880" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="13070" end="13088" title="Robert Downey, Jr." label="Robert Downey, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1423695" start="13121" end="13140" title="Kiss Kiss Bang Bang" label="Kiss Kiss Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="13390" end="13400" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="13445" end="13462" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q252409" start="13491" end="13498" title="Déjà Vu (2006 film)" label="Déjà Vu"/>
<link wikidata="Q895463" start="13561" end="13577" title="Bowling for Soup" label="Bowling for Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308873" start="13602" end="13634" title="The Great Burrito Extortion Case" label="The Great Burrito Extortion Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="13672" end="13683" title="Ford Motors" label="Ford Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="13717" end="13730" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935" start="13799" end="13806" title="Numb3rs" label="Numb3rs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848124" start="13834" end="13846" title="Trust Metric" label="Trust Metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q334195" start="14011" end="14024" title="Stephen Dorff" label="Stephen Dorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q367244" start="14060" end="14065" title="Felon (film)" label="Felon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088996" start="14265" end="14269" title="KITT" label="KITT"/>
<link wikidata="Q660092" start="14289" end="14301" title="Knight Rider (2008 film)" label="Knight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q838372" start="14340" end="14357" title="Knight Rider (2008 TV series)" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q355116" start="14371" end="14382" title="Will Arnett" label="Will Arnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="14452" end="14466" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q464009" start="14528" end="14540" title="Knight Rider (1982 TV series)" label="Knight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q370181" start="14578" end="14593" title="William Daniels" label="William Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14606" end="14616" title="Billing (film)#Unbilled appearances" label="uncredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="14667" end="14679" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="14687" end="14700" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14712" end="14752" title="Bad Lieutenant: Port of Call New Orleans" label="Bad Lieutenant: Port of Call New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="14774" end="14808" title="50 Cent" label="Curtis &amp;quot;50 Cent&amp;quot; Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178936" start="14818" end="14834" title="Streets of Blood" label="Streets of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299873" start="14990" end="14994" title="XIII (TV Mini-series)" label="XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856239" start="15056" end="15072" title="Michael Oblowitz" label="Michael Oblowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083437" start="15098" end="15110" title="The Traveler (2010 film)" label="The Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836709" start="15141" end="15156" title="vengeful spirit" label="vengeful spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839339" start="15266" end="15289" title="Kelseyville, California" label="Kelseyville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="15344" end="15364" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408534" start="15392" end="15397" title="Twixt (film)" label="Twixt"/>
<link wikidata="Q108137" start="15460" end="15471" title="Napa County" label="Napa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579371" start="15630" end="15639" title="MacGruber (film)" label="MacGruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q205780" start="15696" end="15707" title="Tenacious D" label="Tenacious D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445253" start="15804" end="15828" title="William Woods University" label="William Woods University"/>
<link wikidata="Q839802" start="15832" end="15848" title="Fulton, Missouri" label="Fulton, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="15966" end="15974" title="honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="16108" end="16114" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528949" start="16167" end="16181" title="Harmony Korine" label="Harmony Korine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515040" start="16279" end="16299" title="The Fourth Dimension (film)" label="The Fourth Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q172261" start="16682" end="16696" title="John Malkovich" label="John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q649165" start="16704" end="16724" title="Being John Malkovich" label="Being John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="16736" end="16745" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505923" start="16747" end="16772" title="Jack and Jill (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;Jack and Jill&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q235069" start="16989" end="17004" title="Mary Baker Eddy" label="Mary Baker Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624477" start="17025" end="17042" title="Christian Science" label="Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="17055" end="17065" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q110138" start="17618" end="17625" title="Top Gun" label="Top Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q314924" start="17640" end="17655" title="Anthony Edwards (actor)" label="Anthony Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657080" start="17691" end="17709" title="Planes (film)" label="&amp;quot;Planes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="17879" end="17884" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130601" start="17927" end="17939" title="Song to Song" label="Song to Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q228766" start="17955" end="17966" title="Rooney Mara" label="Rooney Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q193815" start="17971" end="17983" title="Ryan Gosling" label="Ryan Gosling"/>
<link wikidata="Q215478" start="18000" end="18015" title="Terrence Malick" label="Terrence Malick"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350825" start="18061" end="18072" title="The Snowman (2017 film)" label="The Snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="18089" end="18107" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947838" start="18112" end="18128" title="Rebecca Ferguson" label="Rebecca Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q457656" start="18145" end="18160" title="Tomas Alfredson" label="Tomas Alfredson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18399" end="18416" title="Top Gun: Maverick" label="Top Gun: Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q624477" start="18471" end="18490" title="Christian Science" label="Christian Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18786" end="18796" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="18841" end="18846" title="American Bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="18900" end="18904" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q237214" start="18906" end="18923" title="Lesley Ann Warren" label="Lesley Ann Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q199801" start="18925" end="18939" title="Cindy Crawford" label="Cindy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13909" start="18941" end="18955" title="Angelina Jolie" label="Angelina Jolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="18957" end="18969" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q229234" start="18974" end="18986" title="Ellen Barkin" label="Ellen Barkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164069" start="19019" end="19033" title="Joanne Whalley" label="Joanne Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q515931" start="19121" end="19127" title="Willow (1988 film)" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486552" start="19202" end="19206" title="Jack Kilmer" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091580" start="19375" end="19399" title="The Island of Dr. Moreau (1996 film)" label="The Island of Dr. Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="19414" end="19427" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q945685" start="19438" end="19448" title="Red Planet (film)" label="Red Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42198" start="19465" end="19469" title="Heat (1995 film)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q349852" start="19484" end="19496" title="Tom Sizemore" label="Tom Sizemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420651" start="19518" end="19527" title="Tombstone (film)" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q241510" start="19543" end="19556" title="Michael Biehn" label="Michael Biehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q323285" start="19745" end="19760" title="Richard Stanley (director)" label="Richard Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="19927" end="19945" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221345" start="20116" end="20130" title="Batman Forever" label="Batman Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="20146" end="20161" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q212026" start="20268" end="20280" title="Mira Sorvino" label="Mira Sorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="20727" end="20738" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="20759" end="20776" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="20858" end="20882" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010338" start="20922" end="20944" title="2010 New Mexico gubernatorial election" label="Governor of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837086" start="21033" end="21072" title="Equitable Access to Care and Health Act" label="Equitable Access to Care and Health Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="21210" end="21219" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Obamacare"/>
<link wikidata="Q112578128" start="21280" end="21298" title="Sessions with Mick" label="Sessions with Mick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864040" start="21636" end="21640" title="UCLA Medical Center, Santa Monica" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="21793" end="21810" title="Remission (medicine)" label="healing of cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="21842" end="21864" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="21938" end="21951" title="Laryngeal cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="21992" end="21999" title="trachea" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="22235" end="22247" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="22256" end="22269" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="22422" end="22434" title="feeding tube" label="feeding tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="22552" end="22565" title="artificial intelligence" label="AI technology"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22742" end="22759" title="Top Gun: Maverick" label="Top Gun: Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444076" start="22776" end="22791" title="Joseph Kosinski" label="Joseph Kosinski"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53332" wikidata="Q25434" url="?curid=53332" title="Saffron">
<text>Saffron () is a spice derived from the flower of &quot;Crocus sativus&quot;, commonly known as the &quot;saffron crocus&quot;. The vivid crimson stigma and styles, called threads, are collected and dried for use mainly as a seasoning and colouring agent in food. The saffron crocus was slowly propagated throughout much of Eurasia and was later brought to parts of North Africa, North America, and Oceania.

Saffron&#x27;s taste and iodoform-like or hay-like fragrance result from the phytochemicals picrocrocin and safranal. It also contains a carotenoid pigment, crocin, which imparts a rich golden-yellow hue to dishes and textiles. Its recorded history is attested in a 7th-century BC Assyrian botanical treatise, and it has been traded and used for thousands of years. As of 2024, Iran produced some 90% of the world total for saffron. At US$5,000 per kg or higher, saffron has long been the world&#x27;s costliest spice by weight.

==Etymology==

A degree of uncertainty surrounds the origin of the English word &quot;saffron&quot;. It might stem from the 12th-century Old French term &quot;safran&quot;, which comes from the Latin word , from the Persian (, &quot;za&#x27;farān&quot;), from the Persian word &quot;zarparān&quot; () meaning &quot;gold strung&quot; (implying either the golden stamens of the flower or the golden colour it creates when used as flavour).

==Species==
===Description===


The domesticated saffron crocus, &quot;Crocus sativus&quot;, is an autumn-flowering perennial plant unknown in the wild. It probably descends from the eastern Mediterranean autumn-flowering &quot;Crocus cartwrightianus&quot; which is also known as &quot;wild saffron&quot; and is native to mainland Greece, Euboea, Crete, Skyros and some islands of the Cyclades. The similar species &quot;C. thomasii&quot; and &quot;C. pallasii&quot; were considered as other possible ancestors. As a genetically monomorphic clone incapable of seed production, it was slowly propagated by humans throughout much of Eurasia. Various origins had been suggested for saffron, including Iran, Greece, Mesopotamia. and Kashmir.

It is a sterile triploid form, which means that three homologous sets of chromosomes make up each specimen&#x27;s genetic complement; &quot;C. sativus&quot; bears eight chromosomal bodies per set, making for 24 in total. Being sterile, the purple flowers of &quot;C. sativus&quot; fail to produce viable seeds; reproduction hinges on human assistance: clusters of corms, underground, bulb-like, starch-storing organs, must be dug up, divided, and replanted. A corm survives for one season, producing via vegetative division up to ten &quot;cormlets&quot; that can grow into new plants in the next season. The compact corms are small, brown globules that can measure as large as in diameter, have a flat base, and are shrouded in a dense mat of parallel fibres; this coat is referred to as the &quot;corm tunic&quot;. Corms also bear vertical fibres, thin and net-like, that grow up to above the plant&#x27;s neck.

The plant sprouts 5–11 white and non-photosynthetic leaves known as cataphylls. These membrane-like structures cover and protect 5 to 11 true leaves as they bud and develop on the crocus flower. The latter are thin, straight, and blade-like green foliage leaves, which are , in diameter, which either expand after the flowers have opened (&quot;hysteranthous&quot;) or do so simultaneously with their blooming (&quot;synanthous&quot;). &quot;C. sativus&quot; cataphylls are suspected by some to manifest prior to blooming when the plant is irrigated relatively early in the growing season. Its floral axes, or flower-bearing structures, bear bracteoles, or specialised leaves, that sprout from the flower stems; the latter are known as pedicels. After aestivating in spring, the plant sends up its true leaves, each up to in length. Only in October, after most other flowering plants have released their seeds, do its brilliantly hued flowers develop; they range from a light pastel shade of lilac to a darker and more striated mauve. The flowers possess a sweet, honey-like fragrance. Upon flowering, the plants are in height and bear up to four flowers. A three-pronged style in length, emerges from each flower. Each prong terminates with a vivid crimson stigma, which is the distal end of a carpel.

===Cultivation===

The saffron crocus, unknown in the wild, probably descends from &quot;Crocus cartwrightianus&quot;. It is a triploid that is &quot;self-incompatible&quot; and male sterile; it undergoes aberrant meiosis and is hence incapable of independent sexual reproduction—all propagation is by vegetative multiplication via manual &quot;divide-and-set&quot; of a starter clone or by interspecific hybridisation.

&quot;Crocus sativus&quot; thrives in the Mediterranean maquis, an ecotype superficially resembling the North American chaparral, and similar climates where hot and dry summer breezes sweep semi-arid lands. It can nonetheless survive cold winters, tolerating frosts as low as and short periods of snow cover. Some reports suggest saffron can tolerate an air temperature range from −22 to 40 °C. Irrigation is required if grown outside of moist environments such as Kashmir, where annual rainfall averages ; saffron-growing regions in Greece ( annually) and Spain () are far drier than the main cultivating Iranian regions. What makes this possible is the timing of the local wet seasons; generous spring rains and drier summers are optimal. Rain immediately preceding flowering boosts saffron yields; rainy or cold weather during flowering promotes disease and reduces yields. Persistently damp and hot conditions harm the crops, and rabbits, rats, and birds cause damage by digging up corms. Nematodes, leaf rusts, and corm rot pose other threats. Yet &quot;Bacillus subtilis&quot; inoculation may provide some benefit to growers by speeding corm growth and increasing stigma biomass yield.

The plants fare poorly in shady conditions; they grow best in full sunlight. Fields that slope towards the sunlight are optimal (i.e., south-sloping in the Northern Hemisphere). Planting is mostly done in June in the Northern Hemisphere, where corms are lodged deep; its roots, stems, and leaves can develop between October and February. Planting depth and corm spacing, in concert with climate, are critical factors in determining yields. Mother corms planted deeper yield higher-quality saffron, though they form fewer flower buds and daughter corms. Italian growers optimise thread yield by planting deep and in rows apart; depths of optimise flower and corm production. Greek, Moroccan, and Spanish growers employ distinct depths and spacings that suit their locales.

&quot;C. sativus&quot; prefers friable, loose, low-density, well-watered, and well-drained clay-calcareous soils with high organic content. Traditional raised beds promote good drainage. Soil organic content was historically boosted via application of some of manure. Afterwards, and with no further manure application, corms were planted. After a period of dormancy through the summer, the corms send up their narrow leaves and begin to bud in early autumn. Only in mid-autumn do they flower. Harvests are by necessity a speedy affair: after blossoming at dawn, flowers quickly wilt as the day passes. All plants bloom within a window of one or two weeks. Stigmas are dried quickly upon extraction and (preferably) sealed in airtight containers.

===Harvesting===

The high retail value of saffron is maintained on world markets because of labour-intensive harvesting methods, which require some – equivalently, . Forty hours of labour are needed to pick 150,000 flowers.

One freshly picked crocus flower yields on average 30 mg of fresh saffron or 7 mg dried; roughly 150 flowers yield of dry saffron threads; to produce of dried saffron, of flowers are needed; the yield of dried spice from fresh saffron is only .

==Spice==

===Phytochemistry and sensory properties===
Saffron contains some 28 volatile and aroma-yielding compounds, dominated by ketones and aldehydes. Its main aroma-active compounds are safranal – the main compound responsible for saffron aroma – 4-ketoisophorone, and dihydrooxophorone. Saffron also contains nonvolatile phytochemicals, including the carotenoids zeaxanthin, lycopene, various α- and β-carotenes, as well as crocetin and its glycoside crocein, which are the most biologically active components. Because crocetin is smaller and more water-soluble than the other carotenoids, it is more rapidly absorbed.

The yellow-orange colour of saffron is primarily the result of α-crocin. This crocin is trans-crocetin di-(β-D-gentiobiosyl) ester; it bears the systematic (IUPAC) name 8,8-diapo-8,8-carotenoic acid. This means that the crocin underlying saffron&#x27;s aroma is a digentiobiose ester of the carotenoid crocetin. Crocins themselves are a series of hydrophilic carotenoids that are either monoglycosyl or diglycosyl polyene esters of crocetin. Crocetin is a conjugated polyene dicarboxylic acid that is hydrophobic, and thus oil-soluble. When crocetin is esterified with two water-soluble gentiobioses, which are sugars, a product results that is itself water-soluble. The resultant α-crocin is a carotenoid pigment that may make up more than 10% of dry saffron&#x27;s mass. The two esterified gentiobioses make α-crocin ideal for colouring water-based and non-fatty foods such as rice dishes.

The bitter glucoside picrocrocin is responsible for saffron&#x27;s pungent flavour. Picrocrocin (chemical formula: ; systematic name: 4-(β-D-glucopyranosyloxy)-2,6,6-trimethylcyclohex-1-ene-1-carbaldehyde) is a union of an aldehyde sub-molecule known as safranal (systematic name: 2,6,6-trimethylcyclohexa-1,3-diene-1-carbaldehyde) and a carbohydrate. It has insecticidal and pesticidal properties, and may comprise up to 4% of dry saffron. Picrocrocin is a truncated version of the carotenoid zeaxanthin that is produced via oxidative cleavage, and is the glycoside of the terpene aldehyde safranal.

When saffron is dried after its harvest, the heat, combined with enzymatic action, splits picrocrocin to yield D–glucose and a free safranal molecule. Safranal, a volatile oil, gives saffron much of its distinctive aroma. Safranal is less bitter than picrocrocin and may comprise up to 70% of dry saffron&#x27;s volatile fraction in some samples. A second molecule underlying saffron&#x27;s aroma is 2-hydroxy-4,4,6-trimethyl-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-one, which produces a scent described as saffron, dried hay-like. Chemists find this is the most powerful contributor to saffron&#x27;s fragrance, despite its presence in a lesser quantity than safranal. Dry saffron is highly sensitive to fluctuating pH levels, and rapidly breaks down chemically in the presence of light and oxidising agents. It must, therefore, be stored in air-tight containers to minimise contact with atmospheric oxygen. Saffron is somewhat more resistant to heat.

===Grades and ISO 3632 categories===


Saffron is not all of the same quality and strength. Strength is related to several factors including the amount of style picked along with the red stigma. Age of the saffron is also a factor. More style included means the saffron is less strong gram for gram because the colour and flavour are concentrated in the red stigmas. Saffron from Iran, Spain, and Kashmir is classified into various grades according to the relative amounts of red stigma and yellow styles it contains. Grades of Iranian saffron are: &quot;sargol&quot; (, red stigma tips only, strongest grade), &quot;pushal&quot; or &quot;pushali&quot; (red stigmas plus some yellow style, lower strength), &quot;bunch&quot; saffron (red stigmas plus large amount of yellow style, presented in a tiny bundle like a miniature wheatsheaf) and &quot;konge&quot; (yellow style only, claimed to have aroma but with very little, if any, colouring potential). Grades of Spanish saffron are &quot;coupé&quot; (the strongest grade, like Iranian sargol), &quot;mancha&quot; (like Iranian pushal), and in order of further decreasing strength &quot;rio&quot;, &quot;standard&quot; and &quot;sierra&quot; saffron. The word &quot;mancha&quot; in the Spanish classification can have two meanings: a general grade of saffron or a very high quality Spanish-grown saffron from a specific geographical origin. Real Spanish-grown La Mancha saffron has PDO protected status and this is displayed on the product packaging. Spanish growers fought hard for Protected Status because they felt that imports of Iranian saffron re-packaged in Spain and sold as &quot;Spanish Mancha saffron&quot; were undermining the genuine La Mancha brand. Similar was the case in Kashmir where imported Iranian saffron is mixed with local saffron and sold as &quot;Kashmir brand&quot; at a higher price. In Kashmir, saffron is mostly classified into two main categories called &quot;mongra&quot; (stigma alone) and &quot;lachha&quot; (stigmas attached with parts of the style). Countries producing less saffron do not have specialised words for different grades and may only produce one grade. Artisan producers in Europe and New Zealand have offset their higher labour charges for saffron harvesting by targeting quality, only offering extremely high-grade saffron.

In addition to descriptions based on how the saffron is picked, saffron may be categorised under the international standard ISO 3632 after laboratory measurement of crocin (responsible for saffron&#x27;s colour), picrocrocin (taste), and safranal (fragrance or aroma) content. However, often there is no clear grading information on the product packaging and little of the saffron readily available in the UK is labelled with ISO category. This lack of information makes it hard for customers to make informed choices when comparing prices and buying saffron.

Under ISO 3632, determination of non-stigma content (&quot;floral waste content&quot;) and other extraneous matter such as inorganic material (&quot;ash&quot;) are also key. Grading standards are set by the International Organization for Standardization, a federation of national standards bodies. ISO 3632 deals exclusively with saffron and establishes three categories: III (poorest quality), II, and I (finest quality). Formerly there was also category IV, which was below category III. Samples are assigned categories by gauging the spice&#x27;s crocin and picrocrocin content, revealed by measurements of specific spectrophotometric absorbance. Safranal is treated slightly differently and rather than there being threshold levels for each category, samples must give a reading of 20–50 for all categories.

These data are measured through spectrophotometry reports at certified testing laboratories worldwide. Higher absorbances imply greater levels of crocin, picrocrocin and safranal, and thus a greater colouring potential and therefore strength per gram. The absorbance reading of crocin is known as the &quot;colouring strength&quot; of that saffron. Saffron&#x27;s colouring strength can range from lower than 80 (for all category IV saffron) up to 200 or greater (for category I). The world&#x27;s finest samples (the selected, most red-maroon, tips of stigmas picked from the finest flowers) receive colouring strengths in excess of 250, making such saffron over three times more powerful than category IV saffron. Market prices for saffron types follow directly from these ISO categories. Sargol and coupé saffron would typically fall into ISO 3632 category I. Pushal and Mancha would probably be assigned to category II. On many saffron packaging labels, neither the ISO 3632 category nor the colouring strength (the measurement of crocin content) is displayed.

However, many growers, traders, and consumers reject such lab test numbers. Some people prefer a more holistic method of sampling batches of threads for taste, aroma, pliability, and other traits in a fashion similar to that practised by experienced wine tasters.

===Adulteration===
Despite attempts at quality control and standardisation, an extensive history of saffron adulteration, particularly among the cheapest grades, continues into modern times. Adulteration was first documented in Europe&#x27;s Middle Ages, when those found selling adulterated saffron were executed under the &quot;Safranschou&quot; code. Typical methods include mixing in extraneous substances like beetroot, pomegranate fibres, red-dyed silk fibres, or the saffron crocus&#x27;s tasteless and odourless yellow stamens. Other methods included dousing saffron fibres with viscid substances like honey or vegetable oil to increase their weight. Powdered saffron is more prone to adulteration, with turmeric, paprika, and other powders used as diluting fillers. Adulteration can also consist of selling mislabelled mixes of different saffron grades. Thus, high-grade Kashmiri saffron is often sold and mixed with cheaper Iranian imports; these mixes are then marketed as pure Kashmiri saffron. Safflower is a common substitute sometimes sold as saffron. The spice is reportedly counterfeited with horse hair, corn silk, or shredded paper. Tartrazine or sunset yellow have been used to colour counterfeit powdered saffron.

In recent years, saffron adulterated with the colouring extract of gardenia fruits has been detected in the European market. This form of fraud is difficult to detect due to the presence of flavonoids and crocines in the gardenia-extracts similar to those naturally occurring in saffron. Detection methods have been developed by using HPLC and mass spectrometry to determine the presence of geniposide, a compound present in the fruits of gardenia, but not in saffron.

===Types===

The various saffron crocus cultivars give rise to thread types that are often regionally distributed and characteristically distinct. Varieties (not varieties in the botanical sense) from Spain, including the tradenames &quot;Spanish Superior&quot; and &quot;Creme&quot;, are generally mellower in colour, flavour, and aroma; they are graded by government-imposed standards. Italian varieties are slightly more potent than Spanish. Greek saffron produced in the town of Krokos is PDO protected due to its particularly high-quality colour and strong flavour. Various &quot;boutique&quot; crops are available from New Zealand, France, Switzerland, England, the United States, and other countries—some of them organically grown. In the US, Pennsylvania Dutch saffron—known for its &quot;earthy&quot; notes—is marketed in small quantities.

Consumers may regard certain cultivars as &quot;premium&quot; quality. The &quot;Aquila&quot; saffron, or &quot;zafferano dell&#x27;Aquila&quot;, is defined by high safranal and crocin content, distinctive thread shape, unusually pungent aroma, and intense colour; it is grown exclusively on eight hectares in the Navelli Valley of Italy&#x27;s Abruzzo region, near L&#x27;Aquila. It was first introduced to Italy by a Dominican friar from inquisition-era Spain. But the biggest saffron cultivation in Italy is in San Gavino Monreale, Sardinia, where it is grown on 40 hectares, representing 60% of Italian production; it too has unusually high crocin, picrocrocin, and safranal content.

Another is the &quot;Mongra&quot; or &quot;Lacha&quot; saffron of Kashmir (&quot;Crocus sativus&quot; &#x27;Cashmirianus&#x27;), which is among the most difficult for consumers to obtain. Repeated droughts, blights, and crop failures in Kashmir combined with an Indian export ban, contribute to its prohibitive overseas prices. Kashmiri saffron is recognizable by its dark maroon-purple hue, making it among the world&#x27;s darkest. In 2020, Kashmir Valley saffron was certified with a geographical indication from the Government of India.

==World production==
Almost all saffron grows in a belt from Spain in the west to India in the east. Iran is responsible for around 88% of global production. In 2024, Iran was the largest producer of saffron, with Afghanistan as the second largest. Saffron is cultivated in 26 of Afghanistan&#x27;s 34 provinces, with most production concentrated in Herat.

Spain is the third largest producer, while the United Arab Emirates, Greece, the Indian subcontinent and Morocco are among minor producers.

===Trade===

Saffron prices at wholesale and retail rates range from . In Western countries, the average retail price in 1974 was . In February 2013, a retail bottle containing could be purchased for $16.26 or the equivalent of , or as little as about in larger quantities. There are between . Vivid crimson colouring, slight moistness, elasticity, and lack of broken-off thread debris are all traits of fresh saffron.

==Uses==

Saffron has a long history of use in traditional medicine. Saffron has also been used as a fabric dye, particularly in China and India, and in perfumery. It is used for religious purposes in India.

In the European E number categorisation for food elements and additives, Saffron is coded as E164.
===Consumption===

Saffron&#x27;s aroma is often described by connoisseurs as reminiscent of metallic honey with grassy or hay-like notes, while its taste has also been noted as hay-like and sweet. Saffron also contributes a luminous yellow-orange colouring to foods. Saffron is widely used in Persian, Indian, European, and Arab cuisines. Confectioneries and liquors also often include saffron. Saffron is used in dishes ranging from the jewelled rice and &quot;khoresh&quot; of Iran, the Milanese &quot;risotto&quot; of Italy, the &quot;paella&quot; of Spain, the &quot;bouillabaisse&quot; of France, to the &quot;biryani&quot; with various meat accompaniments in South Asia. Saffron is also used in the preparation of the &quot;Golden Ham&quot;, a precious dry-cured ham made with saffron from San Gimignano. Common saffron substitutes include safflower (&quot;Carthamus tinctorius&quot;, which is often sold as &quot;Portuguese saffron&quot; or &quot;açafrão&quot;), annatto, and turmeric (&quot;Curcuma longa&quot;). In Medieval Europe, turmeric was also known as &quot;Indian saffron&quot; because of its yellow-orange colour.

===Nutrition===
Dried saffron is 65% carbohydrates, 6% fat, 11% protein (table) and 12% water. In one tablespoon (2 grams; a quantity much larger than is likely to be ingested in normal use) manganese is present as 29% of the Daily Value, while other micronutrients have negligible content (table).

===Toxicity===
Ingesting less than of saffron is not toxic for humans, but doses greater than can become increasingly toxic. Mild toxicity includes dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, whereas at higher doses there can be reduced platelet count and spontaneous bleeding.

===Storage===
Saffron will not spoil, but will lose flavour within six months if not stored in an airtight, cool and dark place. Freezer storage can maintain flavour for up to two years.

===Research===

As of 2020, saffron constituents, such as crocin, crocetin, and safranal, were under preliminary research for their potential to affect mental depression. Saffron has also been studied for its possible effect on cardiovascular risk factors, and in erectile dysfunction.

==History==

Saffron likely originated in Iran, Greece, Mesopotamia, or Kashmir. Harold McGee states that it was domesticated in or near Greece during the Bronze Age. &quot;C. sativus&quot; is probably a triploid form of &quot;Crocus cartwrightianus&quot;, which is also known as &quot;wild saffron&quot;. Saffron crocus was slowly propagated by humans throughout much of Eurasia and was later brought to parts of North Africa, North America, and Oceania.

Several wild species of &quot;Crocus&quot; similar to the commercial plant are known to have been harvested in recent times for use as saffron. &quot;Crocus ancyrensis&quot; was used to make saffron in Sivas in Central Turkey, the corms were also eaten. &quot;Crocus cartwrightianus&quot; was harvested on Andros in the islands of the Cyclades, for medicinal purposes and the stigmas for making a pigment called Zafran. &quot;Crocus longiflorus&quot; stigmas were used for saffron in Sicily. &quot;Crocus thomasii&quot; stigmas were used to flavour dishes around Taranto, South Italy. In Syria the stigmas of an unknown wild species were collected by women and children, sun-dried and pressed into small tablets which were sold in the Bazaars. Not all ancient depictions or descriptions of saffron spice or flowers are certain to be the same species as the modern commercial species used for spice.

===West Asia===
Saffron was detailed in a 7th-century BC Assyrian botanical reference compiled under Ashurbanipal. Documentation of saffron&#x27;s use over the span of 3,500 years has been uncovered. Saffron-based pigments have indeed been found in 50,000-year-old depictions of prehistoric places in northwest Iran. The Sumerians later used wild-growing saffron in their remedies and magical potions. Saffron was an article of long-distance trade before the Minoan palace culture&#x27;s 2nd millennium BC peak. Ancient Persians cultivated Persian saffron (&quot;Crocus sativus&quot; var. &quot;haussknechtii&quot; now called &quot;Crocus haussknechtii&quot; by botanists) in Derbent, Isfahan, and Khorasan by the 10th century BC. At such sites, saffron threads were woven into textiles, ritually offered to divinities, and used in dyes, perfumes, medicines, and body washes. Saffron threads would thus be scattered across beds and mixed into hot teas as a curative for bouts of melancholy. Non-Persians also feared the Persians&#x27; usage of saffron as a drugging agent and aphrodisiac. During his Asian campaigns, Alexander the Great used Persian saffron in his infusions, rice, and baths as a curative for battle wounds. Alexander&#x27;s troops imitated the practice from the Persians and brought saffron-bathing to Greece.

=== South Asia ===
Conflicting theories explain saffron&#x27;s arrival in South Asia. Kashmiri and Chinese accounts date its arrival anywhere between 2500 and 900 years ago. Historians studying ancient Persian records date the arrival to sometime prior to 500 BC, attributing it to a Persian transplantation of saffron corms to stock new gardens and parks. Phoenicians then marketed Kashmiri saffron as a dye and a treatment for melancholy. Its use in foods and dyes subsequently spread throughout South Asia. Buddhist monks wear saffron-coloured robes; however, the robes are not dyed with costly saffron but turmeric, a less expensive dye, or jackfruit. Monks&#x27; robes are dyed the same colour to show equality with each other, and turmeric or ochre were the cheapest, most readily available dyes. Gamboge is also used to dye the robes.

=== East Asia ===
Some historians believe that saffron came to China with Mongol invaders from Persia. Yet it is mentioned in ancient Chinese medical texts, including the forty-volume &quot;Shennong Bencaojing&quot;, a pharmacopoeia written around 300–200 BC. Traditionally credited to the legendary Yan Emperor and the deity Shennong, it discusses 252 plant-based medical treatments for various disorders. Nevertheless, around the 3rd century AD, the Chinese were referring to it as having a Kashmiri provenance. According to the herbalist Wan Zhen, &quot;the habitat of saffron is in Kashmir, where people grow it principally to offer it to the Buddha&quot;. Wan also reflected on how it was used in his time: &quot;The flower withers after a few days, and then the saffron is obtained. It is valued for its uniform yellow colour. It can be used to aromatise wine.&quot;

===South East Mediterranean===
Minoan depictions of saffron are now considered to be &quot;Crocus cartwrightianus&quot;. The Minoans portrayed saffron in their palace frescoes by 1600–1500 BC; they hint at its possible use as a therapeutic drug. Ancient Greek legends told of sea voyages to Cilicia, where adventurers sought what they believed were the world&#x27;s most valuable threads. Another legend tells of Crocus and Smilax, whereby Crocus is bewitched and transformed into the first saffron crocus. Ancient perfumers in Egypt, physicians in Gaza, townspeople in Rhodes, and the Greek &quot;hetaerae&quot; courtesans used saffron in their scented waters, perfumes and potpourris, mascaras and ointments, divine offerings, and medical treatments.

In late Ptolemaic Egypt, Cleopatra used saffron in her baths so that lovemaking would be more pleasurable. Egyptian healers used saffron as a treatment for all varieties of gastrointestinal ailments. Saffron was also used as a fabric dye in such Levantine cities as Sidon and Tyre in Lebanon. Aulus Cornelius Celsus prescribes saffron in medicines for wounds, cough, colic, and scabies, and in the mithridatium.

===Western Europe===

Saffron was a notable ingredient in certain Roman recipes such as jusselle and conditum. Such was the Romans&#x27; love of saffron that Roman colonists took it with them when they settled in southern Gaul, where it was extensively cultivated until Rome&#x27;s fall. With this fall, European saffron cultivation plummeted. Competing theories state that saffron only returned to France with 8th-century AD Moors or with the Avignon papacy in the 14th century AD. Similarly, the spread of Islamic civilisation may have helped reintroduce the crop to Spain and Italy.

The 14th-century Black Death caused demand for saffron-based medicaments to peak, and Europe imported large quantities of threads via Venetian and Genoan ships from southern and Mediterranean lands such as Rhodes. The theft of one such shipment by noblemen sparked the fourteen-week-long Saffron War. The conflict and resulting fear of rampant saffron piracy spurred corm cultivation in Basel; it thereby grew prosperous. The crop then spread to Nuremberg, where endemic and insalubrious adulteration brought on the &quot;Safranschou&quot; code—whereby culprits were variously fined, imprisoned, and executed. Meanwhile, cultivation continued in southern France, Italy, and Spain.

Direct archaeological evidence of mediaeval saffron consumption in Scandinavia comes from the wreck of the royal Danish-Norwegian flagship, Gribshunden. The ship sank in 1495 while on a diplomatic mission to Sweden. Excavations in 2021 revealed concentrations of saffron threads and small &quot;pucks&quot; of compressed saffron powder, along with fresh ginger, cloves, and pepper. Surprisingly, the saffron retained its distinctive odour even after more than 500 years of submersion in the Baltic Sea.

The Essex town of Saffron Walden, named for its new specialty crop, emerged as a prime saffron growing and trading centre in the 16th and 17th centuries but cultivation there was abandoned; saffron was re-introduced around 2013 as well as other parts of the UK (Cheshire).

===The Americas===
Europeans introduced saffron to the Americas when immigrant members of the Schwenkfelder Church left Europe with a trunk containing its corms. Church members had grown it widely in Europe. By 1730, the Pennsylvania Dutch cultivated saffron throughout eastern Pennsylvania. Spanish colonies in the Caribbean bought large amounts of this new American saffron, and high demand ensured that saffron&#x27;s list price on the Philadelphia commodities exchange was equal to gold. Trade with the Caribbean later collapsed in the aftermath of the War of 1812, when many saffron-bearing merchant vessels were destroyed. Yet the Pennsylvania Dutch continued to grow lesser amounts of saffron for local trade and use in their cakes, noodles, and chicken or trout dishes. American saffron cultivation survives into modern times, mainly in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.

=== Afghanistan ===
Saffron has a long history in Afghanistan, with cultivation believed to date back to before Alexander the Great&#x27;s conquest of the Persian Empire. Due to prolonged droughts, conflict, and shifts in agricultural focus, saffron farming declined for centuries. Cultivation resumed in the early 2000s as an alternative to opium poppy farming, supported by international organizations and the Afghan government. According to Afghanistan’s Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock, production increased from 20 metric tons in 2022 to 46 metric tons in 2024. Key export markets include India, Europe, and the United States, where Afghan saffron is prized for its high quality.

Saffron cultivation contributes significantly to Afghanistan’s economy, supporting thousands of farmers, particularly women. Over 80% of the saffron workforce consists of women, who primarily handle harvesting and processing. The sector has provided employment opportunities for over 40,000 people, playing a role in agricultural sustainability and rural development.

Afghan saffron is known for its deep red color, strong aroma, and high crocin content, a compound that determines color intensity. It has been ranked among the highest quality saffron varieties in recent years with a 310 Crocin color quality based on ISO 3632.2 standards.

== Gallery ==

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="0" end="7" title="Saffron" label="Saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041677" start="55" end="69" title="Crocus sativus" label="Crocus sativus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="145" end="151" title="stigma (botany)" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546595" start="156" end="162" title="style (botany)" label="styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q773108" start="224" end="233" title="seasoning" label="seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="238" end="253" title="Food coloring" label="colouring agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q412393" start="433" end="441" title="iodoform" label="iodoform"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="450" end="453" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="485" end="498" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q289866" start="500" end="511" title="picrocrocin" label="picrocrocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424919" start="516" end="524" title="safranal" label="safranal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="545" end="555" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q424767" start="565" end="571" title="crocin" label="crocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137949" start="636" end="656" title="History of saffron" label="Its recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="689" end="696" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222151" start="734" end="749" title="Trade and use of saffron" label="traded and used"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="786" end="790" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1075" end="1085" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="1483" end="1492" title="flowering plant" label="flowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="1493" end="1508" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q291315" start="1605" end="1627" title="Crocus cartwrightianus" label="Crocus cartwrightianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q375433" start="1699" end="1714" title="mainland Greece" label="mainland Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="1716" end="1722" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="1724" end="1729" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q208566" start="1731" end="1737" title="Skyros" label="Skyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="1762" end="1770" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q15561516" start="1798" end="1809" title="Crocus thomasii" label="C. thomasii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4521091" start="1826" end="1837" title="Crocus pallasii" label="C. pallasii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="2008" end="2015" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2075" end="2079" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2081" end="2087" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2089" end="2100" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="2106" end="2113" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="2132" end="2140" title="polyploidy" label="triploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="2189" end="2199" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q858568" start="2480" end="2484" title="corm" label="corm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="3068" end="3082" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061675" start="3099" end="3108" title="cataphyll" label="cataphyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="3673" end="3678" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713537" start="3767" end="3775" title="pedicel (botany)" label="pedicels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777443" start="3783" end="3794" title="Aestivation (botany)" label="aestivating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546595" start="4203" end="4208" title="style (botany)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="4289" end="4295" title="stigma (botany)" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="4326" end="4332" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q291315" start="4424" end="4446" title="Crocus cartwrightianus" label="Crocus cartwrightianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="4462" end="4470" title="polyploid" label="triploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="4549" end="4556" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="4637" end="4662" title="vegetative reproduction" label="vegetative multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="4812" end="4818" title="Maquis shrubland" label="maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="4875" end="4884" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="5749" end="5757" title="Nematode" label="Nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130524" start="5765" end="5770" title="rust (fungus)" label="rusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131238" start="5815" end="5832" title="Bacillus subtilis" label="Bacillus subtilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="6818" end="6828" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="8022" end="8059" title="Volatile organic compound" label="volatile and aroma-yielding compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="8074" end="8080" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="8086" end="8094" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q424919" start="8133" end="8141" title="safranal" label="safranal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="8269" end="8282" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="8299" end="8309" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q169337" start="8311" end="8321" title="zeaxanthin" label="zeaxanthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208130" start="8323" end="8331" title="lycopene" label="lycopene"/>
<link wikidata="Q190156" start="8350" end="8358" title="carotene" label="carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714546" start="8372" end="8380" title="crocetin" label="crocetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="8389" end="8398" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q424767" start="8646" end="8652" title="crocin" label="crocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714546" start="8662" end="8670" title="crocetin" label="crocetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415583" start="8679" end="8691" title="gentiobiose" label="gentiobiosyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="8693" end="8698" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826683" start="8713" end="8736" title="IUPAC nomenclature" label="systematic (IUPAC) name"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="8915" end="8926" title="hydrophile" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855177" start="8955" end="8967" title="glycosyl" label="monoglycosyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519471" start="8982" end="8989" title="polyene" label="polyene"/>
<link wikidata="Q898370" start="9024" end="9034" title="conjugated system" label="conjugated"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="9043" end="9060" title="carboxylic acid" label="dicarboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="9069" end="9080" title="Hydrophobe" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="9121" end="9131" title="esterification" label="esterified"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="9179" end="9185" title="carbohydrate" label="sugars"/>
<link wikidata="Q137173" start="9472" end="9481" title="glucoside" label="glucoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q289866" start="9482" end="9493" title="picrocrocin" label="picrocrocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517948" start="9528" end="9543" title="pungency" label="pungent flavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="9558" end="9574" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="9684" end="9692" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q424919" start="9715" end="9723" title="safranal" label="safranal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169337" start="9955" end="9965" title="zeaxanthin" label="zeaxanthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="9987" end="9996" title="redox" label="oxidative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="10018" end="10027" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="10035" end="10042" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="10043" end="10051" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10174" end="10175" title="Monosaccharide#Isomerism" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="10176" end="10183" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="10226" end="10234" title="essential oil" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597672" start="10463" end="10512" title="Lanierone" label="2-hydroxy-4,4,6-trimethyl-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="10760" end="10762" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="10835" end="10844" title="redox" label="oxidising"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11377" end="11381" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="11383" end="11388" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="11394" end="11401" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12429" end="12432" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union#Protected designation of origin (PDO)" label="PDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="13447" end="13450" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944212" start="14033" end="14036" title="Ash (analytical chemistry)" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="14091" end="14137" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q907315" start="14522" end="14532" title="absorbance" label="absorbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q332084" start="14729" end="14746" title="spectrophotometry" label="spectrophotometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="16013" end="16017" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658591" start="16136" end="16148" title="adulteration" label="adulteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="16443" end="16451" title="beetroot" label="beetroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="16453" end="16464" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="16638" end="16643" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="16740" end="16748" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="16750" end="16757" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q156625" start="17035" end="17044" title="Safflower" label="Safflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q964736" start="17138" end="17148" title="horse hair" label="horse hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719298" start="17150" end="17159" title="corn silk" label="corn silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q407158" start="17180" end="17190" title="Tartrazine" label="Tartrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="17194" end="17207" title="sunset yellow" label="sunset yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q740887" start="17331" end="17339" title="gardenia" label="gardenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="17454" end="17464" title="flavonoids" label="flavonoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q424767" start="17469" end="17475" title="crocin" label="crocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381233" start="17599" end="17603" title="HPLC" label="HPLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="17608" end="17625" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106709" start="17655" end="17665" title="geniposide" label="geniposide"/>
<link wikidata="Q929244" start="18217" end="18223" title="Krokos" label="Krokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="18227" end="18230" title="Protected designation of origin" label="PDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="18929" end="18936" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476" start="18950" end="18963" title="L&amp;#x27;Aquila" label="L&amp;#x27;Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q287986" start="19098" end="19117" title="San Gavino Monreale" label="San Gavino Monreale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361576" start="19716" end="19730" title="Kashmir Valley" label="Kashmir Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q325668" start="19760" end="19783" title="geographical indication" label="geographical indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="19876" end="19881" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="19916" end="19920" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="20029" end="20040" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="20165" end="20170" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="20220" end="20240" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="20242" end="20248" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="20254" end="20273" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="20278" end="20285" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="20781" end="20801" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="20842" end="20845" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="20959" end="20967" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685351" start="21505" end="21512" title="khoresh" label="khoresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208105" start="21547" end="21554" title="risotto" label="risotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q212121" start="21581" end="21587" title="paella" label="paella"/>
<link wikidata="Q828043" start="21614" end="21627" title="bouillabaisse" label="bouillabaisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q271555" start="21658" end="21665" title="biryani" label="biryani"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="21812" end="21815" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q91413" start="21839" end="21852" title="San Gimignano" label="San Gimignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q156625" start="21889" end="21898" title="safflower" label="safflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q425902" start="22013" end="22020" title="annatto" label="annatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="22026" end="22034" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="22067" end="22082" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="22213" end="22226" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="22240" end="22247" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002583" start="22278" end="22288" title="tablespoon" label="tablespoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="22367" end="22376" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="22402" end="22413" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="22427" end="22440" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="22712" end="22720" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q424767" start="23000" end="23006" title="crocin" label="crocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714546" start="23008" end="23016" title="crocetin" label="crocetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424919" start="23022" end="23030" title="safranal" label="safranal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="23094" end="23111" title="mental depression" label="mental depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="23185" end="23196" title="Risk factor (epidemiology)" label="risk factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="23206" end="23226" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="23433" end="23441" title="triploid" label="triploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q291315" start="23456" end="23478" title="Crocus cartwrightianus" label="Crocus cartwrightianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="23601" end="23608" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q556360" start="23836" end="23853" title="Crocus ancyrensis" label="Crocus ancyrensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264027" start="24112" end="24130" title="Crocus longiflorus" label="Crocus longiflorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="24687" end="24699" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059595" start="25045" end="25058" title="Minoan palace" label="Minoan palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903489" start="25218" end="25238" title="Crocus haussknechtii" label="Crocus haussknechtii"/>
<link wikidata="Q131416" start="25262" end="25269" title="Derbent" label="Derbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="25271" end="25278" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="25284" end="25292" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="25703" end="25722" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="26525" end="26533" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="26560" end="26569" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q909115" start="26718" end="26725" title="Gamboge" label="Gamboge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933270" start="26948" end="26967" title="Shennong Bencaojing" label="Shennong Bencaojing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056696" start="27058" end="27069" title="Yan Emperor" label="Yan Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313336" start="27084" end="27092" title="Shennong" label="Shennong"/>
<link wikidata="Q291315" start="27723" end="27745" title="Crocus cartwrightianus" label="Crocus cartwrightianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="27757" end="27764" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="27923" end="27930" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="28181" end="28185" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="28202" end="28208" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q466118" start="28230" end="28238" title="hetaerae" label="hetaerae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605029" start="28278" end="28291" title="scented water" label="scented water"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="28394" end="28409" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="28411" end="28420" title="Cleopatra VII of Egypt" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="28632" end="28638" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="28652" end="28657" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="28662" end="28666" title="Tyre (Lebanon)" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q312420" start="28679" end="28701" title="Aulus Cornelius Celsus" label="Aulus Cornelius Celsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978469" start="28784" end="28796" title="mithridatium" label="mithridatium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25066972" start="28887" end="28895" title="jusselle" label="jusselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q924164" start="28900" end="28908" title="conditum" label="conditum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="29021" end="29025" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="29243" end="29250" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="29403" end="29414" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="29447" end="29457" title="medicament" label="medicament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137949" start="29674" end="29685" title="Saffron War" label="Saffron War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="29773" end="29778" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="29832" end="29841" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819337" start="30208" end="30219" title="Gribshunden" label="Gribshunden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="30576" end="30581" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q183329" start="30590" end="30604" title="Saffron Walden" label="Saffron Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q672023" start="30940" end="30960" title="Schwenkfelder Church" label="Schwenkfelder Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="31067" end="31085" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="31691" end="31721" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="31774" end="31785" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="31836" end="31855" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q131584" start="32066" end="32077" title="Papaver somniferum" label="opium poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866610" start="32182" end="32232" title="Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock" label="Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53335" wikidata="Q205764" url="?curid=53335" title="Endometriosis">
<text>Endometriosis is a disease in which cells like those in the endometrium, the layer of tissue that normally covers the inside of the uterus, grow outside the uterus. It occurs in humans and a limited number of menstruating mammals. Endometrial tissue most often grows on or around reproductive organs such as the ovaries and fallopian tubes, on the outside surface of the uterus, or on the tissues surrounding the uterus and the ovaries (peritoneum). It can also grow on other organs in the pelvic region like the bowels, stomach, bladder, or the cervix. Rarely, it can also occur in other parts of the body.

Symptoms can be very different from person to person, varying in range and intensity. About 25% of individuals have no symptoms, while for some it can be a debilitating disease. Common symptoms include pelvic pain, heavy and painful periods, pain with bowel movements, painful urination, pain during sexual intercourse and infertility. Nearly half of those affected have chronic pelvic pain, while 70% feel pain during menstruation. Up to half of affected individuals are infertile. Besides physical symptoms, endometriosis can have an effect on the mental health and social life of people.
Diagnosis is usually based on symptoms and medical imaging; however, a definitive diagnosis is made through laparoscopy excision for biopsy. Other causes of similar symptoms include pelvic inflammatory disease, irritable bowel syndrome, interstitial cystitis, and fibromyalgia. Endometriosis is often misdiagnosed and many patients report being incorrectly told their symptoms are trivial or normal. Patients with endometriosis see an average of seven physicians before receiving a correct diagnosis, with an average delay of 6.7 years between the onset of symptoms and surgically obtained biopsies for diagnosing the condition.
It is estimated that globally around 10% of the female population, 190 million women are affected by endometriosis. Ethnic differences have been observed in endometriosis, as Southeast Asian and East Asian women are significantly more likely than White women to be diagnosed with endometriosis.
The exact cause of endometriosis is not known. Possible causes include problems with menstrual period flow, genetic factors, hormones, and problems with the immune system. Endometriosis is associated with elevated levels of the female sex hormone estrogen, as well as estrogen receptor sensitivity. Estrogen exposure worsens the inflammatory symptoms of endometriosis by stimulating an immune response.
While there is no cure for endometriosis, several treatments may improve symptoms. This may include pain medication, hormonal treatments or surgery. The recommended pain medication is usually a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), such as naproxen. Taking the active component of the birth control pill continuously or using an intrauterine device with progestogen may also be useful. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH agonist) may improve the ability of those who are infertile to conceive. Surgical removal of endometriosis may be used to treat those whose symptoms are not manageable with other treatments. Surgeons use ablation or excision to remove endometriosis lesions. Excision is the most complete treatment for endometriosis, as it involves cutting out the lesions, as opposed to ablation, which is the burning of the lesions, which leaves no samples for biopsy to confirm endometriosis.

==Signs and symptoms==
Pain and infertility are common symptoms, although 20–25% of affected women are asymptomatic. Presence of pain symptoms are associated with the type of endometrial lesions as 50% of women with typical lesions, 10% of women with cystic ovarian lesions, and 5% of women with deep endometriosis do not have pain.

===Pelvic pain===
A major symptom of endometriosis is recurring pelvic pain. The pain can range from mild to severe cramping or stabbing pain that occurs on both sides of the pelvis, in the lower back and rectal area, and even down the legs. The amount of pain a person feels correlates weakly with the extent or stage (1 through 4) of endometriosis, with some individuals having little or no pain despite having extensive endometriosis or endometriosis with scarring, while others may have severe pain even though they have only a few small areas of endometriosis. The most severe pain is typically associated with menstruation. Pain can also start a week before a menstrual period, during and even a week after a menstrual period, or it can be constant. The pain can be debilitating and result in emotional stress. Symptoms of endometriosis-related pain may include:
* Dysmenorrhea (64%) – painful, sometimes disabling cramps during the menstrual period; pain may get worse over time (progressive pain), also lower back pains linked to the pelvis
* Chronic pelvic pain – typically accompanied by lower back pain or abdominal pain
* Dyspareunia – painful sexual intercourse
* Dysuria – urinary urgency, frequency, and sometimes painful voiding
* Mittelschmerz – pain associated with ovulation
* Bodily movement pain – present during exercise, standing, or walking

Compared with patients with superficial endometriosis, those with deep disease appear to be more likely to report shooting rectal pain and a sense of their insides being pulled down. Individual pain areas and pain intensity appear to be unrelated to the surgical diagnosis, and the area of pain unrelated to the area of endometriosis.

There are multiple causes of pain. Endometriosis lesions react to hormonal stimulation and may &quot;bleed&quot; during menstruation. The blood accumulates locally if it is not cleared shortly by the immune, circulatory, and lymphatic systems. This accumulation can lead to swelling, which triggers inflammation with the activation of cytokines, resulting in pain. Another source of pain is organ dislocation that arises from adhesion binding internal organs together. The ovaries, the uterus, the oviducts, the peritoneum, and the bladder can all be bound together. Pain triggered in this way can last throughout the menstrual cycle, not just during menstrual periods.

Additionally, endometriotic lesions can develop their own nerve supply, creating a direct and two-way interaction between lesions and the central nervous system. This interaction can produce a variety of individual differences in pain that, in some cases, become independent of the disease itself. Nerve fibers and blood vessels are thought to grow into endometriosis lesions by a process known as neuroangiogenesis.

===Infertility===

About a third of women with infertility have endometriosis. Among those with endometriosis, about 40% are infertile. The pathogenesis of infertility varies by disease stage: in early-stage disease, it is hypothesised to result from an inflammatory response that impairs various aspects of conception, whereas in later stages, distorted pelvic anatomy and adhesions contribute to impaired fertilisation.

===Other===
Bowel endometriosis may include symptoms like diarrhea, constipation, tenesmus, dyschezia, and, rarely, rectal bleeding. Other symptoms include chronic fatigue, nausea and vomiting, migraines, low-grade fevers, heavy (44%) and/or irregular periods (60%), and hypoglycemia. Endometriosis is associated with certain types of cancers, notably some types of ovarian cancer, non-Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma and brain cancer. Endometriosis is however unrelated to endometrial cancer.

Rarely, endometriosis can cause endometrium-like tissue to be found in other parts of the body. Thoracic endometriosis occurs when endometrium-like tissue implants in the lungs or pleura. Manifestations of this include coughing up blood, a collapsed lung, or bleeding into the pleural space. Endometriosis may also affect the nearby colon which in rare situations may progress to partial obstruction requiring emergency surgery.

Stress may be a contributing factor or a consequence of endometriosis.

===Complications===

==== Physical health ====
Complications of endometriosis include internal scarring, adhesions, pelvic cysts, ovarian chocolate cysts, ruptured cysts, and bowel and ureter obstruction resulting from pelvic adhesions. Endometriosis-associated infertility may result from scar formation and anatomical distortions caused by the condition.

Ovarian endometriosis may complicate pregnancy through decidualization, abscess formation and/or rupture.

Thoracic endometriosis can be associated with recurrent thoracic endometriosis syndrome which manifests during menstrual periods. It includes catamenial pneumothorax in 73% of women, catamenial hemothorax in 14%, catamenial hemoptysis in 7%, and pulmonary nodules in 6%.

A 20-year study involving 12,000 women with endometriosis found that individuals under 40 are three times more likely to develop heart problems compared to their healthy peers.

A study indicated that 39% of women with surgically confirmed non-graded endometriosis had a 270% higher risk for ectopic pregnancy and a 76% higher risk for miscarriage compared to their peers. For women with deep endometriosis (&gt;5 mm invasion, ASRM Stage II and higher), the risk of miscarriage increased by 298%.

Women with endometriosis also face a significantly increased risk of experiencing ante- and postpartum hemorrhage as well as a 170% increased risk of severe pre-eclampsia during pregnancy.

Endometriosis slightly increases the risk (about 1% or less) of developing ovarian, breast and thyroid cancers compared to women without the condition.

The mortality rates associated with endometriosis are low, with unadjusted and age-standardized death rates of 0.1 and 0.0 per 100,000, respectively.

Sciatic endometriosis also called catamenial or cyclical sciatica, is a rare form where endometriosis affects the sciatic nerve. Diagnosis is usually confirmed through MRI or CT-myelography.

Endometriosis can also impact a woman&#x27;s fetus or neonate, increasing the risks for congenital malformations, preterm delivery and higher neonatal death rates.

Endometriosis can lead to ovarian cysts (endometriomas), adhesions, and damage to the fallopian tubes or ovaries, all of which can interfere with ovulation and fertilization. Treatment for endometriosis often includes hormonal therapies, pain management, and in some cases, surgery to remove the endometrial tissue. For women who struggle with infertility due to endometriosis, assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) may be recommended, sometimes in combination with surgical treatment to improve fertility outcomes.

==== Mental health ====
&quot;Endometriosis is associated with an elevated risk of developing depression and anxiety disorders&quot;. Studies suggest this is partially due to the pelvic pain experienced by endometriosis patients. 
Mental health concerns like depression and anxiety can also result due to poor diagnostic procedures related to cultural norms where women&#x27;s concerns are devalued or ignored, especially by medical professionals.

==Risk factors==
===Genetics===
Endometriosis is a heritable condition influenced by both genetic and environmental factors, a genetic disorder of polygenic/multifactorial inheritance acquired via affected genes from either a person&#x27;s father or mother. For example, children or siblings of women with endometriosis are at higher risk of developing endometriosis themselves; low progesterone levels may be genetic, and may contribute to a hormone imbalance. Individuals with an affected first-degree relative have an approximate six-fold increase incidence of endometriosis.

Inheritance is significant, but not the sole risk factor for endometriosis. Studies attribute 50% of risk to genetics, the other 50% likely to environmental factors. It has been proposed that endometriosis may result from a series of multiple mutations, within target genes, in a mechanism similar to the development of cancer. In this case, the mutations may be either somatic or heritable.

A 2019 genome-wide association study (GWAS) review enumerated 36 genes with mutations associated with endometriosis development. Nine chromosome loci were robustly replicated:

There are many findings of altered gene expression and epigenetics, but both of these can also be a secondary result of, for example, environmental factors and altered metabolism. Examples of altered gene expression include that of miRNAs.

===Environmental toxins===

Some factors associated with endometriosis include:
* Prolonged exposure to naturally synthesized estrogen; for example, from late menopause or early menarche
* Obstruction of menstrual outflow; for example, in Müllerian anomalies

Potential toxins:
* Dioxins- Several studies have investigated the potential link between exposure to dioxins and endometriosis, but evidence is equivocal and potential mechanisms are poorly understood. A 2004 review of studies of dioxin and endometriosis concluded that &quot;the human data supporting the dioxin-endometriosis association are scanty and conflicting&quot;, and a 2009 follow-up review also found that there was &quot;insufficient evidence&quot; in support of a link between dioxin exposure and developing endometriosis.
* Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs)- A wider class of hormonally active agents, to which dioxin belongs, consists of both natural and manmade compounds, e.g., bisphenols, phthalates, pesticides (chlorpyrifos, hexachlorobenzene) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Dietary uptake represents a significant source of EDC exposure via consumption of food, water and beverages, but exposure can also occur through ingestion of EDC dust and inhalation of its gases or particles in the air. Most EDCs are lipophilic, allowing them to bioaccumulate in adipose tissue (body fat) and increase in concentration. Bisphenol A (BPA), bisphenol S (BPS), phthalates, pesticides and PCBs all have a suspected linkage to endometriosis, though have not been definitively proven as being causative.

=== Vaginal dysbiosis ===
A growing body of evidence has shown a correlation between an imbalance in the vaginal microbiome and the appearance of endometriosis. This correlation is mediated by an immune system overload in the context of retrograde menstruation, in which it fails to detect and kill cells that come outside of the vaginal environment. By disrupting normal immune function, dysbiosis leads to elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines, a compromised immunosurveillance system and altered immune cell profiles. Indeed, the activation of Toll-like receptors in macrophages leads to a greater activity of this immune cell type. They, in turn, secrete factors (such as the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 8) that help create an inflammatory environment, ultimately favoring the proliferation and adhesion of endometrial cells.

==Pathophysiology==

While the exact cause of endometriosis remains unknown, many theories have been presented to better understand and explain its development. These concepts do not necessarily exclude each other. The pathophysiology of endometriosis is likely to be multifactorial and to involve an interplay between several factors.

===Formation===
The main theories for the formation of the ectopic endometrium-like tissue include retrograde menstruation, Müllerianosis, coelomic metaplasia, vascular dissemination of stem cells, and surgical transplantation were postulated as early as 1870. Each is further described below.

====Retrograde menstruation theory====
The theory of retrograde menstruation (also called the &quot;implantation theory&quot; or &quot;transplantation theory&quot;) is the most commonly accepted theory for the dissemination and transformation of ectopic endometrium into endometriosis. It suggests that during a woman&#x27;s menstrual flow, some of the endometrial debris flow backward through the fallopian tubes and into the peritoneal cavity, attaching itself to the peritoneal surface (the lining of the abdominal cavity) where it can proceed to invade the tissue as or transform into endometriosis. It is not clear at what stage the transformation of endometrium, or any cell of origin such as stem cells or coelomic cells (see those theories below), to endometriosis begins.

Proofs in support of the theory are based on retrospective epidemiological studies that an association with endometrial implants attached to the peritoneal cavity, which would develop into endometrial lesions and retrograde menstruation; and the fact that animals like rodents and non-human primates whose endometrium is not shed during the estrous cycle don&#x27;t develop naturally endometriosis contrary to animals that have a natural menstrual cycle like rhesus monkeys and baboons.

Retrograde menstruation alone is not able to explain all instances of endometriosis, and additional factors such as genetics, immunology, stem cell migration, and coelomic metaplasia (see &quot;Other theories&quot; on this page) are needed to account for disseminated disease and why many individuals with retrograde menstruation are not diagnosed with endometriosis. In addition, endometriosis has shown up in people who have never experienced menstruation including cisgender men, fetuses, and prepubescent girls. Further theoretical additions are needed to complement the retrograde menstruation theory to explain why cases of endometriosis show up in the brain and lungs.

Researchers are investigating the possibility that the immune system may not be able to cope with the cyclic onslaught of retrograde menstrual fluid. In this context there is interest in studying the relationship of endometriosis to autoimmune disease, allergic reactions, and the impact of toxic materials. It is still unclear what, if any, causal relationship exists between toxic materials or autoimmune disease and endometriosis. There are immune system changes in people with endometriosis, such as an increase of macrophage-derived secretion products, but it is unknown if these are contributing to the disorder or are reactions from it.

Endometriotic lesions differ in their biochemistry, hormonal response, immunology, inflammatory response when compared to endometrium. This is likely because the cells that give rise to endometriosis are a side population of cells. Similarly, there are changes in, for example, the mesothelium of the peritoneum in people with endometriosis, such as loss of tight junctions, but it is unknown if these are causes or effects of the disorder.

In rare cases where imperforate hymen does not resolve itself prior to the first menstrual cycle and goes undetected, blood and endometrium are trapped within the uterus until such time as the problem is resolved by surgical incision. Many health care practitioners never encounter this defect, and due to the flu-like symptoms it is often misdiagnosed or overlooked until multiple menstrual cycles have passed. By the time a correct diagnosis has been made, endometrium and other fluids have filled the uterus and Fallopian tubes with results similar to retrograde menstruation resulting in endometriosis. The initial stage of endometriosis may vary based on the time elapsed between onset and surgical procedure.

The theory of retrograde menstruation as a cause of endometriosis was first proposed by John A. Sampson.

====Other theories====
* Stem cells: Endometriosis may arise from stem cells from bone marrow and potentially other sources. In particular, this theory explains endometriosis found in areas remote from the pelvis such as the brain or lungs. Stem cells may be from local cells such as the peritoneum (see coelomic metaplasia below) or cells disseminated in the blood stream (see vascular dissemination below) such as those from the bone marrow.
* Vascular dissemination: Vascular dissemination is a 1927 theory that has been revived with new studies of bone-marrow stem cells involved in pathogenesis.
* Environment: Environmental toxins (e.g., dioxin, nickel) may cause endometriosis. Toxins such as dioxins and dioxin-like compounds tend to bioaccumulate within the human body. Further research is needed but &quot;it is plausible that inflammatory-like processes, caused by dioxin-like environmental chemicals, can alter normal endometrial and immune cell physiology allowing persistence and development of endometrial tissue within the peritoneal cavity, normally cleared by immune system cells&quot;.
* Müllerianosis: A theory supported by foetal autopsy is that cells with the potential to become endometrial, which are laid down in tracts during embryonic development called the female reproductive (Müllerian) tract as it migrates downward at 8–10 weeks of embryonic life, could become dislocated from the migrating uterus and act like seeds or stem cells.
* Coelomic metaplasia: Coelomic cells which are the common ancestor of endometrial and peritoneal cells may undergo metaplasia (transformation) from one type of cell to the other, perhaps triggered by inflammation.
* Vasculogenesis: Up to 37% of the microvascular endothelium of ectopic endometrial tissue originates from endothelial progenitor cells, which result in &quot;de novo&quot; formation of microvessels by the process of vasculogenesis rather than the conventional process of angiogenesis.
* Neural growth: An increased expression of new nerve fibres is found in endometriosis but does not fully explain the formation of ectopic endometriotic tissue and is not definitely correlated with the amount of perceived pain.
* Autoimmune: Graves disease is an autoimmune disease characterized by hyperthyroidism, goiter, ophthalmopathy, and dermopathy. People with endometriosis had higher rates of Graves disease. One of these potential links between Graves disease and endometriosis is autoimmunity.
* Oxidative stress: Influx of iron is associated with the local destruction of the peritoneal mesothelium, leading to the adhesion of ectopic endometriotic cells. Peritoneal iron overload has been suggested to be caused by the destruction of erythrocytes, which contain the iron-binding protein hemoglobin, or a deficiency in the peritoneal iron metabolism system. Oxidative stress activity and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (such as superoxide anions and peroxide levels) are reported to be higher than normal in people with endometriosis. Oxidative stress and the presence of excess ROS can damage tissue and induce rapid cellular division. Mechanistically, there are several cellular pathways by which oxidative stress may lead to or may induce proliferation of endometriotic lesions, including the mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway and the extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) pathway. Activation of both of the MAP and ERK pathways lead to increased levels of c-Fos and c-Jun, which are proto-oncogenes that are associated with high-grade lesions.

===Localization===
Most often, endometriosis is found on the:
* Ovaries
* Fallopian tubes
* Tissues that hold the uterus in place (ligaments)
* Outer surface of the uterus
Less common pelvic sites are:
* Vagina
* Cervix
* Vulva
* Bowel
* Bladder
* Rectum

Endometriosis may spread to the cervix and vagina or to sites of a surgical abdominal incision, known as &quot;scar endometriosis.&quot; Rectovaginal or bowel endometriosis affects approximately 5-12% of those with endometriosis, and can cause severe pain with bowel movements.

Deep infiltrating endometriosis (DIE) has been defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma infiltrating more than 5 mm in the subperitoneal tissue. The prevalence of DIE is estimated to be 1 to 2% in women of reproductive age. Deep endometriosis typically presents as a single nodule in the vesicouterine fold or in the lower 20 cm of the bowel. Deep endometriosis can be associated with severe pain. However, it can be present without severe levels of pain.

====Male endometriosis====
Endometriosis has been reported in people assigned male at birth. Prostate endometriosis has been reported following estrogen therapy for prostate cancer and feminizing hormone therapy.

Abdominal endometriosis also happens in men following cirrhosis.

====Extrapelvic endometriosis====
Rarely, endometriosis appears in extrapelvic parts of the body, such as the lungs, brain, and skin. &quot;Scar endometriosis&quot; can occur in surgical abdominal incisions. Risk factors for scar endometriosis include previous abdominal surgeries, such as a hysterotomy or cesarean section, or ectopic pregnancies, salpingostomy puerperal sterilization, laparoscopy, amniocentesis, appendectomy, episiotomy, vaginal hysterectomies, and hernia repair.

Endometriosis may also present with skin lesions in cutaneous endometriosis.

Less commonly lesions can be found on the diaphragm or lungs. Diaphragmatic endometriosis is rare, almost always on the right hemidiaphragm, and may inflict the cyclic pain of the right scapula (shoulder) or cervical area (neck) during a menstrual period. Pulmonary endometriosis can be associated with a thoracic endometriosis syndrome that can include catamenial (occurs during menstruation) pneumothorax seen in 73% of women with the syndrome, catamenial hemothorax in 14%, catamenial hemoptysis in 7%, and pulmonary nodules in 6%.

==Diagnosis==
A health history and a physical examination can lead the health care practitioner to suspect endometriosis. There is a clear benefit for performing a transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) as a first step of testing for endometriosis.

Definitive diagnosis is based on the morphology (form and structure) of the pelvic region, determined by observation (surgical or non-invasive imaging), classified into four different stages of endometriosis. The American Society of Reproductive Medicine&#x27;s scale, revised in 1996, gives higher scores to deep, thick lesions or intrusions on the ovaries and dense, enveloping adhesions on the ovaries or fallopian tubes. Additionally, histological studies, when performed, should show specific findings.

For many patients, there are significant delays in diagnosis. Studies show an average delay of 11.7 years in the United States. Patients in the UK have an average delay of 8 years and in Norway of 6.7 years. A third of women had consulted their GP six or more times before being diagnosed.

The most common sites of endometriosis are the ovaries, followed by the Douglas pouch, the posterior leaves of the broad ligaments, and the sacrouterine ligaments.

As for deep infiltrating endometriosis, TVUS, TRUS and MRI are the techniques of choice for non-invasive diagnosis with a high sensitivity and specificity.

===Laparoscopy===

Laparoscopy, a surgical procedure where a camera is used to look inside the abdominal cavity, is the only way to accurately diagnose the extent and severity of pelvic/abdominal endometriosis. Laparoscopy is not an applicable test for extrapelvic sites such as umbilicus, hernia sacs, abdominal wall, lung, or kidneys.

Reviews in 2019 and 2020 concluded that 1) with advances in imaging, endometriosis diagnosis should no longer be considered synonymous with immediate laparoscopy for diagnosis, and 2) endometriosis should be classified a syndrome that requires confirmation of visible lesions seen at laparoscopy in addition to characteristic symptoms.

Laparoscopy permits lesion visualization unless the lesion is visible externally (e.g., an endometriotic nodule in the vagina) or is extra-abdominal. If the growths (lesions) are not visible, a biopsy must be taken to determine the diagnosis. Surgery for diagnoses also allows for surgical treatment of endometriosis at the same time.

During a laparoscopic procedure, lesions can appear dark blue, powder-burn black, red, white, yellow, brown or non-pigmented. Lesions vary in size. Some within the pelvis walls may not be visible, as normal-appearing peritoneum of infertile women reveals endometriosis on biopsy in 6–13% of cases. Early endometriosis typically occurs on the surfaces of organs in the pelvic and intra-abdominal areas. Health care providers may call areas of endometriosis by different names, such as implants, lesions, or nodules. Larger lesions may be seen within the ovaries as endometriomas or &quot;chocolate cysts&quot;, &quot;chocolate&quot; because they contain a thick brownish fluid, mostly old blood.

Frequently during diagnostic laparoscopy, no lesions are found in individuals with chronic pelvic pain, a symptom common to other disorders including adenomyosis, pelvic adhesions, pelvic inflammatory disease, congenital anomalies of the reproductive tract, and ovarian or tubal masses.

=== Ultrasound ===
Vaginal ultrasound can be used to diagnosis endometriosis, or for localizing endometrioma before surgery. This can be used to identify the spread of disease in individuals with well-established clinical suspicion of endometriosis. Vaginal ultrasound is inexpensive, easily accessible, has no contraindications and requires no preparation. By extending the ultrasound assessment into the posterior and anterior pelvic compartments a sonographer is able to evaluate structural mobility and look for deep infiltrating endometriotic nodules. Better sonographic detection of deep infiltrating endometriosis could reduce the number of diagnostic laparoscopies, as well as guide disease management and enhance patient quality of life.

=== Magnetic resonance imaging ===
MRI is another means of detecting lesions in a non-invasive manner. MRI is not widely used due to its cost and limited availability, although it can be used to detect the most common form of endometriosis (endometrioma) with a sufficient accuracy. A 2020 article recommended administering an anti-spasmodic agent (i.e. hyoscine butylbromide) and a big glass of water (if the bladder is empty), and scanning in the supine position with an abdominal strap, for better image quality. It also recommended using pelvic-phased array coils and T1 (spin-lattice) weighted scanning, with and without suppression of fat for endometriomas, and sagittal, axial and oblique 2D T2 (spin-spin) weighting for deep infiltrating endometriosis. 

===Stages of disease===
By surgical observation, endometriosis can be classified as stage I–IV by the 1996 scale of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine (ASRM). The scale uses a point system that assesses lesions and adhesions in the pelvic organs. It is important to note that staging assesses physical disease only, not the level of pain or infertility. A person with Stage I endometriosis may have a little disease and severe pain, while a person with Stage IV endometriosis may have severe disease and no pain or vice versa. The various stages are summarized by:

Stage I (Minimal)
: Findings restricted to only superficial lesions and possibly a few filmy adhesions.
Stage II (Mild)
: In addition, some deep lesions are present in the cul-de-sac.
Stage III (Moderate)
: As above, plus the presence of endometriomas on the ovary and more adhesions.
Stage IV (Severe)
: As above, plus large endometriomas, extensive adhesions. Implants and adhesions may be found beyond the uterus. Large ovarian cysts are common.

===Markers===
An area of research is the search for endometriosis markers.

In 2010, essentially all proposed biomarkers for endometriosis were of unclear medical use, although some appear to be promising. The one biomarker that has been in use over the last 20 years is CA-125. A 2016 review found that this biomarker was present in those with symptoms of endometriosis; and, once ovarian cancer has been ruled out, a positive CA-125 may confirm the diagnosis. Its performance in ruling out endometriosis is low. CA-125 levels appear to fall during endometriosis treatment, but it has not shown a correlation with disease response.

Another review in 2011 identified several putative biomarkers upon biopsy, including findings of small sensory nerve fibers or defectively expressed β3 integrin subunit. It has been postulated a future diagnostic tool for endometriosis will consist of a panel of several specific and sensitive biomarkers, including both substance concentrations and genetic predisposition.

A 2016 review of endometrial biomarkers for diagnosing endometriosis was unable to draw conclusions due to the low quality of the evidence.

MicroRNAs have the potential to be used in diagnostic and therapeutic decisions.

===Histopathology===
For a histopathological diagnosis, at least two of the following three criteria should be present:
* Endometrial type stroma
* Endometrial epithelium with glands
* Evidence of chronic hemorrhage, mainly hemosiderin deposits

Immunohistochemistry has been found to be useful in diagnosing endometriosis as stromal cells have a peculiar surface antigen, CD10, thus allowing the pathologist go straight to a staining area and confirm the presence of stromal cells and sometimes glandular tissue is identified that was missed on routine H&amp;E staining.

===Pain quantification===
The most common pain scale for quantification of endometriosis-related pain is the visual analogue scale (VAS); VAS and numerical rating scale (NRS) were the best adapted pain scales for pain measurement in endometriosis. For research purposes, and for more detailed pain measurement in clinical practice, VAS or NRS for each type of typical pain related to endometriosis (dysmenorrhea, deep dyspareunia and non-menstrual chronic pelvic pain), combined with the clinical global impression (CGI) and a quality of life scale, are used.

==Prevention==
Limited evidence indicates that the use of combined oral contraceptives is associated with a reduced risk of endometriosis, as is regular exercise and the avoidance of alcohol and caffeine. There is little known information on preventing endometriosis.

==Management==
While there is no cure for endometriosis, there are treatments for pain and endometriosis-associated infertility. Pain can be treated with hormones, painkillers or, in severe cases, surgery.

In most cases, the symptoms disappear or improve with menopause (natural or surgical). In the reproductive years, endometriosis is merely managed: the goal is to provide pain relief, to restrict progression of the process, and to restore or preserve fertility where needed. In younger individuals, some surgical treatment attempts to remove endometriotic tissue and preserve the ovaries without damaging normal tissue.

Pharmacotherapy for pain management can be initiated based on the presence of symptoms and examination and ultrasound findings that rule out other potential causes.

In general, the diagnosis of endometriosis is confirmed during surgery, at which time removal can be performed. Further steps depend on circumstances: someone without infertility can manage symptoms with pain medication and hormonal medication that suppresses the natural cycle, while an infertile individual may be treated expectantly after surgery, with fertility medication, or with in vitro fertilisation (IVF).

A 2020 Cochrane systematic review found that for all types of endometriosis, &quot;it is uncertain whether laparoscopic surgery improves overall pain compared to diagnostic laparoscopy&quot;.

===Surgery===
Based on strong evidence, experts recommend that surgery be performed laparoscopically (through keyhole surgery) rather than open. Treatment consists of the ablation or excision of the endometriosis, electrocoagulation, lysis of adhesions, resection of endometriomas, and restoration of normal pelvic anatomy as much as is possible. When laparoscopic surgery is used, small instruments are inserted through the incisions to remove the endometriosis tissue and adhesions. Because the incisions are very small, there will only be small scars on the skin after the procedure, and most individuals recover from surgery quickly and have a reduced risk of adhesions. Many endometriosis specialists believe that excision is the ideal surgical method to treat endometriosis. A 2017 literature review found excision improved some outcomes over ablation. In the United States, some specialists trained in excision for endometriosis do not accept health insurance, because insurance companies do not reimburse the higher costs of this procedure over ablation.

As for deep endometriosis, a segmental resection or shaving of nodules is effective but is associated with an increased rate of complications, of which about 4.6% are major.

Historically, a hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) was thought to be a cure for endometriosis in individuals who do not wish to conceive. Removal of the uterus may be beneficial as part of the treatment, if the uterus itself is affected by adenomyosis. However, this should only be done in combination with removal of the endometriosis by excision. If endometriosis is not also removed at the time of hysterectomy, pain may persist. A study of hysterectomy patients found those with endometriosis were not using less pain medication 3 years after the procedure.

Presacral neurectomy may be performed where the nerves to the uterus are cut. However, this technique is not usually used due to the high incidence of associated complications including presacral hematoma and irreversible problems with urination and constipation.

====Recurrence====
The underlying process that causes endometriosis may not cease after a surgical or medical intervention. Even though surgery can improve symptoms, the resurgence of pain is common. A study has shown that dysmenorrhea recurs at a rate of 30 percent within a year following laparoscopic surgery. Resurgence of lesions tend to appear in the same location if the lesions were not completely removed during surgery. It has been shown that laser ablation resulted in higher and earlier recurrence rates when compared with endometrioma cystectomy; and recurrence after repetitive laparoscopy was similar to that after the first surgery. Endometriosis has a 10% recurrence rate after hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.

Endometriosis recurrence following conservative surgery is estimated as 21.5% at 2 years and 40-50% at 5 years.

Recurrence rate for DIE after surgery is less than 1%.

====Risks and safety of pelvic surgery====
Risk of developing complications following surgery depend on the type of the lesion that has undergone surgery. 55% to 100% of individuals develop adhesions following pelvic surgery, which can result in infertility, chronic abdominal and pelvic pain, and difficult reoperative surgery. Trehan&#x27;s temporary ovarian suspension, a technique in which the ovaries are suspended for a week after surgery, may be used to reduce the incidence of adhesions after endometriosis surgery. Removal of cysts on the ovary without removing the ovary is a safe procedure.

===Hormonal medications===
* Hormonal birth control therapy: Birth control pills reduce the menstrual pain and recurrence rate for endometrioma following conservative surgery for endometriosis. A 2018 Cochrane systematic review found that there is insufficient evidence to make a judgement on the effectiveness of the combined oral contraceptive pill compared with placebo or other medical treatment for managing pain associated with endometriosis partly because of lack of included studies for data analysis (only two for COCP vs placebo).
* Progestogens: Progesterone counteracts estrogen and inhibits the growth of the endometrium. Danazol and gestrinone are suppressive steroids with some androgenic activity. Both agents inhibit the growth of endometriosis but their use has declined, due in part to virilizing side effects such as excessive hair growth and voice changes. There is tentative evidence based on cohort studies that dienogest and norethisterone acetate (NETA) may help patients with DIE in terms of pain. There is tentative evidence based on a prospective study that vaginal danazol reduces pain in those affected by DIE.
* Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) modulators: These drugs include GnRH agonists such as leuprorelin and GnRH antagonists such as elagolix and are thought to work by decreasing estrogen levels. A 2010 Cochrane review found that GnRH modulators were more effective for pain relief in endometriosis than no treatment or placebo, but were not more effective than danazol or intrauterine progestogen, and had more side effects than danazol. A 2018 Swedish systematic review found that GnRH modulators had similar pain-relieving effects to gestagen, but also decreased bone density.
* Aromatase inhibitors are medications that block the formation of estrogen and have become of interest for researchers who are treating endometriosis. Examples of aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole and letrozole. Evidence for aromatase inhibitors is confirmed by numerous controlled studies that show benefit in terms of pain control and quality of life when used in combination with gestagens or oral contraceptives with less side-effects when used in combination with oral contraceptives like norethisterone acetate. Despite multiple benefits, there are lot of things to consider before using aromatase inhibitors for endometriosis, as it is common for them to induce functional cysts as an adverse effects. Moreover, dosages, treatment length, appropriate add-back therapies and mode of administration is still being investigated.
* Progesterone receptor modulators like mifepristone and gestrinone have the potential (based on only one randomized controlled trial each) to be used as a treatment to manage pain caused by endometriosis.

===Other medicines===
* Melatonin, there is tentative evidence for its use (at a dose of 10 mg) in reducing pain related to endometriosis.
*Vitamin C and E antioxidant supplementation may significantly reduce pain symptoms in endometriosis.
* Opioids: Morphine sulphate tablets and other opioid painkillers work by mimicking the action of naturally occurring pain-reducing chemicals called &quot;endorphins&quot;. There are different long acting and short acting medications that can be used alone or in combination to provide appropriate pain control.
* Chinese herbal medicine was reported to have comparable benefits to gestrinone and danazol in patients who had had laparoscopic surgery, though the review notes that the two trials were small and of &quot;poor methodological quality&quot; and results should be &quot;interpreted cautiously&quot; as better quality research is needed.
* Serrapeptase, a digestive enzyme found in the intestines of silkworms. Serrapeptase is widely used in Japan and Europe as an anti-inflammatory treatment. More research is needed but serrapeptase may be used by endometriosis patients to reduce inflammation.
* Angiogenesis inhibitors lack clinical evidence of efficacy in endometriosis therapy. Under experimental &quot;in vitro&quot; and &quot;in vivo&quot; conditions, compounds that have been shown to exert inhibitory effects on endometriotic lesions include growth factor inhibitors, endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors, fumagillin analogues, statins, cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors, phytochemical compounds, immunomodulators, dopamine agonists, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists, progestins, danazol and gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists. However, many of these agents are associated with undesirable side effects and more research is necessary. An ideal therapy would diminish inflammation and underlying symptoms without being contraceptive.
* Pentoxifylline, an immunomodulating agent, has been theorized to improve pain as well as improve pregnancy rates in individuals with endometriosis. There is not enough evidence to support the effectiveness or safety of either of these uses. Current American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines do not include immunomodulators, such as pentoxifylline, in standard treatment protocols.
* NSAIDs are anti-inflammatory medications commonly used for endometriosis patients despite unproven efficacy and unintended adverse effects.
* Neuromodulators like gabapentin did not prove to be superior to placebo in managing pain caused by endometriosis.

The overall effectiveness of manual physical therapy to treat endometriosis has not yet been identified.

===Comparison of interventions===
A 2021 meta-analysis found that GnRH analogues and combined hormonal contraceptives were the best treatment for reducing dyspareunia, menstrual and non menstrual pelvic pain. A 2018 Swedish systematic review found a large number of studies but a general lack of scientific evidence for most treatments. There was only one study of sufficient quality and relevance comparing the effect of surgery and non-surgery. Cohort studies indicate that surgery is effective in decreasing pain. Most complications occurred in cases of low intestinal anastomosis, while risk of fistula occurred in cases of combined abdominal or vaginal surgery, and urinary tract problems were common in intestinal surgery. The evidence was found to be insufficient regarding surgical intervention.

The advantages of physical therapy techniques are decreased cost, absence of major side-effects, it does not interfere with fertility, and near-universal increase of sexual function. Disadvantages are that there are no large or long-term studies of its use for treating pain or infertility related to endometriosis.

===Treatment of infertility===
Surgery is more effective than medicinal intervention for addressing infertility associated with endometriosis. Surgery attempts to remove endometrium-like tissue and preserve the ovaries without damaging normal tissue. Receiving hormonal suppression therapy after surgery might be positive regarding endometriosis recurrence and pregnancy. In-vitro fertilization (IVF) procedures are effective in improving fertility in many individuals with endometriosis.

During fertility treatment, the ultralong pretreatment with GnRH-agonist has a higher chance of resulting in pregnancy for individuals with endometriosis, compared to the short pretreatment.

==Epidemiology==
Determining how many people have endometriosis is challenging because definitive diagnosis requires surgical visualization through laparoscopic surgery. Criteria that are commonly used to establish a diagnosis include pelvic pain, infertility, surgical assessment, and in some cases, magnetic resonance imaging. An ultrasound can identify large clumps of tissue as potential endometriosis lesions and ovarian cysts but it is not effective for all patients, especially in cases with smaller, superficial lesions.

Ethnic differences in endometriosis have been observed. The condition is more common in women of East Asian and Southeast Asian descent than in White women. Risk factors include having a family history of the condition.

One estimate is that 10.8 million people are affected globally . Other sources estimate 6 to 10% of the general female population and 2 to 11% of asymptomatic women are affected. In addition, 11% of women in a general population have undiagnosed endometriosis that can be seen on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Endometriosis is most common in those in their thirties and forties; however, it can begin in girls as early as eight years old. It results in few deaths with unadjusted and age-standardized death rates of 0.1 and 0.0 per 100,000. Endometriosis was first determined to be a separate condition in the 1920s. Before that time, endometriosis and adenomyosis were considered together. It is unclear who first described the disease.

It chiefly affects adults from premenarche to postmenopause, regardless of race or ethnicity or whether or not they have had children and is estimated to affect over 190 million women in their reproductive years. Incidences of endometriosis have occurred in postmenopausal individuals, and in less common cases, individuals may have had endometriosis symptoms before they even reach menarche.

The rate of recurrence of endometriosis is estimated to be 40-50% for adults over a 5-year period. The rate of recurrence has been shown to increase with time from surgery and is not associated with the stage of the disease, initial site, surgical method used, or post-surgical treatment.

==History==
Endometriosis was first discovered microscopically by Karl von Rokitansky in 1860, although the earliest antecedents may have stemmed from concepts published almost 4,000 years ago. The Hippocratic Corpus outlines symptoms similar to endometriosis, including uterine ulcers, adhesions, and infertility. Historically, women with these symptoms were treated with leeches, straitjackets, bloodletting, chemical douches, genital mutilation, pregnancy (as a form of treatment), hanging upside down, surgical intervention, and even killing due to suspicion of demonic possession. Hippocratic doctors recognized and treated chronic pelvic pain as a true organic disorder 2,500 years ago, but during the Middle Ages, there was a shift into believing that women with pelvic pain were mad, immoral, imagining the pain, or simply misbehaving. The symptoms of inexplicable chronic pelvic pain were often attributed to imagined madness, female weakness, promiscuity, or hysteria. The historical diagnosis of hysteria, which was thought to be a psychological disease, may have indeed been endometriosis. The idea that chronic pelvic pain was related to mental illness influenced modern attitudes regarding individuals with endometriosis, leading to delays in correct diagnosis and indifference to the patients&#x27; true pain throughout the 20th and into the 21st century.

Hippocratic doctors believed that delaying childbearing could trigger diseases of the uterus, which caused endometriosis-like symptoms. Women with dysmenorrhea were encouraged to marry and have children at a young age. The fact that Hippocratics were recommending changes in marriage practices due to an endometriosis-like illness implies that this disease was likely common, with rates higher than the 5-15% prevalence that is often cited today. If indeed this disorder was so common historically, this may point away from modern theories that suggest links between endometriosis and dioxins, PCBs, and chemicals.

The early treatment of endometriosis was surgical and included oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries) and hysterectomy (removal of the uterus). In the 1940s, the only available hormonal therapies for endometriosis were high-dose testosterone and high-dose estrogen therapy. High-dose estrogen therapy with diethylstilbestrol for endometriosis was first reported by Karnaky in 1948 and was the main pharmacological treatment for the condition in the early 1950s. Pseudopregnancy (high-dose estrogen–progestogen therapy) for endometriosis was first described by Kistner in the late 1950s. Pseudopregnancy as well as progestogen monotherapy dominated the treatment of endometriosis in the 1960s and 1970s. These agents, although efficacious, were associated with intolerable side effects. Danazol was first described for endometriosis in 1971 and became the main therapy in the 1970s and 1980s. In the 1980s GnRH agonists gained prominence for the treatment of endometriosis and by the 1990s had become the most widely used therapy. Oral GnRH antagonists such as elagolix were introduced for the treatment of endometriosis in 2018.

==Society and culture==
===Public figures===
A number of public figures have spoken about their experience with endometriosis, including:

* RuthAnne
* Emma Barnett
* Emma Bunton
* Alexa Chung
* Danielle Collins
* Olivia Culpo
* Lena Dunham
* Abby Finkenauer
* Bethenny Frankel
* Whoopi Goldberg
* Mel Greig
* Halsey
* Emma Hayes
* Julianne Hough
* Bridget Hustwaite
* Bindi Irwin
* Jaime King
* Padma Lakshmi
* Cyndi Lauper
* Jillian Michaels
* Monica
* Marilyn Monroe
* Tia Mowry
* Sinéad O&#x27;Connor
* Dolly Parton
* Florence Pugh
* Daisy Ridley
* Emma Roberts
* Susan Sarandon
* Amy Schumer
* Kirsten Storms
* Gabrielle Union
* Lacey Schwimmer
* Chrissy Teigen
* Emma Watkins
* Mae Whitman
* Jessica Williams
* Leah Williamson
===Economic burden===
The economic burden of endometriosis is widespread and multifaceted. Endometriosis is a chronic disease that has direct and indirect costs which include loss of work days, direct costs of treatment, symptom management, and treatment of other associated conditions such as depression or chronic pain. One factor which seems to be associated with especially high costs is the delay between onset of symptoms and diagnosis.

Costs vary greatly between countries. Two factors that contribute to the economic burden include healthcare costs and losses in productivity. A Swedish study of 400 endometriosis patients found &quot;Absence from work was reported by 32% of the women, while 36% reported reduced time at work because of endometriosis&quot;. An additional cross sectional study with Puerto Rican women, &quot;found that endometriosis-related and coexisting symptoms disrupted all aspects of women&#x27;s daily lives, including physical limitations that affected doing household chores and paid employment. The majority of women (85%) experienced a decrease in the quality of their work; 20% reported being unable to work because of pain, and over two-thirds of the sample continued to work despite their pain.&quot; A study published in the UK in 2025 found that after women received a diagnosis of endometriosis in an English NHS hospital their earnings were on average £56 per month less in the four to five years after diagnosis than they were in the two years before. There was also a reduction in the proportion of women in employment.

===Medical culture===
There are a number of barriers that those affected face to receiving diagnosis and treatment for endometriosis. Some of these include outdated standards for laparoscopic evaluation, stigma about discussing menstruation and sex, lack of understanding of the disease, primary-care physicians&#x27; lack of knowledge, and assumptions about typical menstrual pain. On average, those later diagnosed with endometriosis waited 2.3 years after the onset of symptoms before seeking treatment and nearly three quarters of women receive a misdiagnosis prior to endometriosis. Self-help groups say practitioners delay making the diagnosis, often because they do not consider it a possibility. There is a typical delay of 7–12 years from symptom onset in affected individuals to professional diagnosis. There is a general lack of knowledge about endometriosis among primary care physicians. Half of general health care providers surveyed in a 2013 study were unable to name three symptoms of endometriosis. Health care providers are also likely to dismiss described symptoms as normal menstruation. Younger patients may also feel uncomfortable discussing symptoms with a physician.

===Race and ethnicity===
Race and ethnicity may play a role in how endometriosis affects one&#x27;s life. Endometriosis is less thoroughly studied among Black people, and the research that has been done is outdated.

Cultural differences among ethnic groups also contribute to attitudes toward and treatment of endometriosis, especially in Hispanic or Latino communities. A study done in Puerto Rico in 2020 found that health care and interactions with friends and family related to discussing endometriosis were affected by stigma. The most common finding was a referral to those expressing pain related to endometriosis as &quot;changuería&quot; or &quot;changas&quot;, terms used in Puerto Rico to describe pointless whining and complaining, often directed at children.

=== Stigma ===
The existing stigma surrounding women&#x27;s health, specifically endometriosis, can lead to patients not seeking diagnoses, lower quality of healthcare, increased barriers to care and treatment, and negative reception from members of society. Additionally, menstrual stigma significantly contributes to the broader issue of endometriosis stigma, creating an interconnected challenge that extends beyond reproductive health.
Widespread awareness campaigns, developments and implementations aimed to multilevel anti-stigma organizational and structural changes, as well as more qualitative studies of the endometriosis stigma, help to overcome the harm of the phenomenon.

== Research ==
Preliminary research on mouse models showed that monoclonal antibodies, as well as inhibitors of MyD88 downstream signaling pathway, can reduce lesion volume. Thanks to that, clinical trials are being done on using a monoclonal antibody directed against IL-33 and using anakinra, an IL-1 receptor antagonist.

Taking the contraceptive pills or getting long-acting progestogen injections seems to be equally effective for preventing recurring pain after endometriosis surgery. Compared to taking the pill, progestogen might result in reduced risk of needing further treatments or surgery.

Clinical trials are exploring the potential benefits of cannabinoid extracts, dichloroacetic acid and curcuma capsules.

== References ==

== External links ==

* Endometriosis fact sheet from the World Health Organization</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205764" start="0" end="13" title="Endometriosis" label="Endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="36" end="41" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q839508" start="60" end="71" title="endometrium" label="endometrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="86" end="92" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="132" end="138" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155666" start="209" end="228" title="menstruation (mammal)" label="menstruating mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="312" end="319" title="ovaries" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="324" end="338" title="fallopian tube" label="fallopian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q9629" start="437" end="447" title="peritoneum" label="peritoneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="513" end="519" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="bowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="521" end="528" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="530" end="537" title="bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="546" end="552" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161805" start="811" end="822" title="pelvic pain" label="pelvic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494682" start="824" end="829" title="Heavy menstrual bleeding" label="heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816422" start="834" end="849" title="Dysmenorrhea" label="painful periods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="851" end="876" title="pain with bowel movements" label="pain with bowel movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="878" end="895" title="Dysuria" label="painful urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q120395" start="897" end="927" title="Dyspareunia" label="pain during sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="932" end="943" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161805" start="980" end="999" title="chronic pelvic pain" label="chronic pelvic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="1028" end="1040" title="menstruation" label="menstruation"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="1243" end="1258" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="1333" end="1339" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q558070" start="1382" end="1409" title="pelvic inflammatory disease" label="pelvic inflammatory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="1411" end="1435" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671412" start="1437" end="1458" title="interstitial cystitis" label="interstitial cystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q540571" start="1464" end="1476" title="fibromyalgia" label="fibromyalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2004" end="2018" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="2024" end="2034" title="East Asian" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="2076" end="2081" title="White people" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="2371" end="2379" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q416496" start="2392" end="2409" title="estrogen receptor" label="estrogen receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="2627" end="2642" title="pain medication" label="pain medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="2721" end="2757" title="non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215575" start="2775" end="2783" title="naproxen" label="naproxen"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="2820" end="2838" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="birth control pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628262" start="2864" end="2900" title="intrauterine device with progestogen" label="intrauterine device with progestogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606696" start="2921" end="2959" title="Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist" label="Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="3955" end="3961" title="pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q816422" start="4651" end="4663" title="Dysmenorrhea" label="Dysmenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="4936" end="4954" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="4957" end="4964" title="Dysuria" label="Dysuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q732447" start="5027" end="5040" title="Mittelschmerz" label="Mittelschmerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="5817" end="5826" title="cytokines" label="cytokines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967871" start="5908" end="5916" title="Adhesion (medicine)" label="adhesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6291" end="6313" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808285" start="6551" end="6568" title="neuroangiogenesis" label="neuroangiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="6711" end="6723" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="7052" end="7060" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="7062" end="7074" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q403648" start="7076" end="7084" title="Rectal tenesmus" label="tenesmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="7086" end="7095" title="dyschezia" label="dyschezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422583" start="7110" end="7125" title="rectal bleeding" label="rectal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7150" end="7165" title="Fatigue#Chronic" label="chronic fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="7167" end="7173" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="7178" end="7186" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="7188" end="7197" title="migraines" label="migraines"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="7209" end="7215" title="fevers" label="fevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494682" start="7217" end="7222" title="Heavy menstrual bleeding" label="heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073603" start="7236" end="7253" title="irregular periods" label="irregular periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="7265" end="7277" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="7360" end="7374" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="7376" end="7403" title="non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="7408" end="7420" title="brain cancer" label="brain cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944777" start="7460" end="7478" title="endometrial cancer" label="endometrial cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188844" start="7577" end="7599" title="Thoracic endometriosis" label="Thoracic endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="7652" end="7656" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q647099" start="7700" end="7717" title="hemoptysis" label="coughing up blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="7721" end="7735" title="pneumothorax" label="collapsed lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q369073" start="7740" end="7771" title="hemothorax" label="bleeding into the pleural space"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="7869" end="7880" title="Bowel obstruction" label="obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="8106" end="8110" title="cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376367" start="8121" end="8136" title="Endometrioma" label="chocolate cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="8158" end="8163" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="bowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740071" start="8220" end="8256" title="Endometriosis-associated infertility" label="Endometriosis-associated infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="8378" end="8387" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207365" start="8396" end="8411" title="decidualization" label="decidualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188844" start="8448" end="8470" title="Thoracic endometriosis" label="Thoracic endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8504" end="8535" title="Hemothorax#Nontraumatic" label="thoracic endometriosis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="8590" end="8600" title="Uterine cycle" label="catamenial"/>
<link wikidata="Q369073" start="8642" end="8652" title="hemothorax" label="hemothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q582484" start="8704" end="8711" title="Nodule (medicine)" label="nodules"/>
<link wikidata="Q207087" start="9012" end="9029" title="ectopic pregnancy" label="ectopic pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="9056" end="9067" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071048" start="9300" end="9305" title="Antepartum bleeding" label="ante-"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916482" start="9310" end="9331" title="Postpartum bleeding" label="postpartum hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q61335" start="9375" end="9388" title="pre-eclampsia" label="pre-eclampsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="9880" end="9883" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9887" end="9901" title="CT-myelography" label="CT-myelography"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="9949" end="9954" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="9958" end="9965" title="neonate" label="neonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="9992" end="10016" title="congenital malformations" label="congenital malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="10018" end="10034" title="Preterm birth" label="preterm delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781245" start="10046" end="10060" title="Perinatal mortality" label="neonatal death"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="11120" end="11139" title="Genetic disorder" label="heritable condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142347" start="11171" end="11191" title="environmental factor" label="environmental factor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11216" end="11252" title="Quantitative trait locus#Quantitative traits" label="polygenic/multifactorial inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520805" start="11293" end="11325" title="First-degree relative" label="a person&amp;#x27;s father or mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="11452" end="11464" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215243" start="12019" end="12026" title="Somatic mutation" label="somatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="12030" end="12039" title="Heritability" label="heritable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098876" start="12049" end="12078" title="genome-wide association study" label="genome-wide association study"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="12176" end="12191" title="Locus (genetics)" label="chromosome loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="12254" end="12269" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="12274" end="12285" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="12451" end="12456" title="miRNA" label="miRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="12619" end="12628" title="menopause" label="menopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q492514" start="12638" end="12646" title="menarche" label="menarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968389" start="12699" end="12718" title="Müllerian anomalies" label="Müllerian anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="12730" end="12735" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227103" start="12740" end="12746" title="Dioxin" label="Dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13259" end="13296" title="Endocrine disruptor#Types" label="Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q84483575" start="13432" end="13442" title="phthalates" label="phthalates"/>
<link wikidata="Q414915" start="13456" end="13468" title="chlorpyrifos" label="chlorpyrifos"/>
<link wikidata="Q409682" start="13470" end="13487" title="hexachlorobenzene" label="hexachlorobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="13493" end="13517" title="polychlorinated biphenyl" label="polychlorinated biphenyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="13761" end="13771" title="Lipophilicity" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="13790" end="13803" title="Bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="13807" end="13821" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q271980" start="13864" end="13875" title="Bisphenol A" label="Bisphenol A"/>
<link wikidata="Q418379" start="13883" end="13894" title="bisphenol S" label="bisphenol S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330402" start="14156" end="14166" title="microbiome" label="microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="14239" end="14252" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q408004" start="14597" end="14615" title="Toll-like receptor" label="Toll-like receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="14620" end="14630" title="macrophage" label="macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q421859" start="14756" end="14769" title="interleukin 8" label="interleukin 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135939" start="15110" end="15125" title="pathophysiology" label="pathophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281220" start="15159" end="15173" title="Multifactorial disease" label="multifactorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="15414" end="15423" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="15848" end="15862" title="menstruation" label="menstrual flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9629" start="15993" end="16011" title="peritoneum" label="peritoneal surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="17452" end="17457" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="17703" end="17721" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="17723" end="17731" title="allergy" label="allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35970" start="18397" end="18408" title="mesothelium" label="mesothelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053832" start="18473" end="18487" title="tight junction" label="tight junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065620" start="18577" end="18594" title="imperforate hymen" label="imperforate hymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508755" start="18867" end="18884" title="flu-like symptoms" label="flu-like symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699079" start="19361" end="19376" title="John A. Sampson" label="John A. Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="19810" end="19821" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="20031" end="20037" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522" start="20079" end="20112" title="dioxins and dioxin-like compounds" label="dioxins and dioxin-like compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="20121" end="20134" title="bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q629138" start="20866" end="20874" title="Coelomic" label="Coelomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q839508" start="20914" end="20925" title="endometrial" label="endometrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9629" start="20930" end="20940" title="peritoneal" label="peritoneal"/>
<link wikidata="Q660713" start="20959" end="20969" title="metaplasia" label="metaplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111140" start="21107" end="21118" title="endothelium" label="endothelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340830" start="21165" end="21192" title="endothelial progenitor cell" label="endothelial progenitor cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424593" start="21275" end="21289" title="vasculogenesis" label="vasculogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q539568" start="21330" end="21342" title="angiogenesis" label="angiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16483" start="21586" end="21600" title="Graves disease" label="Graves disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="21835" end="21847" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="21851" end="21867" title="Oxidative stress" label="Oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334291" start="21983" end="21990" title="Ectopic expression" label="ectopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="22091" end="22103" title="erythrocytes" label="erythrocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925744" start="22190" end="22213" title="Human iron metabolism" label="iron metabolism system."/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="22244" end="22267" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q413283" start="22283" end="22299" title="superoxide anion" label="superoxide anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107429" start="22305" end="22313" title="peroxide" label="peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="22473" end="22490" title="cellular division" label="cellular division"/>
<link wikidata="Q899651" start="22651" end="22676" title="Mitogen-activated protein kinase" label="mitogen activated protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14197552" start="22706" end="22741" title="MAPK/ERK pathway" label="extracellular signal-related kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745522" start="22832" end="22837" title="c-Fos" label="c-Fos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005943" start="22842" end="22847" title="C-jun" label="c-Jun"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="22859" end="22874" title="Proto oncogenes" label="proto-oncogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541222" start="22900" end="22918" title="High grade lesion" label="high-grade lesions"/>
<link wikidata="Q39888" start="23052" end="23060" title="ligament" label="ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="23125" end="23131" title="Vagina" label="Vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="23134" end="23140" title="Cervix" label="Cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="23143" end="23148" title="Vulva" label="Vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="23169" end="23175" title="Rectum" label="Rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458483" start="23998" end="24020" title="assigned male at birth" label="assigned male at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="24022" end="24030" title="Prostate" label="Prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903807" start="24114" end="24140" title="feminizing hormone therapy" label="feminizing hormone therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="24337" end="24341" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196694" start="24747" end="24770" title="cutaneous endometriosis" label="cutaneous endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="24959" end="24966" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="24981" end="24994" title="cervical vertebrae" label="cervical area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25078" end="25109" title="Hemothorax#Nontraumatic" label="thoracic endometriosis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="25127" end="25137" title="Uterine cycle" label="catamenial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919310" start="25473" end="25496" title="transvaginal ultrasound" label="transvaginal ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="25588" end="25598" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="25990" end="26002" title="histology" label="histological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449773" start="26562" end="26566" title="TRUS" label="TRUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376367" start="28248" end="28260" title="endometrioma" label="endometrioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012569" start="28530" end="28541" title="adenomyosis" label="adenomyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="28590" end="28610" title="congenital anomalies" label="congenital anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895" start="28618" end="28636" title="reproductive tract" label="reproductive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q419361" start="29770" end="29791" title="hyoscine butylbromide" label="hyoscine butylbromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376393" start="29958" end="29983" title="Endorectal coil magnetic resonance imaging" label="pelvic-phased array coils"/>
<link wikidata="Q466817" start="30299" end="30340" title="American Society of Reproductive Medicine" label="American Society of Reproductive Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251960" start="30928" end="30938" title="Rectouterine pouch" label="cul-de-sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q864574" start="31272" end="31279" title="biomarker" label="markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032902" start="31477" end="31483" title="CA-125" label="CA-125"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201964" start="31989" end="32000" title="Beta-3 integrin" label="β3 integrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q558313" start="32577" end="32583" title="stroma (animal tissue)" label="stroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="32598" end="32608" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422203" start="32662" end="32673" title="hemosiderin" label="hemosiderin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899285" start="32684" end="32704" title="Immunohistochemistry" label="Immunohistochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423443" start="32992" end="33008" title="H&amp;amp;E staining" label="H&amp;amp;E staining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131635" start="33053" end="33063" title="pain scale" label="pain scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362526" start="33120" end="33141" title="visual analogue scale" label="visual analogue scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131635" start="33157" end="33179" title="numerical rating scale" label="numerical rating scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133761" start="33499" end="33525" title="clinical global impression" label="clinical global impression"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="33538" end="33553" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="33630" end="33658" title="combined oral contraceptive pill" label="combined oral contraceptives"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="35020" end="35042" title="in vitro fertilisation" label="in vitro fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668225" start="35458" end="35476" title="electrocoagulation" label="electrocoagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446275" start="36337" end="36356" title="segmental resection" label="segmental resection"/>
<link wikidata="Q550675" start="36499" end="36511" title="hysterectomy" label="hysterectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48998930" start="37048" end="37068" title="Presacral neurectomy" label="Presacral neurectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="38860" end="38882" title="Hormonal birth control" label="Hormonal birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q45071" start="39374" end="39385" title="Progestogen" label="Progestogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419652" start="39466" end="39473" title="Danazol" label="Danazol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761406" start="39478" end="39488" title="gestrinone" label="gestrinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433654" start="39636" end="39646" title="masculinization" label="virilizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620594" start="39668" end="39689" title="hirsutism" label="excessive hair growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q502689" start="39694" end="39707" title="voice changes" label="voice changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495694" start="39780" end="39802" title="norethisterone acetate" label="norethisterone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314721" start="39974" end="40021" title="Gonadotropin-releasing hormone modulator" label="Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606696" start="40044" end="40056" title="GnRH agonist" label="GnRH agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q907160" start="40066" end="40077" title="leuprorelin" label="leuprorelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618379" start="40082" end="40097" title="GnRH antagonist" label="GnRH antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098999" start="40107" end="40115" title="elagolix" label="elagolix"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="40295" end="40302" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040305" start="40557" end="40576" title="Aromatase inhibitor" label="Aromatase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q419143" start="40748" end="40759" title="anastrozole" label="anastrozole"/>
<link wikidata="Q194974" start="40764" end="40773" title="letrozole" label="letrozole"/>
<link wikidata="Q411240" start="41436" end="41448" title="mifepristone" label="mifepristone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761406" start="41453" end="41463" title="gestrinone" label="gestrinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="41502" end="41529" title="randomized controlled trial" label="randomized controlled trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="41627" end="41636" title="Melatonin" label="Melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="41743" end="41752" title="Vitamin C" label="Vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="41846" end="41852" title="Opioid" label="Opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="41855" end="41863" title="Morphine" label="Morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190528" start="41999" end="42009" title="endorphins" label="endorphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q261503" start="42158" end="42181" title="Chinese herbal medicine" label="Chinese herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455390" start="42494" end="42506" title="Serrapeptase" label="Serrapeptase"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="42510" end="42526" title="digestive enzyme" label="digestive enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q574834" start="42753" end="42775" title="Angiogenesis inhibitor" label="Angiogenesis inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="42863" end="42871" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="42888" end="42895" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="43090" end="43096" title="statin" label="statin"/>
<link wikidata="Q377458" start="43099" end="43126" title="cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor" label="cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="43129" end="43142" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427096" start="43154" end="43169" title="immunomodulator" label="immunomodulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q600203" start="43172" end="43188" title="dopamine agonist" label="dopamine agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10331450" start="43191" end="43241" title="peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonist" label="peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383885" start="43244" end="43253" title="progestin" label="progestin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419652" start="43256" end="43263" title="danazol" label="danazol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606696" start="43268" end="43306" title="gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist" label="gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q416331" start="43516" end="43530" title="Pentoxifylline" label="Pentoxifylline"/>
<link wikidata="Q463772" start="43765" end="43817" title="American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764649" start="46722" end="46732" title="East Asian people" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="46737" end="46751" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012569" start="47503" end="47514" title="adenomyosis" label="adenomyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78714" start="48339" end="48358" title="Carl von Rokitansky" label="Karl von Rokitansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="48471" end="48489" title="Hippocratic Corpus" label="Hippocratic Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43012" start="48646" end="48651" title="leech" label="leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="48655" end="48667" title="straitjacket" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q356405" start="48670" end="48682" title="bloodletting" label="bloodletting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673202" start="48693" end="48699" title="douche" label="douche"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="48702" end="48720" title="Female genital mutilation" label="genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782082" start="48839" end="48857" title="demonic possession" label="demonic possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="49242" end="49250" title="hysteria" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="50239" end="50243" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="50302" end="50310" title="surgery" label="surgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751597" start="50324" end="50336" title="oophorectomy" label="oophorectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27863114" start="50489" end="50501" title="testosterone (medication)" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056784" start="50506" end="50524" title="high-dose estrogen" label="high-dose estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q423989" start="50566" end="50584" title="diethylstilbestrol" label="diethylstilbestrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="50658" end="50673" title="medication" label="pharmacological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575059" start="50722" end="50737" title="Pseudopregnancy" label="Pseudopregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q419652" start="51046" end="51053" title="Danazol" label="Danazol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606696" start="51165" end="51177" title="GnRH agonist" label="GnRH agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098999" start="51320" end="51328" title="elagolix" label="elagolix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382837" start="51531" end="51539" title="RuthAnne" label="RuthAnne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052578" start="51542" end="51554" title="Emma Barnett" label="Emma Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q219878" start="51557" end="51568" title="Emma Bunton" label="Emma Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q236520" start="51571" end="51582" title="Alexa Chung" label="Alexa Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q17523802" start="51585" end="51601" title="Danielle Collins" label="Danielle Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q291102" start="51604" end="51616" title="Olivia Culpo" label="Olivia Culpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q288359" start="51619" end="51630" title="Lena Dunham" label="Lena Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q24435337" start="51633" end="51648" title="Abby Finkenauer" label="Abby Finkenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492369" start="51651" end="51667" title="Bethenny Frankel" label="Bethenny Frankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="51670" end="51685" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122790" start="51688" end="51697" title="Mel Greig" label="Mel Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534249" start="51700" end="51706" title="Halsey (singer)" label="Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372833" start="51709" end="51719" title="Emma Hayes" label="Emma Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q232646" start="51722" end="51736" title="Julianne Hough" label="Julianne Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q54185301" start="51739" end="51756" title="Bridget Hustwaite" label="Bridget Hustwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423081" start="51759" end="51770" title="Bindi Irwin" label="Bindi Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233038" start="51773" end="51783" title="Jaime King" label="Jaime King"/>
<link wikidata="Q464835" start="51786" end="51799" title="Padma Lakshmi" label="Padma Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="51802" end="51814" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971799" start="51817" end="51833" title="Jillian Michaels" label="Jillian Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q231487" start="51836" end="51842" title="Monica (singer)" label="Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="51845" end="51859" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q956479" start="51862" end="51871" title="Tia Mowry" label="Tia Mowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193982" start="51874" end="51894" title="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="51897" end="51909" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277803" start="51912" end="51925" title="Florence Pugh" label="Florence Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16738674" start="51928" end="51940" title="Daisy Ridley" label="Daisy Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q228598" start="51943" end="51955" title="Emma Roberts" label="Emma Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="51958" end="51972" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749380" start="51975" end="51986" title="Amy Schumer" label="Amy Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589352" start="51989" end="52003" title="Kirsten Storms" label="Kirsten Storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q231648" start="52006" end="52021" title="Gabrielle Union" label="Gabrielle Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468266" start="52024" end="52039" title="Lacey Schwimmer" label="Lacey Schwimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111202" start="52042" end="52056" title="Chrissy Teigen" label="Chrissy Teigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372988" start="52059" end="52071" title="Emma Watkins" label="Emma Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q232307" start="52074" end="52085" title="Mae Whitman" label="Mae Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175951" start="52088" end="52104" title="Jessica Williams (actress)" label="Jessica Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18129271" start="52107" end="52122" title="Leah Williamson" label="Leah Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q122471985" start="55931" end="55947" title="menstrual stigma" label="menstrual stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086751" start="56109" end="56127" title="awareness campaign" label="awareness campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905557" start="56457" end="56462" title="MYD88" label="MyD88"/>
<link wikidata="Q415411" start="56630" end="56638" title="anakinra" label="anakinra"/>
<link wikidata="Q412845" start="57027" end="57046" title="dichloroacetic acid" label="dichloroacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33551" start="57051" end="57058" title="curcuma" label="curcuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="57146" end="57171" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53336" wikidata="Q54798" url="?curid=53336" title="Pope Cornelius">
<text>Pope Cornelius () was the bishop of Rome from 6th or 13 March 251 until his martyrdom in June 253.

He was pope during and following a period of persecution of the church, while a schism occurred over how repentant church members who had practiced pagan sacrifices to protect themselves could be readmitted to the church. He agreed with Cyprian of Carthage that those who had lapsed could be restored to communion after varying forms of Reinitiation and Penance. This position was in contrast to the Novatianists, who held that those who failed to maintain their confession of faith under persecution would not be received again into communion with the church. This resulted in a short-lived schism in the Church of Rome that spread as each side sought to gather support. Cornelius held a synod that confirmed his election and excommunicated Novatian, but the controversy regarding lapsed members continued for years.

The persecutions resumed in 251 under Emperor Trebonianus Gallus. Cornelius was sent into exile and may have died from the rigours of his banishment; possibly he was beheaded.

==Christian persecution==

Emperor Decius, who ruled from 249 to 251, persecuted Christians in the Roman Empire rather sporadically and locally, but starting in January of the year 250, he ordered all citizens to perform a religious sacrifice in the presence of commissioners, or else face death. Many Christians refused and were martyred, (including Pope Fabian on 20 January 250), while others partook in the sacrifices in order to save their own lives.

Two schools of thought arose after the persecution. One side, led by Novatian, a priest in the diocese of Rome, said those who had stopped practising Christianity during the persecution could not be accepted back into the church, even if they repented. He held that idolatry was an unpardonable sin, and that the Church had no authority to forgive apostates, but that their forgiveness must be left to God; it could not be pronounced in this world. The opposing side, including Cornelius and Cyprian of Carthage, said the &quot;lapsi&quot; could be restored to communion through repentance, demonstrated by a period of penance.

During the persecution it proved impossible to elect a successor, and the papal seat remained vacant for a year. During this period the church was governed by several priests, including Novatian. When Decius left Rome to fight the invading Goths, the Roman clergy chose a new bishop. In the fourteen months without a pope, the leading candidate, Moses, had died under the persecution. The more moderate Cornelius was unwillingly elected over Novatian and others as the twenty-first pope in March 251.

==Papacy==

Those who supported a more rigorist position had Novatian consecrated bishop and refused to recognize Cornelius as Bishop of Rome.
 Both sides sent out letters to other bishops seeking recognition and support. Cornelius had the support of Cyprian, Dionysius, and most African and Eastern bishops while Novatian had the support of a minority of clergy and laymen in Rome. Cornelius&#x27;s next action was to convene a synod of 60 bishops to acknowledge him as the rightful pope and the council excommunicated Novatian as well as all Novatianists. Also addressed in the synod was that Christians who stopped practising during Emperor Decius&#x27;s persecution could be re-admitted into the Christian community only after doing penance.

The verdict of the synod was sent to the Christian bishops, most notably the bishop of Antioch, a fierce Novatian supporter, in order to convince him to accept Cornelius as bishop of Rome. The letters that Cornelius sent to surrounding bishops provide information of the size of the church in Rome at that time. Cornelius mentions that the Roman Church had, &quot;forty six priests, seven deacons, seven sub-deacons, forty two acolytes, fifty two ostiarii, and over one thousand five hundred widows and persons in distress.&quot; His letters also inform that Cornelius had a staff of over 150 clergy members and the church fed over 1,500 people daily. From these numbers, it has been estimated that there were at least 50,000 Christians in Rome during the papacy of Pope Cornelius.

==Death and letters==
In June 251, Decius was killed in battle with the Goths; and persecutions resumed under his successor, Trebonianus Gallus. Cornelius was exiled to Centumcellae, Italy, where he died in June 253. The Liberian catalogue ascribes his death to the hardships of banishment; later sources say he was beheaded. He was entombed in a catacomb near the chapel of the popes, behind a Latin inscription, not Greek like his predecessor Pope Fabian and successor Lucius I. It translates to &quot;Cornelius Martyr&quot;. The letters he sent while in exile are all written in the colloquial Latin of the period instead of the classical style used by the educated such as Cyprian, a theologian as well as a bishop, and Novatian, who was also a philosopher. This suggests that Cornelius came from a financially average family and thus was given an ordinary education as a child. One letter mentions an office of &quot;exorcist&quot; in the church for the first time.

==Veneration==

Some of his relics were taken to Germany during the Middle Ages; his head was claimed by Kornelimünster Abbey near Aachen.
In the Rhineland, he was also a patron saint of lovers. A legend associated with Cornelius tells of a young artist who was commissioned to decorate the Corneliuskapelle in the Selikum quarter of Neuss. The daughter of a local townsman fell in love with the artist, but her father forbade the marriage, remarking that he would only consent if the pope did as well. Miraculously, the statue of Cornelius leaned forward from the altar and blessed the pair, and the two lovers were thus married.

Cornelius, along with Quirinus of Neuss, Hubertus and Anthony the Great, was venerated as one of the Four Holy Marshals in the Rhineland during the late Middle Ages.

A legend told at Carnac states that its stones were once pagan soldiers who had been turned into stone by Cornelius, who was fleeing from them.

The Catholic Church commemorated Cornelius by venerating him, with his Saint&#x27;s Day on 16 September, which he shares with his friend Cyprian. His Saint&#x27;s Day was originally on 14 September, the date on which both Cyprian and Cornelius were martyred, according to Jerome. Cornelius&#x27;s saintly name means &quot;battle horn&quot;, and he is represented in icons by a pope either holding some form of cow&#x27;s horn or with a cow nearby. He is the patron against earache, epilepsy, fever, twitching, and also of cattle, domestic animals, earache sufferers, epileptics, and the town of Kornelimünster, Germany, where his head is enshrined.

==See also==

*List of popes

==Notes==
==References==
* &quot;A bit of exorcist history.&quot; National Catholic Reporter 36.38 (September 1, 2000): 6. General OneFile. Gale. Sacred Heart Preparatory (BAISL). 5 December 2008
* &quot;Decius.&quot; Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online School Edition. 7 December 2008
* &quot;Gallus.&quot; Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online School Edition. 7 December 2008
* McBrien, Richard P. &quot;Pope Cornelius, a reconciler, had a hard road.&quot; National Catholic Reporter 40.41 (September 24, 2004): 19(1). General OneFile. Gale. Sacred Heart Preparatory (BAISL). 5 December 20
* Moody Smith, D. &quot;Review: The Rise of Christianity: A Review.&quot; Journal of the American Academy of Religion 54 (1986): 337–42.
*&quot;Novatian.&quot; Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online School Edition. 7 December 2008
* &quot;Pope Saint Cornelius.&quot; Patron Saints Index. 7 December 2008
* &quot;Saint Cornelius.&quot; Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 24 November 2008
* Saints and Feast Days. New York: Loyola P, 1991.
* Schrembs, Joseph. &quot;The Catholic Philosophy of History.&quot; &quot;The Catholic Historical&quot; Review 20 (1934): 1–22.

==External links==

*Letters of Pope Cornelius I
*The Rediscovery of Cornelius&#x27; Crypt
*The Saint with the Horn
*Sites where Cornelius is venerated
*More saints called Cornelius</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54798" start="0" end="14" title="Pope Cornelius" label="Pope Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="26" end="40" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365805" start="205" end="229" title="Lapsi (Christianity)" label="repentant church members"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="337" end="344" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="437" end="449" title="Initiation" label="Reinitiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="454" end="461" title="Penance" label="Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276913" start="500" end="512" title="Novatianism" label="Novatianists"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="789" end="794" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q222890" start="842" end="850" title="Novatian" label="Novatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171023" start="965" end="983" title="Trebonianus Gallus" label="Trebonianus Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="1123" end="1137" title="Emperor Decius" label="Emperor Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1195" end="1207" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131159" start="1447" end="1458" title="Pope Fabian" label="Pope Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q222890" start="1622" end="1630" title="Novatian" label="Novatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="2045" end="2052" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365805" start="2081" end="2086" title="Lapsi (Christianity)" label="lapsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="2422" end="2427" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="2664" end="2668" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="2935" end="2942" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131162" start="2944" end="2953" title="Pope Dionysius" label="Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="3051" end="3057" title="laymen" label="laymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="3113" end="3118" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3125" end="3131" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="3189" end="3203" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276913" start="3228" end="3240" title="Novatianists" label="Novatianists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="3421" end="3428" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="3518" end="3525" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="3805" end="3812" title="priests" label="priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="3820" end="3827" title="deacons" label="deacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056310" start="3835" end="3846" title="sub-deacons" label="sub-deacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q420421" start="3858" end="3866" title="acolytes" label="acolytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179115" start="3923" end="3929" title="widows" label="widows"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="4024" end="4030" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="4249" end="4255" title="Emperor Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="4286" end="4291" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q171023" start="4339" end="4357" title="Trebonianus Gallus" label="Trebonianus Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="4383" end="4395" title="Centumcellae" label="Centumcellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246112" start="4547" end="4598" title="List of extant papal tombs" label="entombed in a catacomb near the chapel of the popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131159" start="4659" end="4670" title="Pope Fabian" label="Pope Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132793" start="4685" end="4693" title="Lucius I" label="Lucius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467532" start="5136" end="5144" title="exorcist" label="exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="5214" end="5220" title="relics" label="relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5235" end="5242" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5254" end="5265" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q152432" start="5291" end="5311" title="Kornelimünster Abbey" label="Kornelimünster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="5317" end="5323" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="5332" end="5341" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="5357" end="5369" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948" start="5520" end="5525" title="Neuss" label="Neuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q688884" start="5840" end="5857" title="Quirinus of Neuss" label="Quirinus of Neuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q159834" start="5859" end="5867" title="Hubertus" label="Hubertus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170547" start="5872" end="5889" title="Anthony the Great" label="Anthony the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475234" start="5919" end="5937" title="Four Holy Marshals" label="Four Holy Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q70925" start="6002" end="6008" title="Carnac" label="Carnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q833850" start="6021" end="6031" title="Carnac stones" label="its stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="6267" end="6274" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="6379" end="6387" title="martyred" label="martyred"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="6402" end="6408" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="6566" end="6569" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="6588" end="6594" title="patron" label="patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596398" start="6603" end="6610" title="earache" label="earache"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="6612" end="6620" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="6622" end="6627" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397878" start="6629" end="6638" title="fasciculation" label="twitching"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="6652" end="6658" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301561" start="6660" end="6676" title="domestic animals" label="domestic animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486907" start="6697" end="6707" title="epileptics" label="epileptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q154048" start="6725" end="6739" title="Kornelimünster" label="Kornelimünster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="6795" end="6808" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53338" wikidata="Q160105" url="?curid=53338" title="Cervical cancer">
<text>Cervical cancer is a cancer arising from the cervix or in any layer of the wall of the cervix. It is due to the abnormal growth of cells that can invade or spread to other parts of the body. Early on, typically no symptoms are seen. Later symptoms may include abnormal vaginal bleeding, pelvic pain or pain during sexual intercourse. While bleeding after sex may not be serious, it may also indicate the presence of cervical cancer.
Virtually all cervical cancer cases (99%) are linked to genital human papillomavirus infection (HPV); most who have had HPV infections, however, do not develop cervical cancer. HPV 16 and 18 strains are responsible for approximately 70% of cervical cancer cases globally and nearly 50% of high grade cervical pre-cancers. Minor risk factors include smoking, a weak immune system, birth control pills, starting sex at a young age, and having many sexual partners. Genetic factors also contribute to cervical cancer risk. Cervical cancer typically develops from precancerous changes called cervical intraepithelial neoplasia over 10 to 20 years. About 75% of cervical cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, 20-25% are adenocarcinoma, 3% are adenosquamous carcinomas and less than 1% are small cell neuroendocrine tumors of the cervix. Diagnosis is typically by cervical screening followed by a biopsy. Medical imaging is then done to determine whether or not the cancer has spread.
HPV vaccination is the most cost-effective public health measure against cervical cancer. There are six licensed HPV vaccines. They protect against two to seven high-risk strains of this family of viruses and may prevent up to 90% of cervical cancers. By the end of 2023, 143 countries (74% of WHO member states) provided the HPV vaccine in their national immunization schedule for girls. As of 2022, 47 countries (24% of WHO member states) also did it for boys. As a risk of cancer still exists, guidelines recommend continuing regular Pap tests. Other methods of prevention include having few or no sexual partners and the use of condoms. Cervical cancer screening using the Pap test or acetic acid can identify precancerous changes, which when treated, can prevent the development of cancer. Treatment may consist of some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Five-year survival rates in the United States are 68%. Outcomes, however, depend very much on how early the cancer is detected.
Worldwide, cervical cancer is both the fourth-most common type of cancer and the fourth-most common cause of death from cancer in women, with over 660,000 new cases and around 350,000 deaths in 2022. This is about 8% of the total cases and total deaths from cancer. 88% (2020 figure) of cervical cancers and 90% of deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries and 2% (2020 figure) in high-income countries. Of the 20 hardest hit countries by cervical cancer, 19 are in Africa. In low-income countries, it is one of the most common causes of cancer death with an incidence rate of 47.3 per 100,000 women. In developed countries, the widespread use of cervical screening programs has dramatically reduced rates of cervical cancer. Expected scenarios for the reduction of mortality due to cervical cancer worldwide (and specially in low-income countries) have been reviewed, given assumptions with respect to the achievement of recommended prevention targets using triple-intervention strategies defined by WHO. In medical research, the most famous immortalized cell line, known as HeLa, was developed from cervical cancer cells of a woman named Henrietta Lacks.

17 November is the Cervical Cancer Elimination Day of Action. The date marks the day in 2020 when WHO launched the Global strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem, with a resolution passed by 194 countries. To eliminate cervical cancer, all countries must reach and maintain an incidence rate of below 4 per 100 000 women.

==Signs and symptoms==
The early stages of cervical cancer may be completely free of symptoms. Vaginal bleeding, contact bleeding (one most common form being bleeding after sexual intercourse), or (rarely) a vaginal mass may indicate the presence of cervical cancer. Also, moderate pain during sexual intercourse and vaginal discharge are symptoms of cervical cancer. Bleeding after douching or after a pelvic exam is a common symptom of cervical cancer. In advanced disease, metastases may be present in the abdomen, lungs, or elsewhere.

Symptoms of advanced cervical cancer may include loss of appetite, weight loss, fatigue, pelvic pain, back pain, leg pain, swollen legs, heavy vaginal bleeding, bone fractures, and (rarely) leakage of urine or faeces from the vagina. Other signs of locally advanced disease (as the cancer invades organs in the pelvis) include hydronephrosis with flank pain as the ureters directing urine from the kidneys to bladder are blocked, leg swelling and blood clots in the legs as pelvic veins are blocked, rectal bleeding, and bleeding in the urine.

==Causes==
Infection with some types of HPV is the greatest risk factor for cervical cancer, followed by smoking. HIV infection is also a risk factor. Not all of the causes of cervical cancer are known, however, and several other contributing factors have been implicated.

===Human papillomavirus===
Infection with HPV is generally believed to be required for cervical cancer to occur. HPV types 16 and 18 are the cause of 75% of cervical cancer cases globally, while 31 and 45 are the causes of another 10%.

Women who have multiple sexual partners, or have partners who have multiple sexual partners, regardless of sex are at higher risk of cervical cancer.

Over 200 types of HPV known, 12 are classified as high-risk types (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, and 59), three as probable high-risk (26, 53, and 66), and 12 as low-risk (6, 11, 40, 42, 43, 44, 54, 61, 70, 72, 81, and CP6108). Most cases of squamous cell carcinomas of the cervix are due to HPV type 16 and most cases of adenocarcinoma are due to HPV type 18. High risk HPV viral subtypes can integrate their DNA into the host genome and induce transcription of the viral cancer causing proteins E6 and E7. E6 degrades the tumor suppressing protein p53 and E7 degrades and inactivates the tumor suppressing protein pRb. The loss of p53 and pRb leads to increased blood vessel growth feeding tumors (via vascular endothelial growth factor(VEGF) over-expression), loss of tumor cell suppression and cell cycle regulation disruptions all of which can lead to cervical cancer.

Genital warts, which are a form of benign tumor of epithelial cells, are also caused by various strains of HPV. However, these serotypes are usually not related to cervical cancer. Having multiple strains at the same time is common, including those that can cause cervical cancer along with those that cause warts.

=== Smoking ===
Cigarette smoking, both active and passive, increases the risk of cervical cancer. Among HPV-infected women, current and former smokers have roughly two to three times the incidence of invasive cancer. Passive smoking is also associated with increased risk but to a lesser extent.

Smoking has also been linked to the development of cervical cancer. Smoking can increase the risk in women a few different ways, which can be by direct and indirect methods of inducing cervical cancer. A direct way of contracting this cancer is a smoker has a higher chance of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN3) occurring, which has the potential of forming cervical cancer. When CIN3 lesions lead to cancer, most of them have the assistance of the HPV virus, but that is not always the case, which is why it can be considered a direct link to cervical cancer. Heavy smoking and long-term smoking seem to have more of a risk of getting the CIN3 lesions than lighter smoking or not smoking at all. Although smoking has been linked to cervical cancer, it aids in the development of HPV, which is the leading cause of this type of cancer. Also, not only does it aid in the development of HPV, but also if the woman is already HPV-positive, she is at an even greater likelihood of contracting cervical cancer.

===Oral contraceptives===
Long-term use of oral contraceptives is associated with increased risk of cervical cancer in women who have had HPV. Women who have used oral contraceptives for 5 to 9 years have about three times the incidence of invasive cancer, and those who used them for 10 years or longer have about four times the risk.

===Multiple pregnancies===
Having many pregnancies is associated with an increased risk of cervical cancer. Among HPV-infected women, those who have had seven or more full-term pregnancies have around four times the risk of cancer compared with women with no pregnancies, and two to three times the risk of women who have had one or two full-term pregnancies.

==Diagnosis==
===Biopsy===
The Pap test can be used as a screening test but produces a false negative in up to 50% of cases of cervical cancer. Another concern is the cost of doing Pap tests, which makes them unaffordable in many areas of the world.

Confirmation of the diagnosis of cervical cancer or precancer requires a biopsy of the cervix. This is often done through colposcopy, a magnified visual inspection of the cervix aided by using a dilute acetic acid (e.g. vinegar) solution to highlight abnormal cells on the surface of the cervix, with visual contrast provided by staining the normal tissues a mahogany brown with Lugol&#x27;s iodine. Medical devices used for biopsy of the cervix include punch forceps. Colposcopic impression, the estimate of disease severity based on the visual inspection, forms part of the diagnosis. Further diagnostic and treatment procedures are loop electrical excision procedure and cervical conization, in which the inner lining of the cervix is removed to be examined pathologically. These are carried out if the biopsy confirms severe cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.

Often before the biopsy, the doctor asks for medical imaging to rule out other causes of a woman&#x27;s symptoms. Imaging modalities such as ultrasound, CT scan, and MRI have been used to look for alternating disease, spread of the tumor, and effect on adjacent structures. Typically, they appear as heterogeneous masses on the cervix.

Interventions such as playing music during the procedure and viewing the procedure on a monitor can reduce the anxiety associated with the examination.

===Precancerous lesions===

Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) means the development of abnormal cells on the surface of the cervix. It is caused by an HPV infection but in most cases, it is resolved by the immune system. However, a small percentage of people might develop a more serious CIN which, if left untreated, can develop into cervical cancer. CIN is often diagnosed during routine Pap smear examination or colposcopy.

The naming and histologic classification of cervical carcinoma precursor lesions has changed many times over the 20th century. The World Health Organization classification system was descriptive of the lesions, naming them mild, moderate, or severe dysplasia or carcinoma &quot;in situ&quot; (CIS). The term cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) was developed to place emphasis on the spectrum of abnormality in these lesions, and to help standardize treatment. For premalignant dysplastic changes, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grading (CIN 1–3) is used. It classifies mild dysplasia as CIN1, moderate dysplasia as CIN2, and severe dysplasia and CIS as CIN3. More recently, CIN2 and CIN3 have been combined into CIN2/3. These results are what a pathologist might report from a biopsy.

These should not be confused with the Bethesda system terms for Pap test (cytopathology) results. Among the Bethesda results: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) and high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL). An LSIL Pap may correspond to CIN1, and HSIL may correspond to CIN2 and CIN3, but they are results of different tests, and the Pap test results need not match the histologic findings.

===Cancer subtypes===
Histologic subtypes of invasive cervical carcinoma include:
* Squamous cell carcinoma (about 80–85%)
* adenocarcinoma (about 15% of cervical cancers in the UK)
* Adenosquamous carcinoma
* Small cell carcinoma
* Neuroendocrine tumour
* Glassy cell carcinoma
* Villoglandular adenocarcinoma
Though squamous cell carcinoma is the cervical cancer with the most incidence, the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the cervix has been increasing in recent decades. Endocervical adenocarcinoma represents 20–25% of the histological types of cervical carcinoma. Gastric-type mucinous adenocarcinoma of the cervix is a rare type of cancer with aggressive behavior. This type of malignancy is not related to high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV).
Noncarcinoma malignancies which can rarely occur in the cervix include melanoma and lymphoma. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage does not incorporate lymph node involvement in contrast to the TNM staging for most other cancers. For cases treated surgically, information obtained from the pathologist can be used in assigning a separate pathologic stage but is not to replace the original clinical stage.

===Staging===

Cervical cancer is staged by the FIGO system, which is based on clinical examination rather than surgical findings. Before the 2018 revisions to FIGO staging, the system allowed only these diagnostic tests to be used in determining the stage: palpation, inspection, colposcopy, endocervical curettage, hysteroscopy, cystoscopy, proctoscopy, intravenous urography, and X-ray examination of the lungs and skeleton, and cervical conization. However, the system allows use of any imaging or pathological methods for staging.

==Prevention ==

=== Screening ===


Checking cervical cells with the Papanicolaou test (Pap test) for cervical pre-cancer has dramatically reduced the number of cases of, and mortality from, cervical cancer. Liquid-based cytology may reduce the number of inadequate samples. Pap test screening every three to five years with appropriate follow-up can reduce cervical cancer incidence up to 80%.

Pap test screening can reveal abnormal cells on the surface of the cervix called cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) which in a small percentage can develop into cervical cancer. These precancerous changes can be confirmed with further examination known as colposcopy.

Personal invitations encouraging women to get screened are effective at increasing the likelihood they will do so. Educational materials also help increase the likelihood that women will go for screening, but they are not as effective as invitations.

According to the 2010 European guidelines, the age at which to start screening ranges between 20 and 30 years of age, but preferentially not before age 25 or 30 years, and depends on the burden of the disease in the population and the available resources.

In the United States, screening is recommended to begin at age 21, regardless of the age at which a woman began having sex or other risk factors. Pap tests should be done every three years between the ages of 21 and 65. In women over the age of 65, screening may be discontinued if no abnormal screening results were seen within the previous 10 years and no history of CIN2 or higher exists. HPV vaccination status does not change screening rates.

A number of recommended options exist for screening those 30 to 65. This includes cervical cytology every 3 years, HPV testing every 5 years, or HPV testing together with cytology every 5 years. Screening is not beneficial before age 25, as the rate of disease is low. Screening is not beneficial in women older than 60 years if they have a history of negative results. The American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline has recommend for different levels of resource availability.

Pap tests have not been as effective in developing countries. This is in part because many of these countries have an impoverished health care infrastructure, too few trained and skilled professionals to obtain and interpret Pap tests, uninformed women who get lost to follow-up, and a lengthy turn-around time to get results. Visual inspection with acetic acid and HPV DNA testing has been tried, though with mixed success.

=== Vaccination ===
There are six licensed HPV vaccines: three bivalent (protect against two types of HPV), two quadrivalent (against four), and one nonavalent vaccine (against nine) Three HPV vaccines (Gardasil, Gardasil 9, and Cervarix) reduce the risk of cancerous or precancerous changes of the cervix and perineum by about 93% and 62%, respectively. All have excellent safety profiles and are highly efficacious, or have met immunobridging standards. The vaccines are between 92% and 100% effective against HPV 16 and 18 up to at least 8 years. 

HPV vaccines are typically given to ages 9 to 26, as the vaccine is most effective if given before infection occurs. The primary target group in most of the countries recommending HPV vaccination is young adolescent girls, aged 9-14. As of 2022, 125 countries include HPV vaccines in their routine vaccinations for girls, and 47 countries recommend them for boys, as well, including Japan.

The duration of effectiveness and whether a booster will be needed is unknown. The high cost of this vaccine has been a cause for concern. Several countries have considered (or are considering) programs to fund HPV vaccination. The American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline has recommendations for different levels of resource availability.

=== Barrier protection ===
Barrier protection or spermicidal gel use during sexual intercourse decreases but does not eliminate the risk of transmitting the infection. Condoms may protect against genital warts. They also protect against other sexually transmitted infections, such as HIV and &quot;Chlamydia&quot;, which are associated with greater risks of developing cervical cancer.

=== Nutrition ===
Vitamin A is associated with a lower risk as are vitamin B12, vitamin C, vitamin E, and beta-Carotene.

==Treatment==

The treatment of cervical cancer varies worldwide, largely due to access to surgeons skilled in radical pelvic surgery and the emergence of fertility-sparing therapy in developed nations. Less advanced stages of cervical cancer typically have treatment options that allow fertility to be maintained if the patient desires.

Because cervical cancers are radiosensitive, radiation may be used in all stages where surgical options do not exist. Surgical intervention may have better outcomes than radiological approaches. In addition, chemotherapy can be used to treat cervical cancer and is more effective than radiation alone. Chemoradiotherapy may increase overall survival and reduce the risk of disease recurrence compared to radiotherapy alone.

Precancerous cells (cervical intraepithelial neoplasia) that would lead to cancer and early-stage cervical cancer (IA1) can be treated effectively by various surgical techniques. Surgical treatment methods include excision, where a cone-shaped portion of the cervix is removed, and ablation which removes only the parts with abnormal tissues. While these effectively reduce the risk of cancer developing or spreading, they cause an increased risk of premature birth in future pregnancies. Surgical techniques that remove more cervical tissue come with less risk of the cancer recurring but a higher chance of giving birth prematurely. Due to this risk, taking into account the age, childbearing plans of the woman, and the size and location of the cancer cells are crucial for choosing the right procedure. There is low-certainty evidence that peri-operative care approaches, such as &#x27;fast-track surgery&#x27; or &#x27;enhanced recovery programmes&#x27; may lower surgical stress and improve recovery after gynaecological cancer surgery.

Microinvasive cancer (stage IA) may also be treated by hysterectomy (removal of the whole uterus, including part of the vagina). For stage IA2, the lymph nodes are removed as well. Alternatives include local surgical procedures such as a loop electrical excision procedure or cone biopsy. A systematic review concluded that more evidence is needed to inform decisions about different surgical techniques for women with cervical cancer at stage IA2.

If a cone biopsy does not produce clear margins (findings on biopsy showing that the tumor is surrounded by cancer free tissue, suggesting all of the tumor is removed), one more possible treatment option for women who want to preserve their fertility is a trachelectomy. This attempts to surgically remove the cancer while preserving the ovaries and uterus, providing for a more conservative operation than a hysterectomy. It is a viable option for those in stage I cervical cancer which has not spread; however, it is not yet considered a standard of care, as few doctors are skilled in this procedure. Even the most experienced surgeon cannot promise that a trachelectomy can be performed until after surgical microscopic examination, as the extent of the spread of cancer is unknown. If the surgeon is not able to microscopically confirm clear margins of cervical tissue once the woman is under general anaesthesia in the operating room, a hysterectomy may still be needed. This can only be done during the same operation if the woman consented. Due to the possible risk of cancer spreading to the lymph nodes in stage 1B cancers and some stage 1A cancers, the surgeon may also need to remove some lymph nodes from around the uterus for pathologic evaluation.

A radical trachelectomy can be performed abdominally or vaginally and opinions are conflicting as to which is better. A radical abdominal trachelectomy with lymphadenectomy usually only requires a two- to three-day hospital stay, and most women recover very quickly (about six weeks). Complications are uncommon, although women who can conceive after surgery are susceptible to preterm labour and possible late miscarriage. A wait of at least one year is generally recommended before attempting to become pregnant after surgery. Recurrence in the residual cervix is rare if the trachelectomy has cleared the cancer. Yet, women are recommended to practice vigilant prevention and follow-up care, including Pap screenings/colposcopy, with biopsies of the remaining lower uterine segment as needed (every 3–4 months for at least 5 years) to monitor for any recurrence in addition to minimizing any new exposures to HPV through safe sex practices until one is actively trying to conceive.

Early stages (IB1 and IIA less than 4 cm) can be treated with radical hysterectomy with removal of the lymph nodes or radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is given as external beam radiotherapy to the pelvis and brachytherapy (internal radiation). Women treated with surgery who have high-risk features found on pathologic examination are given radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy to reduce the risk of relapse. A Cochrane review has found moderate-certainty evidence that radiation decreases the risk of disease progression in people with stage IB cervical cancer when compared to no further treatment. However, little evidence was found on its effects on overall survival.
Larger early-stage tumors (IB2 and IIA more than 4 cm) may be treated with radiation therapy and cisplatin-based chemotherapy, hysterectomy (which then usually requires adjuvant radiation therapy), or cisplatin chemotherapy followed by hysterectomy. When cisplatin is present, it is thought to be the most active single agent in periodic diseases. Such addition of platinum-based chemotherapy to chemoradiation seems not only to improve survival but also reduces risk of recurrence in women with early-stage cervical cancer (IA2–IIA). A Cochrane review found a lack of evidence on the benefits and harms of primary hysterectomy compared to primary chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer in stage IB2.

Advanced-stage tumors (IIB-IVA) are treated with radiation therapy and cisplatin-based chemotherapy. On 15 June 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration approved the use of a combination of two chemotherapy drugs, hycamtin and cisplatin, for women with late-stage (IVB) cervical cancer treatment. Combination treatment has significant risk of neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia side effects.

There is insufficient evidence of whether anticancer drugs after standard care help women with locally advanced cervical cancer to live longer.

For surgery to be curative, the entire cancer must be removed with no cancer found at the margins of the removed tissue on examination under a microscope. This procedure is known as exenteration.

No evidence is available to suggest that any form of follow-up approach is better or worse in terms of prolonging survival, improving quality of life, or guiding the management of problems that can arise because of the treatment and that in the case of radiotherapy treatment worsen with time. A 2019 review found no controlled trials regarding the efficacy and safety of interventions for vaginal bleeding in women with advanced cervical cancer.

Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as pembrolizumab (Keytruda), has also been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for certain patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer, demonstrating promising results in ongoing clinical trials. In October 2021, the FDA expanded this approval to include pembrolizumab in combination with chemotherapy, with or without bevacizumab, for people with persistent, recurrent, or metastatic cervical cancer, underscoring the potential of immunotherapeutic approaches in this setting. Additional immunotherapy agents, including other PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors, are under investigation and have similarly shown encouraging outcomes in clinical studies.

Another immune checkpoint inhibitor, cemiplimab-rwlc (Libtayo), received FDA approval in September 2022 for patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer that has progressed on or after chemotherapy, further highlighting the expanding role of immunotherapeutic strategies in advanced disease. 

Tisotumab vedotin (Tivdak) was approved for medical use in the United States in September 2021.

==Prognosis==
===Stage===
The prognosis depends on the stage of the cancer. The prognosis for squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the cervix is the same for each given stage. For intraepithelial cervical neoplasms, the prognosis is good. With treatment, the five-year survival rate for FIGO stage 1 (cancer confined to the cervix) cervical cancer is 85%, and the overall (all stages combined) five-year survival rate is about 66%. Five-year survival in Stage 2 disease (cancer invading beyond upper two-thirds of uterus) is 65%. Stage 3 disease (in which the lower one-third of vagina, pelvic wall is involved or presence of hydronephrosis, pelvic or peri-aortic lymph node involvement) is 35%. Stage 4 disease, in which cancer extends beyond the pelvis, or involves the bladder or rectum, has a 5 year survival rate of 7%.

About 35% of women with invasive cervical cancer have persistent or recurrent disease after treatment.

===By country===
There is an ethnic disparity in five-year survival in the United States. Average survival rates of the dominant squamous cell carcinoma are 72% for Hispanic and Asian-Pacific women, 68% for White women and 61% for Black women.

Regular screening has meant that precancerous changes and early-stage cervical cancers have been detected and treated early. Figures suggest that cervical screening is saving 5,000 lives each year in the UK by preventing cervical cancer.
About 1,000 women per year die of cervical cancer in the UK. All of the Nordic countries have cervical cancer screening programs in place. The Pap test was integrated into clinical practice in the Nordic countries in the 1960s.

In Africa, outcomes are often worse as diagnosis is frequently at a later stage of the disease. In a scoping review of publicly-available cervical cancer prevention and control plans from African countries, plans tended to emphasize survivorship rather than early HPV diagnosis and prevention.

===Adverse Effects===
Chemotherapy works by attacking cells that rapidly divide. This kills cancer cells, but can also impact normal cells leading to adverse side effects. Common chemotherapy side effects include; hair loss, mouth sores, loss of appetite, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, premature menopause, infertility, and damage to the blood-forming cells within bone marrow. Most acute side effects are temporary, dissipating when treatment ceases, but some can be long-lasting or permanent. Long-term chemotherapy side effects include changes in the menstrual cycle, neuropathy, and nephrotoxicity.

Radiation therapy (RT) adverse effects; for a complete side effect list see 

Curative cervical radiation therapy may affect unintended tissues located within the delivery pathway(s) or adjacent to the target lesion, each tissue with a unique sensitivity and response to radiation injury. Common acute RT effects involve the gastrointestinal system, e.g., diarrhea and constipation; urinary tract, e.g., frequent urination; and may cause cervicitis. Common late RT complications include: infertility or premature ovarian failure; vaginal stenosis; lower motor neuron syndrome; telangiectasias, and subsequent hemorrhage; and progressive myelopathy, which may result in irreversible neurologic deficits ranging from minor sensory symptoms to complete paraplegia. Radiotherapy late effects (with occurrence rates) include osteonecrosis (8-20%), bladder ulceration (&lt;3%), vaginal stenosis (&gt;2.5%) and chronic pelvic radiation disease (1-10%), e.g., irreversible lumbosacral plexopathy.

Pelvic radiation also induces secondary malignancies such as leukemia, lymphoma, bladder cancer, pelvic malignancy, colorectal cancer, bone, and soft-tissue sarcoma with occurrence rates between 0.2 and 1.0% per year for each.

==Epidemiology==
Worldwide, cervical cancer is both the fourth-most common type of cancer and the fourth-most common cause of death from cancer in women, with over 660,000 new cases and around 350,000 deaths in 2022. It is the second-most common cause of female-specific cancer after breast cancer, accounting for around 8% of both total cancer cases and total cancer deaths in women. 88% (2020 figure) of cervical cancers and 90% of deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) and 2% (2020 figure) in high-income countries (HICs). It is the most frequently detected cancer during pregnancy, with an occurrence of 1.5 to 12 for every 100,000 pregnancies.

The large majority of cervical cancer cases in 2020 (88%) occurred in LMICs, where they account for 17% of all cancers in women, compared with only 2% in high-income countries (HICs). In sub-Saharan Africa, the region with the highest rates of young women living with HIV (WLWH), approximately 20% of cervical cancer cases occur in WLWH. HPV infection is more likely to persist and to progress to cancer in WLWH. Mortality rates vary 50-fold between countries, ranging from &lt;2 per 100 000 women in some HICs to &gt;40 per 100 000 in some countries of sub-Saharan Africa.

===Africa===
Of the 20 hardest hit countries by cervical cancer, 19 are in Africa.

===Australia===

Australia is on target to eliminate cervical cancer. It anticipates to achieve this in the next 10 years.

In 2022, it is estimated that 942 new cases of cervical cancer will be diagnosed in Australia. In 2022, it is estimated that a female has a 1 in 180 (or 0.56%) risk of being diagnosed with cervical cancer by the age of 85.

In 2020, there were 165 women aged 25–74 who died from cervical cancer, which is a mortality rate of 2 deaths per 100,000 women in the population. Over the 5 years 2016–2020, there were 62 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women aged 25–74 who died from cervical cancer, which is a mortality rate of 7 deaths per 100,000 Indigenous women in the population. Over the 5 years 2016–2020, the age-standardised mortality rate among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women was 3.8 times the rate of non-Indigenous Australians.

The number of women diagnosed with cervical cancer has dropped on average by 4.5% each year since organised screening began in 1991 (1991–2005). Regular twice-yearly Pap tests can reduce the incidence of cervical cancer up to 90% in Australia, and save 1,200 Australian women from dying from the disease each year. It is predicted that because of the success of the primary HPV testing programme there will be fewer than four new cases per 100 000 women annually by 2028.

=== Canada ===
An estimated 1,450 Canadians will be diagnosed with cervical cancer in 2022. An estimated 380 will die from it.

=== India ===
In India, the number of people with cervical cancer is rising, but overall the age-adjusted rates are decreasing. Usage of condoms in the female population has improved the survival of women with cancers of the cervix.

=== European Union ===
As of 2022, the World Health Organization announced that &quot;each year in the WHO European Region more than 66 000 women are newly diagnosed with cervical cancer and more than 30 000 die from this preventable disease.&quot;

=== United Kingdom ===

Cervical cancer is the 12th-most common cancer in women in the UK (around 3,100 women were diagnosed with the disease in 2011) and accounts for 1% of cancer deaths (around 920 died in 2012). With a 42% reduction from 1988 to 1997, the NHS-implemented screening programme has been highly successful, screening the highest-risk age group (25–49 years) every 3 years, and those ages 50–64 every 5 years.

===United States===

An estimated 13,170 new cervical cancers and 4,250 cervical cancer deaths will occur in the United States in 2019. The median age at diagnosis is 50. The rate of new cases in the United States was 7.3 per 100,000 women, based on rates from 2012 to 2016. Cervical cancer deaths decreased by approximately 74% in the last 50 years, largely due to widespread Pap test screening. The annual direct medical cost of cervical cancer prevention and treatment before the introduction of the HPV vaccine was estimated at $6 billion.

=== Nigeria ===
The Nigerian Institute of Medical Research (NIMR) reports that 28 Nigerian women lose their lives daily due to this disease. This alarming statistic underscores the pressing need for better awareness, prevention, and treatment efforts nationally. Numerous Nigerian women lack access to these preventive measures. In many regions of the country, screening tests such as Pap tests and HPV tests are not easily accessible or affordable

==History==
* 400 BCE: Hippocrates noted that cervical cancer was incurable.
* 1925: Hinselmann invented the colposcope.
* 1928: Papanicolaou developed the Papanicolaou technique.
* 1941: Papanicolaou and Traut: Pap test screening began.
* 1946: Aylesbury spatula was developed to scrape the cervix, collecting the sample for the Pap test.
* 1951: First successful in-vitro cell line, HeLa, derived from biopsy of cervical cancer of Henrietta Lacks.
* 1976: Harald zur Hausen and Gisam found HPV DNA in cervical cancer and genital warts; Hausen later won the Nobel Prize for his work.
* 1988: Bethesda System for reporting Pap results was developed.
* 2006: First HPV vaccine was approved by the FDA.
* 2015: HPV vaccine shown to protect against infection at multiple body sites.
* 2018: Evidence for single-dose protection with HPV vaccine.

Epidemiologists working in the early 20th century noted that cervical cancer behaved like a sexually transmitted disease. In summary:

# Cervical cancer was noted to be common in female sex workers.
# It was rare in nuns, except for those who had been sexually active before entering the convent (Rigoni in 1841).
# It was more common in the second wives of men whose first wives had died from cervical cancer.
# It was rare in Jewish women.
# In 1935, Syverton and Berry discovered a relationship between RPV (Rabbit Papillomavirus) and skin cancer in rabbits. (HPV is species-specific and therefore cannot be transmitted to rabbits).

These historical observations suggested that cervical cancer could be caused by a sexually transmitted agent. Initial research in the 1940s and 1950s attributed cervical cancer to smegma. During the 1960s and 1970s it was suspected that infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) was the cause of the disease. In summary, HSV was seen as a likely cause because it is known to survive in the female reproductive tract, and to be transmitted sexually in a way compatible with known risk factors, such as promiscuity and low socioeconomic status. Herpes viruses were also implicated in other malignant diseases, including Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma, Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Marek&#x27;s disease and the Lucké renal adenocarcinoma. HSV was recovered from cervical tumour cells.

A description of human papillomavirus (HPV) by electron microscopy was given in 1949, and HPV-DNA was identified in 1963. It was not until the 1980s that HPV was identified in cervical cancer tissue. It has since been demonstrated that HPV is implicated in virtually all cervical cancers. Specific viral subtypes implicated are HPV 16, 18, 31, 45 and others.

In work that was initiated in the mid-1980s, the HPV vaccine was developed, in parallel, by researchers at Georgetown University Medical Center, the University of Rochester, the University of Queensland in Australia, and the U.S. National Cancer Institute. In 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first preventive HPV vaccine, marketed by Merck &amp; Co. under the trade name Gardasil.

17 November is the Cervical Cancer Elimination Day of Action. The date marks the day in 2020 when WHO launched the Global strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem, with a resolution passed by 194 countries. In November 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO), under backing from the World Health Assembly, set out a strategy to eliminate cervical cancer by 2050. The strategy involves vaccinating 90% of girls by the age of 15, screening 70% of women by the age of 35 and again by the age of 45, and treating 90% of women identified with cervical disease. To eliminate cervical cancer, all countries must reach and maintain an incidence rate of below 4 per 100 000 women.

==Society and culture==
===Australia===
In Australia, Aboriginal women are more than five times more likely to die from cervical cancer than non-Aboriginal women, suggesting that Aboriginal women are less likely to have regular Pap tests. There are several factors that may limit indigenous women from engaging in regular cervical screening practices, including sensitivity in discussing the topic in Aboriginal communities, embarrassment, anxiety and fear about the procedure. Difficulty in accessing screening services (for example, transport difficulties) and a lack of female GPs, trained Pap test providers and trained female Aboriginal Health Workers are also issues.

The Australian Cervical Cancer Foundation (ACCF), founded in 2008, promotes &#x27;women&#x27;s health by eliminating cervical cancer and enabling treatment for women with cervical cancer and related health issues, in Australia and in developing countries.&#x27; Ian Frazer, one of the developers of the Gardasil cervical cancer vaccine, is the scientific advisor to ACCF. Janette Howard, the wife of the then-Prime Minister of Australia, John Howard, was diagnosed with cervical cancer in 1996, and first spoke publicly about the disease in 2006.

===United States===
A 2007 survey of American women found 40% had heard of HPV infection and less than half of those knew it causes cervical cancer. Over a longitudinal study from 1975 to 2000, it was found that people of lower socioeconomic census brackets had higher rates of late-stage cancer diagnosis and higher morbidity rates. After controlling for stage, there still existed differences in survival rates. Women in the US experience stigma around HPV infection, vaccination, and cervical cancer. This is predominantly driven by fear of social judgment and rejection, self-blame, and shame, with notable negative influences from gender and social norms, as both human papillomavirus infection and cervical cancer were stigmatized due to the perception that they arise from reckless behavior such as having multiple sexual partners or neglecting screening.

=== LGBTQ populations ===
Transgender men and gender-diverse people who have a cervix (even if partially intact) or have a prior history of cervical cancer or precancerous conditions, and are age 21 or older who have ever had sex with anyone need to get screened for cervical cancer. Transmasculine people are just as likely as cisgender women to have cervical cancer, but are less likely to undergo cervical screening, because of dysphoria, gender disaffirmation or disempowerment of the individual by healthcare providers, or being misinformed of HPV and cervical cancer risks as well as many healthcare providers perceiving transmasculine individuals to be at low risk of cervical cancer.

Transgender women who have not had bottom surgery have no risk of cervical cancer, as they do not have a cervix. Trans women who have had bottom surgery to create a vagina (vaginoplasty) and possibly a cervix, are at a very small risk to develop cancer in the tissues of their neo-vagina or neo-cervix as these tissues are made up of different cells than a cervix in a cisgender woman Cervical cancer screening is not necessary in trans women who have undergone vaginoplasty because they do not have a cervix.

Intersex people with a cervix are also able to have cervical cancer.
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Fact sheet on cervical cancer by the WHO
* Cervical cancer at the NIH National Cancer Institute
* Jo&#x27;s Cervical Cancer Trust, UK cervical cancer charity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="0" end="15" title="Cervical cancer" label="Cervical cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="21" end="27" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="45" end="51" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="131" end="136" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q244913" start="269" end="285" title="vaginal bleeding" label="vaginal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161805" start="287" end="298" title="pelvic pain" label="pelvic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q120395" start="302" end="332" title="dyspareunia" label="pain during sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="497" end="527" title="human papillomavirus infection" label="human papillomavirus infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="782" end="789" title="smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="793" end="811" title="Immunodeficiency" label="weak immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="813" end="832" title="Oral contraceptive pill" label="birth control pills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065327" start="896" end="911" title="Cervical Cancer Gene Database" label="Genetic factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088163" start="993" end="1013" title="Precancerous condition" label="precancerous changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="1021" end="1055" title="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="1111" end="1134" title="squamous cell carcinoma" label="squamous cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q356033" start="1148" end="1162" title="adenocarcinoma" label="adenocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981276" start="1228" end="1249" title="neuroendocrine tumors" label="neuroendocrine tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065348" start="1291" end="1309" title="cervical screening" label="cervical screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="1324" end="1330" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="1332" end="1347" title="Medical imaging" label="Medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q900189" start="1412" end="1427" title="HPV vaccine" label="HPV vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="1609" end="1614" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q942976" start="1949" end="1957" title="Pap test" label="Pap test"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="2044" end="2050" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="2101" end="2112" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="2252" end="2259" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="2261" end="2273" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="2279" end="2296" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716347" start="2298" end="2321" title="Five-year survival rate" label="Five-year survival rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="3037" end="3056" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q115818534" start="3476" end="3498" title="immortalized cell line" label="immortalized cell line"/>
<link wikidata="Q847482" start="3509" end="3513" title="HeLa" label="HeLa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647793" start="3573" end="3588" title="Henrietta Lacks" label="Henrietta Lacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="4036" end="4052" title="asymptomatic" label="free of symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q244913" start="4054" end="4070" title="Vaginal bleeding" label="Vaginal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="4435" end="4445" title="metastasis" label="metastases"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="4468" end="4475" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="4477" end="4481" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="4548" end="4564" title="Anorexia (symptom)" label="loss of appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="4826" end="4840" title="hydronephrosis" label="hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385" start="4864" end="4871" title="ureters" label="ureters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="5158" end="5161" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="5345" end="5363" title="Human papillomavirus infection" label="Infection with HPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="6166" end="6179" title="transcription (biology)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="6270" end="6273" title="p53" label="p53"/>
<link wikidata="Q21111463" start="6336" end="6339" title="pRb" label="pRb"/>
<link wikidata="Q29725" start="6424" end="6458" title="vascular endothelial growth factor" label="vascular endothelial growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188941" start="6518" end="6528" title="cell cycle" label="cell cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208726" start="6595" end="6607" title="Genital wart" label="Genital wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417240" start="6630" end="6642" title="benign tumor" label="benign tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="6646" end="6656" title="epithelium" label="epithelial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="6927" end="6944" title="Tobacco smoking" label="Cigarette smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="7486" end="7520" title="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="8266" end="8285" title="Oral contraceptive pill" label="oral contraceptives"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="8361" end="8364" title="Human papillomavirus infection" label="HPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q942976" start="8952" end="8960" title="Pap test" label="Pap test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163564" start="8978" end="8992" title="Screening (medicine)" label="screening test"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9008" end="9022" title="False positives and false negatives#False negative error" label="false negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q912741" start="9294" end="9304" title="colposcopy" label="colposcopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="9374" end="9385" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="9392" end="9399" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042005" start="9626" end="9639" title="Instruments used in obstetrics and gynecology" label="punch forceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549707" start="9807" end="9841" title="loop electrical excision procedure" label="loop electrical excision procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123355" start="9846" end="9865" title="cervical conization" label="cervical conization"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="10001" end="10035" title="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="10179" end="10189" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="10556" end="10590" title="Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="10978" end="10988" title="histology" label="histologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="11094" end="11119" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128996" start="11212" end="11221" title="dysplasia" label="dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035645" start="11225" end="11254" title="carcinoma in situ" label="carcinoma &amp;quot;in situ&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124854" start="11796" end="11811" title="Bethesda system" label="Bethesda system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881849" start="11832" end="11845" title="cytopathology" label="cytopathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124854" start="11884" end="11925" title="Bethesda system" label="Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11937" end="11979" title="Bethesda system#HSIL" label="high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070952" start="12195" end="12205" title="Histopathology" label="Histologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="12257" end="12280" title="Squamous cell carcinoma" label="Squamous cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q356033" start="12298" end="12312" title="adenocarcinoma" label="adenocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658380" start="12357" end="12380" title="Adenosquamous carcinoma" label="Adenosquamous carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q738170" start="12383" end="12403" title="Small cell carcinoma" label="Small cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981276" start="12406" end="12427" title="Neuroendocrine tumour" label="Neuroendocrine tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567200" start="12430" end="12451" title="Glassy cell carcinoma of the cervix" label="Glassy cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931117" start="12454" end="12483" title="Villoglandular adenocarcinoma of the cervix" label="Villoglandular adenocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="12996" end="13004" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="13009" end="13017" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q683972" start="13023" end="13076" title="International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics" label="International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="13111" end="13121" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q668115" start="13153" end="13156" title="TNM staging system" label="TNM"/>
<link wikidata="Q912741" start="13647" end="13657" title="colposcopy" label="colposcopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428130" start="13672" end="13681" title="curettage" label="curettage"/>
<link wikidata="Q597058" start="13683" end="13695" title="hysteroscopy" label="hysteroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="13697" end="13707" title="cystoscopy" label="cystoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q447295" start="13709" end="13720" title="proctoscopy" label="proctoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567532" start="13734" end="13743" title="urography" label="urography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="13749" end="13754" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q123355" start="13807" end="13817" title="conization" label="conization"/>
<link wikidata="Q942976" start="13973" end="13990" title="Pap test" label="Papanicolaou test"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="14381" end="14415" title="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="14490" end="14510" title="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="precancerous changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q912741" start="14562" end="14572" title="colposcopy" label="colposcopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643555" start="16588" end="16610" title="Gardasil" label="one nonavalent vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643555" start="16646" end="16666" title="Gardasil" label="Gardasil, Gardasil 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575335" start="16672" end="16680" title="Cervarix" label="Cervarix"/>
<link wikidata="Q105499" start="16753" end="16761" title="perineum" label="perineum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="17200" end="17210" title="Adolescence" label="adolescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920497" start="17430" end="17437" title="Booster dose" label="booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843019" start="17618" end="17655" title="American Society of Clinical Oncology" label="American Society of Clinical Oncology"/>
<link wikidata="Q513122" start="17783" end="17798" title="Spermicide" label="spermicidal gel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="17902" end="17908" title="Condom" label="Condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="18018" end="18021" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="18032" end="18041" title="Chlamydia infection" label="Chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="18139" end="18148" title="Vitamin A" label="Vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="18188" end="18199" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="18201" end="18210" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="18212" end="18221" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q306135" start="18227" end="18240" title="beta-Carotene" label="beta-Carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q196788" start="19027" end="19061" title="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia" label="cervical intraepithelial neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123355" start="19239" end="19258" title="Cervical conization" label="cone-shaped portion"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="19457" end="19472" title="Preterm birth" label="premature birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q550675" start="20106" end="20118" title="hysterectomy" label="hysterectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="20171" end="20177" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="20199" end="20209" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549707" start="20289" end="20323" title="loop electrical excision procedure" label="loop electrical excision procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123355" start="20327" end="20338" title="Cervical conization" label="cone biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q916859" start="20757" end="20770" title="trachelectomy" label="trachelectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q912741" start="22485" end="22495" title="colposcopy" label="colposcopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="22689" end="22697" title="safe sex" label="safe sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="22869" end="22886" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="22963" end="22976" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q412415" start="23534" end="23543" title="cisplatin" label="cisplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q357896" start="23606" end="23614" title="adjuvant" label="adjuvant"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="24263" end="24291" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q419953" start="24353" end="24361" title="hycamtin" label="hycamtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="24482" end="24493" title="neutropenia" label="neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="24495" end="24501" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585285" start="24507" end="24523" title="thrombocytopenia" label="thrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13896859" start="25386" end="25399" title="pembrolizumab" label="pembrolizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q413299" start="25732" end="25743" title="bevacizumab" label="bevacizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606818" start="26096" end="26111" title="cemiplimab-rwlc" label="cemiplimab-rwlc"/>
<link wikidata="Q108670929" start="26362" end="26379" title="Tisotumab vedotin" label="Tisotumab vedotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332823" start="26737" end="26750" title="survival rate" label="survival rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="27094" end="27108" title="hydronephrosis" label="hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133679" start="27120" end="27142" title="peri-aortic lymph node" label="peri-aortic lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="27563" end="27571" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806708" start="27576" end="27589" title="Asian Pacific Americans" label="Asian-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="27605" end="27616" title="White people" label="White women"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="27629" end="27640" title="Black people" label="Black women"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="27953" end="27969" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468324" start="28993" end="29007" title="nephrotoxicity" label="nephrotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387689" start="29246" end="29297" title="Radiosensitivity" label="unique sensitivity and response to radiation injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463884" start="29448" end="29458" title="cervicitis" label="cervicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q647630" start="29513" end="29538" title="Primary ovarian insufficiency" label="premature ovarian failure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29540" end="29556" title="vaginal stenosis#Causes" label="vaginal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634800" start="29587" end="29602" title="telangiectasias" label="telangiectasias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303951" start="29635" end="29657" title="myelopathy" label="progressive myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049655" start="29760" end="29770" title="paraplegia" label="paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q503629" start="29830" end="29843" title="osteonecrosis" label="osteonecrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671412" start="29853" end="29871" title="Interstitial cystitis" label="bladder ulceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636901" start="29882" end="29898" title="vaginal stenosis" label="vaginal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280350" start="29922" end="29946" title="Radiation enteropathy" label="pelvic radiation disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631042" start="29962" end="29997" title="Radiation-induced lumbar plexopathy" label="irreversible lumbosacral plexopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="30061" end="30069" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="30071" end="30079" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="30081" end="30095" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="30116" end="30133" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q720020" start="30145" end="30164" title="soft-tissue sarcoma" label="soft-tissue sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="30512" end="30525" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="30678" end="30718" title="Developing country" label="low- and middle-income countries (LMICs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="30743" end="30771" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income countries (HICs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="31547" end="31553" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="31573" end="31582" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="34963" end="34974" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35025" end="35035" title="Hans Hinselmann" label="Hinselmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q912741" start="35049" end="35059" title="colposcope" label="colposcope"/>
<link wikidata="Q319321" start="35069" end="35081" title="Georgios Papanikolaou" label="Papanicolaou"/>
<link wikidata="Q942976" start="35152" end="35160" title="Pap test" label="Pap test"/>
<link wikidata="Q942976" start="35186" end="35203" title="Aylesbury spatula" label="Aylesbury spatula"/>
<link wikidata="Q847482" start="35325" end="35329" title="HeLa" label="HeLa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647793" start="35373" end="35388" title="Henrietta Lacks" label="Henrietta Lacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q75847" start="35398" end="35415" title="Harald zur Hausen" label="Harald zur Hausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="35499" end="35510" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124854" start="35533" end="35548" title="Bethesda System" label="Bethesda System"/>
<link wikidata="Q900189" start="35604" end="35615" title="HPV vaccine" label="HPV vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="35783" end="35798" title="Epidemiology" label="Epidemiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q852857" start="35969" end="35979" title="sex worker" label="sex worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="35999" end="36002" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="36336" end="36342" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156102" start="36600" end="36606" title="smegma" label="smegma"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="36672" end="36692" title="herpes simplex virus" label="herpes simplex virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016605" start="37038" end="37061" title="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693598" start="37063" end="37087" title="Nasopharyngeal carcinoma" label="Nasopharyngeal carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q53843869" start="37089" end="37109" title="Marek&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Marek&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="37210" end="37230" title="human papillomavirus" label="human papillomavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="37240" end="37259" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="37660" end="37681" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="37702" end="37725" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="37731" end="37755" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q664846" start="37783" end="37808" title="National Cancer Institute" label="National Cancer Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="37826" end="37854" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="37916" end="37931" title="Merck &amp;amp; Co." label="Merck &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="38237" end="38262" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="38293" end="38314" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q123758039" start="39362" end="39399" title="Australian Cervical Cancer Foundation" label="Australian Cervical Cancer Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q930011" start="39620" end="39630" title="Ian Frazer" label="Ian Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153696" start="39730" end="39744" title="Janette Howard" label="Janette Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="39796" end="39807" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="40347" end="40353" title="Social stigma" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="40575" end="40595" title="human papillomavirus" label="human papillomavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="41974" end="41982" title="Intersex" label="Intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="42150" end="42153" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q664846" start="42179" end="42208" title="National Cancer Institute" label="NIH National Cancer Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53339" wikidata="Q162972" url="?curid=53339" title="Pope Eutychian">
<text>Pope Eutychian, also called Eutychianus (), was the bishop of Rome from 4 January 275 to his death on 7 December 283.

Eutychian&#x27;s original epitaph was discovered in the catacomb of Callixtus (see Kraus, &quot;Roma sotterranea&quot;, p. 154 et seq.), but almost nothing more is known of him. Even the date of his reign is uncertain. &quot;Liber Pontificalis&quot; gives a reign of 8 years and 11 months, from 275 to 283. Eusebius, on the other hand says his reign was only 10 months.

Eutychian is said to have allowed the blessing of grapes and beans on the altar and to have buried 324 martyrs with his own hands. Some historians doubt these traditions, but others assert that persecutions continued until the Edict of Serdica was proclaimed in 311 by Emperor Galerius, making Christianity a legal and acceptable religion. The blessing of produce of the fields is believed by some to belong to a later period, but this cannot be verified.

Eutychian&#x27;s feast day is 8 December.

==See also==

*List of Catholic saints
*List of popes

==References==
==External links==

*Sanctus Eutychianus at Documenta Catholica Omnia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162972" start="0" end="14" title="Pope Eutychian" label="Pope Eutychian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162972" start="28" end="39" title="Pope Eutychian" label="Eutychianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="52" end="66" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027069" start="175" end="196" title="catacomb of Callixtus" label="catacomb of Callixtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q92208" start="202" end="207" title="Franz Xaver Kraus" label="Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309061" start="344" end="362" title="Liber Pontificalis" label="Liber Pontificalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="426" end="434" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q128742" start="717" end="733" title="Edict of Serdica" label="Edict of Serdica"/>
<link wikidata="Q172168" start="767" end="775" title="Galerius" label="Galerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="784" end="796" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="964" end="973" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566424" start="1005" end="1028" title="List of Catholic saints" label="List of Catholic saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="1030" end="1043" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53340" wikidata="Q160882" url="?curid=53340" title="Pope Caius">
<text>Pope Caius (died 22 April 296), also called Gaius, was the bishop of Rome from 17 December 283 to his death in 296. Little information on Caius is available except that given by the &quot;Liber Pontificalis&quot;, which relies on a legendary account of the martyrdom of Susanna of Rome for its information. According to legend, Caius baptized the men and women who had been converted by Tiburtius (who is venerated with Susanna) and Castulus. His legend states that Caius took refuge in the catacombs of Rome and died a martyr.

==Pontificate==

Christian tradition makes Caius a native of the Dalmatian city of Salona, the son of a man also named Caius or Gaius, and a member of a noble family related to the Emperor Diocletian. About 280, an early Christian house of worship was established on the site of Santa Susanna, which, like many of the earliest Christian meeting places, was in a house (&quot;domus ecclesiae&quot;). The &quot;domus&quot; belonged, according to the sixth-century &quot;&quot;, to brothers named Caius and Gabinus, prominent Christians. Caius may be this pope, or Caius the Presbyter. Gabinus is the name given to the father of Susanna. Thus, sources state that Caius was the uncle of Susanna.

As pope, Caius decreed that before someone could assume the position of bishop, he must first be porter, lector, exorcist, acolyte, subdeacon, deacon, and priest. He also divided the districts of Rome among the deacons. During his pontificate, anti-Christian measures increased, although new churches were built and cemeteries were expanded. 

===Martyrdom===
Pope Caius would go into hiding due to increased persecution of the church, alongside Saints Polycarp, Sebastian, Tranquillinus, Tiburtius, Nicostratus and Zoe, in the house of Castulus, a Christian officer employed at the Imperial Palace. Over the course of the next few years, the entire group would be discovered one by one by Roman authorities and martyred. Caius would be found praying with Tiburtius shortly after the conversion and baptism of Tiburtius&#x27; children and the pair was brought to the local Praefectus, a man named Fabian, who ordered the construction of a great bonfire, and ordered the two to either throw frankincense into it to appease the Roman gods, or to cast themselves into it. Although Pope Caius&#x27; ultimate fate is unclear, often being associated with beheading, according to legend Tiburtius walked into the fire invoking the name of Christ and remained unhurt, so he was taken out of Rome by the Via Labicana and beheaded. However, Caius&#x27; martyrdom is disputed, as the Diocletianic Persecution of Christians began in 303 AD, after Caius’ alleged death, and Diocletian was not immediately hostile to Christianity upon becoming emperor.

==Legacy==

Caius is mentioned in the fourth-century &quot;Depositio Episcoporum&quot; (therefore not as a martyr): &quot;X kl maii Caii in Callisti&quot;.

Caius&#x27; tomb, with the original epitaph, was discovered in the catacomb of Callixtus and in it the ring with which he used to seal his letters (see Arringhi, Roma subterr., 1. iv. c. xlviii. p. 426). In 1631, his alleged residence in Rome was turned into a church. However, it was demolished in 1880 to make room for the Ministry of War, on the Via XX Settembre, and his relics were transferred to the chapel of the Barberini family.

Saint Caius&#x27;s feast day is celebrated on 22 April, as is that of Pope Soter. They are celebrated jointly in the Tridentine calendar and in the successive versions of the General Roman Calendar until that of 1969, since when they are omitted. Both are mentioned under 22 April in the Roman Martyrology, the official list of recognized saints. The entry for Saint Caius is as follows: &quot;At Rome, in the cemetery of Callistus on the Via Appia, the burial of Saint Caius, Pope, who, fleeing from the persecution of Diocletian, died as a confessor of the faith.&quot;

Saint Caius is portrayed in art wearing the papal tiara with Saint Nereus. He is venerated in Dalmatia and Venice. In Florence, the church of San Gaggio on the via Senese was dedicated to him; the term &quot;Gaggio&quot; is a corruption of the name &quot;Cajo&quot;. In 2003, plans were put into effect to turn it into residential council housing.

==See also==
*List of Catholic saints
*List of popes

==References==
==External links==

*Opera Omnia by Migne patrologia Latina</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160882" start="0" end="10" title="Pope Caius" label="Pope Caius"/>
<link wikidata="Q160882" start="44" end="49" title="Pope Caius" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="59" end="73" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q309061" start="188" end="206" title="Liber Pontificalis" label="Liber Pontificalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272987" start="270" end="285" title="Saint Susanna" label="Susanna of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330524" start="387" end="396" title="Saint Tiburtius" label="Tiburtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q167902" start="433" end="441" title="Castulus" label="Castulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="491" end="508" title="catacombs of Rome" label="catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="520" end="526" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="594" end="602" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258998" start="612" end="618" title="Salona" label="Salona"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="682" end="694" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="noble family"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="710" end="717" title="Roman emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="718" end="728" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030809" start="808" end="821" title="Santa Susanna" label="Santa Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="938" end="943" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441699" start="1091" end="1110" title="Caius (presbyter)" label="Caius the Presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="1294" end="1300" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477230" start="1319" end="1325" title="Porter (doorkeeper)" label="porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26899865" start="1327" end="1333" title="lector" label="lector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467532" start="1335" end="1343" title="exorcist" label="exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q420421" start="1345" end="1352" title="acolyte" label="acolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056310" start="1354" end="1363" title="subdeacon" label="subdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="1365" end="1371" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="1377" end="1383" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="1466" end="1480" title="anti-Christian" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q183332" start="1685" end="1694" title="Saint Sebastian" label="Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1696" end="1709" title="Saint Tranquillinus" label="Tranquillinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330524" start="1711" end="1720" title="Saint Tiburtius" label="Tiburtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341507" start="1738" end="1741" title="Zoe of Rome" label="Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q167902" start="1759" end="1767" title="Castulus" label="Castulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183538" start="2095" end="2105" title="Praefectus" label="Praefectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173486" start="2212" end="2224" title="frankincense" label="frankincense"/>
<link wikidata="Q763100" start="2517" end="2529" title="Via Labicana" label="Via Labicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="2534" end="2542" title="beheaded" label="beheaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="2595" end="2619" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="Diocletianic Persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268359" start="2821" end="2842" title="Depositio Episcoporum" label="Depositio Episcoporum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027069" start="2986" end="3007" title="catacomb of Callixtus" label="catacomb of Callixtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27999682" start="3244" end="3259" title="Italian Minister of Defense" label="Ministry of War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3268" end="3284" title="Via XX Settembre (Rome)" label="Via XX Settembre"/>
<link wikidata="Q807815" start="3339" end="3348" title="Barberini" label="Barberini"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="3377" end="3386" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q101280" start="3428" end="3438" title="Pope Soter" label="Pope Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883976" start="3475" end="3494" title="Tridentine calendar" label="Tridentine calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="3533" end="3555" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705108" start="3646" end="3663" title="Roman Martyrology" label="Roman Martyrology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3768" end="3789" title="Catacombs of Rome#Catacombs of San Callisto" label="cemetery of Callistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="3797" end="3806" title="Via Appia" label="Via Appia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="3878" end="3888" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063103" start="3975" end="3986" title="papal tiara" label="papal tiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q721711" start="3992" end="4004" title="Saint Nereus" label="Saint Nereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="4025" end="4033" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4038" end="4044" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3670195" start="4073" end="4083" title="San Gaggio, Florence" label="San Gaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566424" start="4294" end="4317" title="List of Catholic saints" label="List of Catholic saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="4319" end="4332" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53342" wikidata="Q348486" url="?curid=53342" title="Sentence">
<text>Sentence(s) or The Sentence may refer to:

==Common uses==
* Sentence (law), a punishment imposed on a person who has been convicted in court of a criminal offence
* Sentence (linguistics), a grammatical unit of language
* Sentence (mathematical logic), a formula not containing free variables

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* Sentence (music), a type of musical phrase
* Sentence (liturgy), a short biblical phrase within Anglican liturgy
* &quot;Sentences&quot;, a 12th-century theological book by Peter Lombard
* &quot;Sentences&quot; (Muhly), a 2014 oratorio by Nico Muhly
* &quot;&quot;, a 2007 autobiographical graphic novel by MF Grimm
* &quot;The Sentence&quot; (film), a 2018 documentary by Rudy Valdez
* &quot;The Sentence&quot; (novel), a 2021 novel by Louise Erdrich
* &quot;The Sentence&quot; &quot;(The Outer Limits)&quot;, an episode of the TV series &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;
* &quot;The Sentence&quot;, a 2016 novel and performance piece by Alistair Fruish</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348486" start="0" end="8" title="Sentence" label="Sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q348486" start="9" end="10" title="Sentence" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q348486" start="15" end="27" title="Sentence" label="The Sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="61" end="75" title="Sentence (law)" label="Sentence (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796" start="166" end="188" title="Sentence (linguistics)" label="Sentence (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509500" start="223" end="252" title="Sentence (mathematical logic)" label="Sentence (mathematical logic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389395" start="332" end="348" title="Sentence (music)" label="Sentence (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q120629697" start="377" end="395" title="Sentence (liturgy)" label="Sentence (liturgy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703316" start="453" end="462" title="Sentences" label="Sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160150" start="521" end="550" title="Sentences (Muhly)" label="&amp;quot;Sentences&amp;quot; (Muhly)"/>
<link wikidata="Q95991514" start="650" end="681" title="The Sentence (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sentence&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126688726" start="719" end="751" title="The Sentence (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Sentence&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545617" start="786" end="841" title="The Sentence (The Outer Limits)" label="&amp;quot;The Sentence&amp;quot; &amp;quot;(The Outer Limits)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47571471" start="966" end="981" title="Alistair Fruish" label="Alistair Fruish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53343" wikidata="Q10691" url="?curid=53343" title="Plaid Cymru">
<text>Plaid Cymru ( ; , ; officially Plaid Cymru – the Party of Wales, and often referred to simply as Plaid) is a centre-left to left-wing, Welsh nationalist political party in Wales, committed to Welsh independence from the United Kingdom. It campaigns on a platform of social democracy and civic nationalism. The party is a supporter of the European Union and is a member of the European Free Alliance (EFA). The party holds 4 of 32 Welsh seats in the UK Parliament, 12 of 60 seats in the Senedd, and 202 of 1,231 principal local authority councillors. Plaid was formed in 1925 under the name &quot;Plaid Genedlaethol Cymru&quot; (English: The National Party of Wales) and Gwynfor Evans won the first Westminster seat for the party at the 1966 Carmarthen by-election. 

In 1999 (in the first devolved Welsh Assembly election), Plaid Cymru gained considerable ground in traditionally Labour heartlands. These breakthroughs were part of the intentional aim to win more seats in the Welsh valleys and North East Wales, which continues to be an ambition today. The party have mostly been in opposition in the Senedd. Although under the leadership of Ieuan Wyn Jones, the party was part of a coalition as a junior partner with Welsh Labour (See: One Wales, Morgan and Jones governments) between 2007 and 2011. Wyn Jones became the deputy First Minister and Minister for the Economy and Transport, other Plaid Cymru Assembly members were also part of the cabinets. 

After losses in the 2011 Assembly elections and dropping down to being the third largest party, Wyn Jones stepped down. He was succeeded by Leanne Wood. In the 2016 Assembly elections Wood managed to win her constituency seat of Rhondda meaning the party gained one seat, and became the official opposition once again, although only for a brief period. In 2018 following internal pressure and a leadership contest, Adam Price defeated Wood and was elected the new leader. Following the 2021 Senedd election Plaid formed a co-operation agreement with the Welsh Labour government. In May 2023 Price resigned as leader following the publication of a report which detailed failings by the party to prevent sexual harassment and bullying. In June 2023 Rhun ap Iorwerth was elected unopposed as leader. The party won the second most seats in Wales in the 2024 general election and won both its target seats. 

==Aims==
In September 2008, a senior Plaid assembly member spelled out her party&#x27;s continuing support for an independent Wales. The then Welsh Minister for Rural Affairs, Elin Jones, told delegates at Plaid&#x27;s annual conference in Aberystwyth that the party would continue its commitment to independence under the coalition with Welsh Labour.

In 2014, the party&#x27;s constitution included the following aims:

* Securing Welsh independence in Europe
* Economic prosperity, social justice and a healthy natural environment with decentralist socialism
* A national community with equal citizenship and respect for diversity
* Develop a bilingual society
* Promote Wales to the world and achieve United Nations membership

While Wales remains part of the United Kingdom, Plaid Cymru want to see further powers devolved from the UK Government to Wales, including: broadcasting and communication powers, devolution of the Crown Estate, welfare and rail.

The party opposes nuclear power and nuclear weapons (including the UK&#x27;s Trident nuclear weapons programme). 

The party also favours lowering the voting age to 16 years old. The voting age has already been lowered to include 16- and 17-year-olds for both Senedd elections and local elections in Wales since 2020, but not for UK general elections or police and crime commissioner elections: 18 is the minimum voting age for both of these.

Plaid Cymru supports making social care &quot;free at the point of need&quot;.

In 2022, Plaid Cymru&#x27;s policies included in its co-operation agreement with Welsh Labour included:

* Free school meals for all primary school children
* Free childcare for all two-year-olds
* Commitment to deal with second homes
* Creation of a national care service
* Long-term Senedd reform
* Reforming council tax
* Increased investment in flood defence and prevention

==History==
===Beginnings===

While both the Labour and Liberal parties of the early 20th century had accommodated demands for Welsh home rule, no political party existed for the purpose of establishing a Welsh government. was formed on 5 August 1925, by Moses Gruffydd, H. R. Jones and Lewis Valentine, members of ; ); and Fred Jones, Saunders Lewis of and D. Edmund Williams. Initially, home rule for Wales was not an explicit aim of the new movement; keeping Wales Welsh-speaking took primacy, with the aim of making Welsh the only official language of Wales.

In the 1929 general election, the party contested its first parliamentary constituency, Caernarvonshire, polling 609 votes, or 1.6% of the vote for that seat. The party contested few such elections in its early years, partly due to its ambivalence towards Westminster politics. Indeed, the candidate Lewis Valentine, the party&#x27;s first president, offered himself in Caernarvonshire on a platform of demonstrating Welsh people&#x27;s rejection of English dominion.

===1930s===
By 1932, the aims of self-government and Welsh representation at the League of Nations had been added to that of preserving Welsh language and culture. However, this move, and the party&#x27;s early attempts to develop an economic critique, did not broaden its appeal beyond that of an intellectual and socially conservative Welsh language pressure group. The alleged sympathy of the party&#x27;s leading members (including President Saunders Lewis) towards Europe&#x27;s totalitarian regimes compromised its early appeal further.

Saunders Lewis, David John Williams and Lewis Valentine set fire to the newly constructed RAF Penyberth air base on the Llŷn Peninsula in Gwynedd in 1936, in protest at its siting in the Welsh-speaking heartland. The leaders&#x27; treatment, including the trial judge&#x27;s dismissal of the use of Welsh and their subsequent imprisonment in Wormwood Scrubs, led to &quot;The Three&quot; becoming a &quot;cause célèbre&quot;. This heightened the profile of the party dramatically and its membership had doubled to nearly 2,000 by 1939.

===1940s===

Penyberth, and Plaid Cymru&#x27;s neutral stance during the Second World War, prompted concerns within the UK Government that it might be used by Germany to insert spies or carry out other covert operations. In fact, the party adopted a neutral standpoint and urged (with only limited success) conscientious objection to war service.

In 1943, Saunders Lewis contested the University of Wales parliamentary seat at a by-election, gaining 1,330 votes, or 22%. In the 1945 general election, with party membership at around 2,500, Plaid Cymru contested seven seats, as many as it had in the preceding 20 years, including constituencies in south Wales for the first time. At this time Gwynfor Evans was elected president.

===1950s===
Gwynfor Evans&#x27;s presidency coincided with the maturation of Plaid Cymru (as it now began to refer to itself) into a more recognisable political party. Its share of the vote increased from 0.7% in the 1951 general election to 3.1% in 1955 and 5.2% in 1959. In the 1959 election, the party contested a majority of Welsh seats for the first time. Proposals to flood the village of Capel Celyn in the Tryweryn valley in Gwynedd in 1957 to supply the city of Liverpool with water played a part in Plaid Cymru&#x27;s growth. The fact that the parliamentary bill authorising the dam went through without support from any Welsh MPs showed that the MPs&#x27; votes in Westminster were not enough to prevent such bills from passing.

===1960s===
Support for the party declined slightly in the early 1960s, particularly as support for the Liberal Party began to stabilise from its long-term decline. In 1962, Saunders Lewis gave a radio talk entitled &quot;Tynged yr Iaith&quot; (The fate of the language) in which he predicted the extinction of the Welsh language unless action was taken. This led to the formation of Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg (the Welsh Language Society) the same year.

Labour&#x27;s return to power in 1964 and the creation of the post of Secretary of State for Wales appeared to represent a continuation of the incremental evolution of a distinctive Welsh polity, following the Conservative government&#x27;s appointment of a Minister of Welsh Affairs in the mid-1950s and the establishment of Cardiff as Wales&#x27; capital in 1955.

However, in 1966, less than four months after coming in third in the constituency of Carmarthen, Gwynfor Evans captured the seat from Labour at a by-election. This was followed by two further by-elections in Rhondda West in 1967 and Caerphilly in 1968 in which the party achieved massive swings of 30% and 40% respectively, coming within a whisker of victory. The results were caused partly by an anti-Labour backlash. Expectations in coal mining communities that the Wilson government would halt the long-term decline in their industry had been dashed by a significant downward revision of coal production estimates. However, particularly in Carmarthen, Plaid also successfully depicted Labour&#x27;s policies as a threat to the viability of small Welsh communities.

===1970s===
In the 1970 general election, Plaid Cymru contested every seat in Wales for the first time and its vote share surged from 4.5% in 1966 to 11.5%. Gwynfor Evans lost Carmarthen to Labour, but regained the seat in October 1974, by which time the party had gained a further two MPs, representing the constituencies of Caernarfon and Merionethshire.

Plaid Cymru&#x27;s emergence (along with the Scottish National Party) prompted the Wilson government to establish the Kilbrandon Commission on the constitution. The subsequent proposals for a Welsh Assembly were, however, heavily defeated in a referendum in 1979. Despite Plaid Cymru&#x27;s ambivalence toward home rule (as opposed to outright independence) the referendum result led many in the party to question its direction.

Plaid campaigned to leave the Common Market in the 1975 referendum, feeling that the EC&#x27;s regional aid policies would &quot;reconcile places like Wales to their subordinate position&quot;. Nevertheless, 65% of Welsh voters voted to remain in the EC during a 1975 referendum. The EC was incorporated into the European Union (EU) in 1993.

At the 1979 general election, the party&#x27;s vote share declined from 10.8% to 8.1% and Carmarthen was again lost to Labour, although Caernarfon and Merionethshire were held by the party.

===1980s===
Caernarfon MP Dafydd Wigley succeeded Gwynfor Evans as president in 1981, inheriting a party whose morale was at an all-time low. In 1981 the party adopted a policy of &quot;community socialism&quot;. While the party embarked on a wide-ranging review of its priorities and goals, Gwynfor Evans fought a successful campaign (including the threat of a hunger strike) to oblige the Conservative government to fulfill its promise to establish S4C, a Welsh-language television station. In 1984, Dafydd Elis-Thomas was elected president, defeating Dafydd Iwan, a move that saw the party shift to the left. Ieuan Wyn Jones (later Plaid Cymru leader) captured Ynys Môn from the Conservatives in 1987. In 1989 Dafydd Wigley once again assumed the presidency of the party.

===1990s===
In the 1992 general election, the party added a fourth MP, Cynog Dafis, when he gained Ceredigion and Pembroke North from the Liberal Democrats. Dafis was endorsed by the local branch of the Green Party. The party&#x27;s vote share recovered to 9.9% at the 1997 general election.

In 1997, following the election of a Labour government committed to devolution for Wales, a further referendum was narrowly won, establishing the National Assembly for Wales. Plaid Cymru became the main opposition to the ruling Labour Party, with 17 seats to Labour&#x27;s 28. In doing so, it appeared to have broken out of its rural Welsh-speaking heartland, and gained seats in traditionally strong Labour areas in industrial South Wales.

Ahead of the 1999 National Assembly for Wales election, Plaid Cymru dropped its policy of Welsh independence in favour of continued membership in the European Union. These changes in policy were made as it was believed that the electorate in Wales did not view independence as an important issue. It also adopted social democracy for its economic policy in an attempt to weaken Labour. These changes in policy have been used to explain the party&#x27;s subsequent electoral success in Labour&#x27;s traditional South East Wales heartlands.

===Assembly/Senedd era===
====First National Assembly (1999–2003)====
In the 1999 election, Plaid Cymru gained seats in traditional Labour areas such as Rhondda, Islwyn and Llanelli, achieving by far its highest share of the vote in any Wales-wide election. While Plaid Cymru regarded itself as the natural beneficiary of devolution, others attributed its performance in large part to the travails of the Labour Party, whose nomination for Assembly First Secretary, Ron Davies, was forced to stand down in an alleged sex scandal. The ensuing leadership battle, won by Alun Michael, did much to damage Labour, and thus aided Plaid Cymru, whose leader was the more popular and higher profile Dafydd Wigley. The Labour Party&#x27;s UK national leadership was seen to interfere in the contest and deny the popular Rhodri Morgan victory. Less than two months later, in elections to the European parliament, Labour support slumped further, and Plaid Cymru came within 2.5% of achieving the largest share of the vote in Wales. Under the new system of proportional representation, the party also gained two MEPs.

Plaid Cymru then developed political problems of its own. Dafydd Wigley resigned, citing health problems but amid rumours of a plot against him. His successor, Ieuan Wyn Jones, struggled to impose his authority, particularly over controversial remarks made by a councillor, Seimon Glyn. At the same time, Labour leader and First Minister Alun Michael was replaced by Rhodri Morgan.

In the 2001 general election, notwithstanding Plaid Cymru recording its highest-ever vote share in a general election, 14.3%, the party lost Wyn Jones&#x27;s former seat of Ynys Môn to Albert Owen, although it gained Carmarthen East and Dinefwr, where Adam Price was elected.

====Second National Assembly (2003–07)====
The Assembly elections of May 2003 saw the party&#x27;s representation drop from 17 to 12, with the seats gained in the 1999 election falling again to Labour and the party&#x27;s share of the vote declining to 21%. Plaid Cymru narrowly remained the second-largest party in the National Assembly ahead of the Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and Forward Wales.

On 15 September 2003, folk-singer and county councillor Dafydd Iwan was elected as Plaid Cymru&#x27;s president. Ieuan Wyn Jones, who had resigned from his dual role as president and Assembly group leader following the losses in the 2003 Assembly election, was re-elected in the latter role. Elfyn Llwyd remained the Plaid Cymru leader in the Westminster Parliament. Under Iwan&#x27;s presidency the party formally adopted a policy of independence for Wales within Europe. Plaid Cymru had historically supported Welsh independence but dropped this policy ahead of the 1999 devolved election.

The 2004 local election saw the party lose control of the two South Wales councils it gained in 1999, Rhondda Cynon Taff and Caerphilly, while retaining its stronghold of Gwynedd in the north-west. The results enabled the party to claim a greater number of ethnic minority councillors than all the other political parties in Wales combined, along with gains in authorities such as Cardiff and Swansea, where Plaid Cymru representation had been minimal. In the European Parliament elections of the same year, the party&#x27;s vote share fell to 17.4%, and the reduction in the number of Welsh MEPs saw its representation reduced to one.

In the general election of 5 May 2005, Plaid Cymru lost the Ceredigion seat to the Liberal Democrats; this result was a disappointment to Plaid, who had hoped to gain Ynys Môn. Overall therefore, Plaid Cymru&#x27;s Parliamentary representation fell to three seats, the lowest number for the party since 1992. The party&#x27;s share of the vote fell to 12.6%.

Since Plaid Genedlaethol Cymru reformation to &#x27;Plaid Cymru&#x27; in 1933, the logo representing the party was the green &#x27;triban&#x27; (three peaks) which symbolically represented Plaid&#x27;s three key goals; self-government, cultural prosperity and economic prosperity, &#x27;anchored in the bedrock of Welsh identity and history that is the Welsh upland landscape&#x27;, the logo would change in the late stages of 20th century to include the red dragon of Wales, however this version was short-lived. In 2006, the party voted constitutional changes to formally designate the party&#x27;s leader in the assembly as its overall leader, with Ieuan Wyn Jones being restored to the full leadership and Dafydd Iwan becoming head of the voluntary wing of the party. The party unveiled a radical change of image in 2006. In that year, the party opted to use &quot;Plaid&quot; as the party&#x27;s name, although &quot;Plaid Cymru — the Party of Wales&quot; would remain the official title. Plaid would abandon the triban (apart from the merchandise) and adopt the yellow Welsh poppy (&quot;Meconopsis cambrica&quot;).

====Third National Assembly (2007–2011)====
In the National Assembly election of 3 May 2007, Plaid Cymru increased its number of seats from 12 to 15, regaining Llanelli, gaining one additional list seat and winning the newly created constituency of Aberconwy. The 2007 election also saw Plaid Cymru&#x27;s Mohammad Asghar become the first ethnic minority candidate elected to the Welsh Assembly. The party&#x27;s share of the vote increased to 22.4%.

After weeks of negotiations involving all four parties in the Assembly, Plaid Cymru and Labour agreed to form a coalition government. Their agreed &quot;One Wales&quot; programme included a commitment for both parties to campaign for a Yes vote in a referendum on full law-making powers for the Assembly, to be held at a time of the Welsh Assembly Government&#x27;s choosing. Ieuan Wyn Jones was subsequently confirmed as Deputy First Minister of Wales and Minister for the Economy and Transport. Rhodri Glyn Thomas was appointed Heritage Minister. He later stood down, and Alun Ffred Jones took over. Ceredigion AM Elin Jones was appointed to the Rural Affairs brief in the new 10-member cabinet. Jocelyn Davies became Deputy Minister for Housing, and later, Regeneration.

In the 2010 general election, Plaid returned three MPs to Westminster. They took part in the Yes for Wales cross-party campaign for the March 2011 referendum.

====Fourth National Assembly (2011–16)====
In the 2011 National Assembly election, Plaid slipped from second place to third, being overtaken by the Welsh Conservatives and losing its deputy leader Helen Mary Jones. The party held an inquiry into the election result. The internal investigation led to the adoption of wide-ranging changes to its constitution, including a streamlining of the leadership structure.

In May 2011, Ieuan Wyn Jones announced he would stand down as leader within the first half of the Assembly term. A leadership election was held in which three candidates eventually stood: Elin Jones, Dafydd Elis-Thomas and Leanne Wood; Simon Thomas withdrew his candidacy before ballots were cast.

On 15 March 2012, Plaid Cymru elected Leanne Wood as its new leader. She received 55% of the vote, over second-placed Elin Jones with 41%. Wood was the party&#x27;s first female leader, and its first not to be a fluent Welsh speaker. Soon after her election as leader, she appointed former MP Adam Price to head an economic commission for the party &quot;focussed on bringing together tailor-made policies in order to transform our economy&quot;. On 1 May 2012, it was confirmed Leanne Wood would not be taking the £23,000 pay increase that every other party leader in the Assembly receives.

On 12 November 2012, Wood announced she would aim to abandon her relatively safe list seat by winning a constituency at the 2016 National Assembly elections; she later confirmed she would contest the Rhondda. Adam Price was subsequently selected as the party&#x27;s candidate for Carmarthen East and Dinefwr. Lindsay Whittle confirmed he would stand solely in Caerphilly.

On 20 June 2013, former party leader Ieuan Wyn Jones stood down from the Assembly as the member for Ynys Môn. Plaid Cymru&#x27;s candidate Rhun ap Iorwerth was elected as the new Assembly Member for the constituency, receiving 12,601 votes (a 58% share) with a majority of 9,166 over the Labour candidate.

====Fifth National Assembly/Senedd (2016–2021)====
At the 2016 Welsh Assembly elections, Plaid Cymru gained one seat, became the Assembly&#x27;s second-largest party and briefly became the official opposition to the Welsh Government with 12 seats. By January 2018 Plaid Cymru had been reduced to ten Assembly Members, following the resignation of Dafydd Elis-Thomas in 2016 and the permanent expulsion of Neil McEvoy from Plaid&#x27;s Assembly group in 2018.

Despite campaigning to leave in 1975, Plaid campaigned for a Remain vote in the 2016 referendum on the UK&#x27;s membership of the EU, spending £27,495 on the campaign. In the referendum Wales voted 52.5% in favour of Leave. Immediately after the referendum, Leanne Wood stated that voters &#x27;must be respected&#x27; and criticised calls for a second EU referendum. Plaid Cymru later modified their policy to support a People&#x27;s Vote.

In the 2017 United Kingdom general election, Plaid saw their popular vote fall, but narrowly gained Ceredigion and saw Arfon become highly marginal.

In September 2018, Adam Price won the party&#x27;s leadership election, defeating the incumbent Leanne Wood and fellow challenger Rhun ap Iorwerth.

In the Brecon and Radnorshire by-election Plaid Cymru decided not to put up a candidate, but instead to support the Liberal Democrat candidate Jane Dodds in order to maximise the chance of an anti-Brexit candidate winning.

In the 2019 United Kingdom general election, Plaid stood aside in four seats to endorse Unite to Remain candidates. Plaid held their four seats but saw a decrease in their popular vote.

====Sixth Senedd (2021–)====
In the run-up to the 2021 Senedd election, polling suggested that Welsh Labour would win the highest number of seats but fall short of an overall majority. Pollsters and commentators suggested that the most likely outcome would be another Labour–Plaid Cymru coalition, an option First Minister Mark Drakeford said he would be open to. Price insisted that his party would not be Labour&#x27;s &quot;junior partner&quot;, nor would they work with the Conservatives under any circumstances. He stated that Plaid would be willing to join forces with Labour, but only if the former were the largest party or if it were an equal partnership. Price also said that he did not consider Welsh independence to be &quot;a distraction or a constitutional abstraction&quot;, but rather &quot;a practical necessity&quot;.

At the election, Plaid increased their seat total to thirteen, up one from the twelve they won in 2016, but lost out in their target constituencies, and lost Rhondda where former leader Leanne Wood lost her seat to Labour. Price said he would not resign, telling ITV Wales: &quot;My job is to lead, its not to give up at a set back or disappointment. My job is to sustain the hope – all those young people who voted for Plaid because they were inspired by our message of the potential we believe is there in Wales to deliver a decent society for our people. I firmly believe that we have sown a lot of seed at this election. A lot of young people in particular who did come with us this time has laid the foundations for the future which I think will set us up for growth in the years to come.&quot;

On 22 November 2021, despite Price&#x27;s earlier comments about refusing to work with Labour, the two parties announced a co-operation agreement consisting of almost 50 different policies, including providing free school meals for all primary school children, the establishment of a free-at-point-of-need national care system and building a railway between North and South Wales. Price called the agreement &quot;a down-payment on independence&quot; and claimed that the results of the Senedd election &quot;confirmed Wales&#x27;s status as an indy-curious nation. A curiosity that will give birth – sooner than many think – to an independent Wales.&quot; He went on to say, &quot;For Wales to be free, we must first be united. And, that is what this Co-operation Agreement sets out to achieve. It launches us on a pathway to a united Wales, one that, sooner than we perhaps think, will find it both comfortable and natural, indeed essential, to join the world community of normal, independent nations.&quot;

The co-operation agreement was ratified by Plaid&#x27;s conference, with 94% voting in favour. &quot;This is a huge step forward for Wales and our democracy,&quot; Price said. &quot;The co-operation agreement will bring immediate, tangible and long-term benefit for the people of Wales. All primary school children will now receive free school meals; there will be free childcare for all two-year-olds; and radical action to tackle the housing crisis. There will be stability payments to support family farms; exploration of an accelerated pathway to net zero by 2035; the creation of Ynni Cymru – a company to expand community-owned renewable energy generation; and a new and reformed Senedd – bigger, more diverse, and gender balanced in law. From feeding our children to caring for our elderly, this is a nation-building Programme for Government which will change the lives of thousands of people the length and breadth of our country for the better. And none of it would be happening without Plaid Cymru.&quot;

In May 2023, the publication of a report which detailed failings by the party to prevent sexual harassment and bullying led to media coverage suggesting that Price had agreed to resign the party leadership, and Price confirmed this in a statement on 10 May. Acknowledging that he &quot;no longer had the united support of [his] colleagues&quot;, Price stated that he would step down officially at the start of the following week, once the process for electing a new interim leader was finalised. On 11 May Plaid Cymru announced that Llyr Gruffydd, Senedd member for North Wales, would replace him as interim party leader, and that this would be confirmed by the NEC on 13 May. On 16 June 2023 Rhun ap Iorwerth was announced as the new permanent leader after he was elected unopposed.

At party conference in Aberystwyth in October 2023, Rhun ap Iorwerth said the party was &quot;not just for Welsh speakers&quot;. Accomplishments like free school meals with the Drakeford government were promoted.

== Independence Commission 2020 ==
Before the 2019 general election, Price announced that he would set up a commission to look at the practicality of Welsh independence, and how a Plaid Government would hold an independence referendum. The commission, led by former Plaid Dwyfor Meirionydd MP Elfyn Llwyd, released its report on 25 September 2020. It recommends five key aims for Plaid Cymru:

* Says an independent Wales should seek membership of the European Union, with a possible intermediate step being membership of the European Free Trade Area.
* Recommends that Wales explores a confederal relationship with England and Scotland.
* Proposes improvements to the operation of the Welsh Government and civil service.
* Points the way to drawing up a Welsh Constitution and sets out a framework for a Self-Determination Bill to take the independence process forward.
* A statutory National Commission should provide the people of Wales with a clear understanding of the option for their political future – including through Citizens&#x27; Assemblies and an initial referendum to test a range of constitutional options.

It also recommends that there should be one multiple choice referendum to gauge views and to persuade a UK Westminster government to agree to a referendum on the preferred option.

The report was met with criticism from the Welsh Liberal Democrats, describing the report as a mix of &quot;fanatical politics&quot; and &quot;pie in the sky economics&quot;.

In December 2020, Price stated that an independence referendum would be held in Plaid Cymru&#x27;s first term in office, if the party won a majority at the 2021 Senedd election.

== Undeb Credyd Plaid Cymru ==
Undeb Credyd Plaid Cymru Credit Union Limited is a savings and loans co-operative established for party members in 1986. Based in Roath, Cardiff, it is a member of the Association of British Credit Unions Limited. The credit union is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the PRA. Ultimately, like the banks and building societies, members&#x27; savings are protected against business failure by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme.

==Party leadership==
===Leaders===
The Party leader was referred to as the president until March 2000 when the separate role of Leader was created.

===Deputy leaders===
===Chief executives===

==Elected representatives==
===House of Commons===
===Senedd===
*Llyr Huws Gruffydd, MS for North Wales electoral region
*Siân Gwenllian, MS for Arfon
*Rhun ap Iorwerth, MS for Ynys Môn
*Luke Fletcher, MS for South Wales West electoral region
*Cefin Campbell, MS for Mid and West Wales electoral region
*Elin Jones, MS for Ceredigion
*Delyth Jewell, MS for South Wales East electoral region
*Sioned Williams, MS for South Wales West electoral region
*Adam Price, MS for Carmarthen East and Dinefwr
*Mabon ap Gwynfor, MS for Dwyfor Meirionnydd
*Peredur Owen Griffiths, MS for South Wales East
*Heledd Fychan, MS for South Wales Central

===Local councillors===
*202 councillors in local government. They form the Plaid Cymru Councillors Association.

==Appointments==

===House of Lords===

==Electoral performance==

===House of Commons===
&quot;*Six seats (Blaenau Gwent, Ceredigion &amp; Pembroke North, Islwyn, Monmouth, Newport West and Torfaen) contested on a joint Plaid Cymru/Green Party ticket&quot;

===National Assembly/Senedd===
===Local councils===

*The 2012 figures exclude Anglesey, where the vote was delayed until 2013. The changes in seats and votes shown for 2012 are a direct comparison since the 2008 elections in the 21 councils up for election (i.e. excluding Anglesey).

In 2008, Plaid won 205 seats including six in Anglesey. For the purposes of this table the 205 figure has been reduced to 199 for the 2012 elections where the party lost 41 of the 199 seats it was defending on the night, leaving them with 158 seats.

In the 2013 elections in Anglesey, the party won 12 seats, up from the 6 it won in 2008 (although there were significant boundary changes and a reduction in the total number of seats from 40 to 30).

The 2017 figures are based on changes from the 2012 and 2013 elections. &quot;(Hence the slight discrepancy in the percentage increase.)&quot;

===Police and Crime Commissioners===
===European Parliament===
==European Free Alliance==

Plaid retains strong links with the Scottish National Party (SNP), with both parties&#x27; MPs co-operating closely with one another. They work as a single parliamentary group within Westminster, and were involved in joint campaigning, under the banner of a &quot;Celtic alliance&quot;, during the 2001 and 2010 general elections. Both Plaid and the SNP, along with Mebyon Kernow of Cornwall, are members of the European Free Alliance (EFA), a pan-European political party for regionalist, autonomist and pro-independence political parties across Europe. The EFA co-operates with the larger European Green Party to form The Greens–European Free Alliance (Greens/EFA) political group in the European Parliament, although the UK is no longer a member of the European Union.

==See also==
*List of Plaid Cymru MSs
*List of Plaid Cymru MPs
*Credit unions in the United Kingdom
*Culture of Wales
*Politics of Wales
*Republicanism in the United Kingdom
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="0" end="11" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="31" end="63" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru – the Party of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="97" end="102" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="109" end="120" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="124" end="133" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670915" start="135" end="152" title="Welsh nationalist" label="Welsh nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q648207" start="153" end="177" title="list of political parties in Wales" label="political party in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304490" start="192" end="210" title="Welsh independence" label="Welsh independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="220" end="234" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="266" end="282" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="287" end="304" title="civic nationalism" label="civic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="338" end="352" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q639383" start="376" end="398" title="European Free Alliance" label="European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="486" end="492" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q333132" start="670" end="683" title="Gwynfor Evans" label="Gwynfor Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043217" start="736" end="763" title="1966 Carmarthen by-election" label="1966 Carmarthen by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q842113" start="770" end="774" title="1999 National Assembly for Wales election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="798" end="812" title="Senedd" label="Welsh Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400474" start="977" end="990" title="Welsh valleys" label="Welsh valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999698" start="995" end="1011" title="North East Wales" label="North East Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="1102" end="1108" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396810" start="1143" end="1158" title="Ieuan Wyn Jones" label="Ieuan Wyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="1219" end="1231" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093340" start="1238" end="1247" title="One Wales" label="One Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957662" start="1249" end="1255" title="Fourth Morgan government" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957663" start="1260" end="1265" title="First Jones government" label="Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261031" start="1323" end="1344" title="Deputy First Minister of Wales" label="deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q125131048" start="1349" end="1387" title="Minister for the Economy and Transport" label="Minister for the Economy and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q111713" start="1478" end="1501" title="2011 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2011 Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10694" start="1598" end="1609" title="Leanne Wood" label="Leanne Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258007" start="1618" end="1641" title="2016 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2016 Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321386" start="1687" end="1694" title="Rhondda (Senedd constituency)" label="Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391648" start="1853" end="1871" title="2018 Plaid Cymru leadership election" label="leadership contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405033" start="1873" end="1883" title="Adam Price" label="Adam Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403875" start="1944" end="1964" title="2021 Senedd election" label="2021 Senedd election"/>
<link wikidata="Q121599564" start="1980" end="2002" title="2021 Welsh Labour–Plaid Cymru agreement" label="co-operation agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="2012" end="2035" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420732" start="2205" end="2221" title="Rhun ap Iorwerth" label="Rhun ap Iorwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857850" start="2294" end="2328" title="2024 United Kingdom general election in Wales" label="Wales in the 2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406079" start="2405" end="2420" title="Member of the National Assembly for Wales" label="assembly member"/>
<link wikidata="Q32947412" start="2510" end="2536" title="Minister for Rural Affairs (Wales)" label="Minister for Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361084" start="2538" end="2548" title="Elin Jones" label="Elin Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q213154" start="2602" end="2613" title="Aberystwyth" label="Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="2700" end="2712" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="3342" end="3355" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3360" end="3374" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864964" start="3391" end="3434" title="Trident (UK nuclear programme)" label="UK&amp;#x27;s Trident nuclear weapons programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280897" start="3584" end="3600" title="Senedd elections" label="Senedd elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q58333" start="3678" end="3707" title="police and crime commissioner" label="police and crime commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q121599564" start="3897" end="3941" title="2021 Welsh Labour–Plaid Cymru agreement" label="its co-operation agreement with Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195832" start="3955" end="3972" title="Free school meals" label="Free school meals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371789" start="4070" end="4082" title="holiday cottage" label="second homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083716" start="4099" end="4120" title="National Care Service" label="national care service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4272" end="4278" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4283" end="4290" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4482" end="4496" title="Moses Gruffydd" label="Moses Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030060" start="4498" end="4509" title="H. R. Jones" label="H. R. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398434" start="4514" end="4529" title="Lewis Valentine" label="Lewis Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4551" end="4561" title="Fred Jones (Welsh politician)" label="Fred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420498" start="4563" end="4577" title="Saunders Lewis" label="Saunders Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="4695" end="4709" title="Welsh-speaking" label="Welsh-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="4798" end="4819" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016921" start="4879" end="4894" title="Caernarvonshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caernarvonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398434" start="5091" end="5106" title="Lewis Valentine" label="Lewis Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="5293" end="5308" title="self-government" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="5341" end="5358" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="5575" end="5596" title="socially conservative" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420498" start="5706" end="5720" title="Saunders Lewis" label="Saunders Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="5744" end="5764" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarian regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165397" start="5898" end="5907" title="Penyberth" label="Penyberth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541249" start="5924" end="5938" title="Llŷn Peninsula" label="Llŷn Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q109128" start="5942" end="5949" title="Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398177" start="6146" end="6161" title="Wormwood Scrubs (HM Prison)" label="Wormwood Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246417" start="6209" end="6222" title="cause célèbre" label="cause célèbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6414" end="6430" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="6648" end="6671" title="conscientious objection" label="conscientious objection"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="6820" end="6841" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q333132" start="7035" end="7048" title="Gwynfor Evans" label="Gwynfor Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="7290" end="7311" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="7323" end="7327" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q918420" start="7340" end="7344" title="1959 United Kingdom general election" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402628" start="7468" end="7479" title="Capel Celyn" label="Capel Celyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689365" start="7487" end="7495" title="Tryweryn" label="Tryweryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="7544" end="7553" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q13132108" start="8036" end="8051" title="Tynged yr Iaith" label="Tynged yr Iaith"/>
<link wikidata="Q499322" start="8198" end="8225" title="Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg" label="Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="8341" end="8369" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="8481" end="8493" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="8597" end="8604" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043217" start="8647" end="8654" title="1966 Carmarthen by-election" label="in 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q126884214" start="8723" end="8733" title="Carmarthen (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321401" start="8846" end="8858" title="Rhondda West (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Rhondda West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321404" start="8862" end="8866" title="1967 Rhondda West by-election" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238808" start="8871" end="8881" title="Caerphilly (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016930" start="8885" end="8889" title="1968 Caerphilly by-election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="9106" end="9112" title="Harold Wilson" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="9426" end="9447" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="9630" end="9642" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q428829" start="9733" end="9743" title="Caernarfon" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q577711" start="9748" end="9762" title="Merionethshire" label="Merionethshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="9810" end="9833" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986370" start="9883" end="9904" title="Kilbrandon Commission" label="Kilbrandon Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982021" start="10009" end="10027" title="1979 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum in 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="10127" end="10137" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="10246" end="10261" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="10458" end="10473" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="10508" end="10522" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="10545" end="10566" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q428829" start="10674" end="10684" title="Caernarfon" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q577711" start="10689" end="10703" title="Merionethshire" label="Merionethshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q333600" start="10755" end="10768" title="Dafydd Wigley" label="Dafydd Wigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="11180" end="11183" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q333841" start="11231" end="11249" title="Dafydd Elis-Thomas" label="Dafydd Elis-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157150" start="11283" end="11294" title="Dafydd Iwan" label="Dafydd Iwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396810" start="11341" end="11356" title="Ieuan Wyn Jones" label="Ieuan Wyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q750661" start="11393" end="11401" title="Ynys Mon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ynys Môn"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="11428" end="11432" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="11524" end="11545" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405113" start="11576" end="11587" title="Cynog Dafis" label="Cynog Dafis"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751320" start="11604" end="11633" title="Ceredigion and Pembroke North" label="Ceredigion and Pembroke North"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="11643" end="11660" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107424" start="11708" end="11719" title="Wales Green Party" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="11774" end="11795" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689863" start="11890" end="11908" title="1997 Welsh devolution referendum" label="further referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="11944" end="11971" title="National Assembly for Wales" label="National Assembly for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="12226" end="12237" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q842113" start="12253" end="12294" title="1999 National Assembly for Wales election" label="1999 National Assembly for Wales election"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="12553" end="12569" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567141" start="12751" end="12767" title="South East Wales" label="South East Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q842113" start="12858" end="12871" title="1999 National Assembly for Wales election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321386" start="12934" end="12941" title="Rhondda (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084441" start="12943" end="12949" title="Islwyn (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Islwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661286" start="12954" end="12962" title="Llanelli (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Llanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="13221" end="13245" title="Assembly First Secretary" label="Assembly First Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333869" start="13247" end="13257" title="Ron Davies (British politician)" label="Ron Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197458" start="13298" end="13309" title="sex scandal" label="sex scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19397" start="13349" end="13361" title="Alun Michael" label="Alun Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q333600" start="13471" end="13484" title="Dafydd Wigley" label="Dafydd Wigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q333141" start="13591" end="13604" title="Rhodri Morgan" label="Rhodri Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052486" start="13645" end="13681" title="1999 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="elections to the European parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="13825" end="13852" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396810" start="14047" end="14062" title="Ieuan Wyn Jones" label="Ieuan Wyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="14277" end="14298" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q750661" start="14443" end="14451" title="Ynys Môn (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ynys Môn"/>
<link wikidata="Q576121" start="14455" end="14466" title="Albert Owen" label="Albert Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077385" start="14487" end="14514" title="Carmarthen East and Dinefwr (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Carmarthen East and Dinefwr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405033" start="14522" end="14532" title="Adam Price" label="Adam Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655536" start="14594" end="14624" title="2003 National Assembly for Wales election" label="Assembly elections of May 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q384261" start="14935" end="14948" title="Forward Wales" label="Forward Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="14973" end="14984" title="folk music" label="folk-singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157150" start="15007" end="15018" title="Dafydd Iwan" label="Dafydd Iwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333590" start="15243" end="15254" title="Elfyn Llwyd" label="Elfyn Llwyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q817960" start="15646" end="15664" title="Rhondda Cynon Taff" label="Rhondda Cynon Taff"/>
<link wikidata="Q909119" start="15669" end="15679" title="Caerphilly" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="15937" end="15944" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="16188" end="16204" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077398" start="16241" end="16251" title="Ceredigion (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="16264" end="16281" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q750661" start="16348" end="16356" title="Ynys Môn (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ynys Môn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396810" start="17193" end="17208" title="Ieuan Wyn Jones" label="Ieuan Wyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157150" start="17251" end="17262" title="Dafydd Iwan" label="Dafydd Iwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21876094" start="17616" end="17627" title="Welsh poppy" label="Welsh poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111715" start="17715" end="17741" title="2007 National Assembly for Wales election" label="National Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661286" start="17824" end="17832" title="Llanelli (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Llanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666807" start="17913" end="17922" title="Aberconwy (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Aberconwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404581" start="17970" end="17985" title="Mohammad Asghar" label="Mohammad Asghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="18228" end="18248" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093340" start="18269" end="18278" title="One Wales" label="One Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982023" start="18366" end="18402" title="2011 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum on full law-making powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="18538" end="18568" title="First Minister of Wales" label="Deputy First Minister of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q125131048" start="18573" end="18611" title="Minister for the Economy and Transport" label="Minister for the Economy and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321239" start="18613" end="18631" title="Rhodri Glyn Thomas" label="Rhodri Glyn Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405595" start="18690" end="18706" title="Alun Ffred Jones" label="Alun Ffred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361084" start="18732" end="18742" title="Elin Jones" label="Elin Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207115" start="18814" end="18828" title="Jocelyn Davies" label="Jocelyn Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="18898" end="18919" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052782" start="18984" end="18997" title="Yes for Wales" label="Yes for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q111713" start="19101" end="19132" title="2011 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2011 National Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981882" start="19199" end="19218" title="Welsh Conservatives" label="Welsh Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11001680" start="19248" end="19264" title="Helen Mary Jones" label="Helen Mary Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361084" start="19653" end="19663" title="Elin Jones" label="Elin Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q333841" start="19665" end="19683" title="Dafydd Elis-Thomas" label="Dafydd Elis-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10694" start="19688" end="19699" title="Leanne Wood" label="Leanne Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405148" start="19701" end="19713" title="Simon Thomas (politician)" label="Simon Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405033" start="20057" end="20067" title="Adam Price" label="Adam Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321386" start="20557" end="20564" title="Rhondda (Assembly constituency)" label="Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077385" start="20637" end="20664" title="Carmarthen East and Dinefwr (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Carmarthen East and Dinefwr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016924" start="20717" end="20727" title="Caerphilly (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054067" start="20830" end="20838" title="Ynys Môn (National Assembly for Wales constituency)" label="Ynys Môn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420732" start="20869" end="20885" title="Rhun ap Iorwerth" label="Rhun ap Iorwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258007" start="21095" end="21124" title="2016 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2016 Welsh Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q333841" start="21384" end="21402" title="Dafydd Elis-Thomas" label="Dafydd Elis-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24041564" start="21442" end="21453" title="Neil McEvoy" label="Neil McEvoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="21529" end="21533" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="21577" end="21630" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 referendum on the UK&amp;#x27;s membership of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074877" start="21919" end="21937" title="People&amp;#x27;s Vote" label="People&amp;#x27;s Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q30177984" start="21947" end="21983" title="2017 United Kingdom general election in Wales" label="2017 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391648" start="22141" end="22160" title="2018 Plaid Cymru leadership election" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420732" start="22220" end="22236" title="Rhun ap Iorwerth" label="Rhun ap Iorwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049889" start="22246" end="22280" title="2019 Brecon and Radnorshire by-election" label="Brecon and Radnorshire by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42846969" start="22382" end="22392" title="Jane Dodds" label="Jane Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941735" start="22470" end="22506" title="2019 United Kingdom general election in Wales" label="2019 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812056" start="22551" end="22566" title="Unite to Remain" label="Unite to Remain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403875" start="22700" end="22720" title="2021 Senedd election" label="2021 Senedd election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767407" start="22973" end="22987" title="Mark Drakeford" label="Mark Drakeford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304490" start="23356" end="23374" title="Welsh independence" label="Welsh independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321386" start="23645" end="23652" title="Rhondda (Senedd constituency)" label="Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129223" start="23750" end="23759" title="ITV Wales" label="ITV Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q121599564" start="24411" end="24476" title="2021 Welsh Labour–Plaid Cymru agreement" label="co-operation agreement consisting of almost 50 different policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="24646" end="24651" title="North Wales" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="24656" end="24667" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454006" start="25884" end="25894" title="Ynni Cymru" label="Ynni Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662955" start="26848" end="26861" title="Llyr Gruffydd" label="Llyr Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420732" start="27008" end="27024" title="Rhun ap Iorwerth" label="Rhun ap Iorwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213154" start="27123" end="27134" title="Aberystwyth" label="Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="27207" end="27221" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106874092" start="27277" end="27297" title="Second Drakeford government" label="Drakeford government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304490" start="27464" end="27482" title="Welsh independence" label="Welsh independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q113289109" start="27522" end="27548" title="Proposed Welsh independence referendum" label="an independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231892" start="27586" end="27603" title="Dwyfor Meirionydd" label="Dwyfor Meirionydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q333590" start="27607" end="27618" title="Elfyn Llwyd" label="Elfyn Llwyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="27766" end="27780" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338737" start="27840" end="27864" title="European Free Trade Area" label="European Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="27901" end="27911" title="confederal" label="confederal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="28000" end="28016" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981939" start="28662" end="28685" title="Welsh Liberal Democrats" label="Welsh Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403875" start="28951" end="28971" title="2021 Senedd election" label="2021 Senedd election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="29074" end="29086" title="co-operative" label="co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339915" start="29135" end="29140" title="Roath" label="Roath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654692" start="29173" end="29209" title="Association of British Credit Unions" label="Association of British Credit Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q745877" start="29223" end="29235" title="credit union" label="credit union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252987" start="29257" end="29288" title="Prudential Regulation Authority (United Kingdom)" label="Prudential Regulation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449586" start="29310" end="29337" title="Financial Conduct Authority" label="Financial Conduct Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416205" start="29470" end="29508" title="Financial Services Compensation Scheme" label="Financial Services Compensation Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662955" start="29770" end="29788" title="Llyr Huws Gruffydd" label="Llyr Huws Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057143" start="29797" end="29825" title="North Wales (Senedd electoral region)" label="North Wales electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q20570139" start="29827" end="29841" title="Siân Gwenllian" label="Siân Gwenllian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789158" start="29850" end="29855" title="Arfon (Senedd constituency)" label="Arfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420732" start="29857" end="29873" title="Rhun ap Iorwerth" label="Rhun ap Iorwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054067" start="29882" end="29890" title="Ynys Môn (Senedd constituency)" label="Ynys Môn"/>
<link wikidata="Q106814756" start="29892" end="29905" title="Luke Fletcher (politician)" label="Luke Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568795" start="29914" end="29947" title="South Wales West (Senedd electoral region)" label="South Wales West electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q106766510" start="29949" end="29963" title="Cefin Campbell" label="Cefin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841063" start="29972" end="30007" title="Mid and West Wales (Senedd electoral region)" label="Mid and West Wales electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361084" start="30009" end="30019" title="Elin Jones" label="Elin Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064122" start="30028" end="30038" title="Ceredigion (Senedd constituency)" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60658323" start="30040" end="30053" title="Delyth Jewell" label="Delyth Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568768" start="30062" end="30095" title="South Wales East (Senedd electoral region)" label="South Wales East electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q106766817" start="30097" end="30112" title="Sioned Williams" label="Sioned Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568795" start="30121" end="30154" title="South Wales West (Senedd electoral region)" label="South Wales West electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405033" start="30156" end="30166" title="Adam Price" label="Adam Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043201" start="30175" end="30202" title="Carmarthen East and Dinefwr (Senedd constituency)" label="Carmarthen East and Dinefwr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129862" start="30204" end="30220" title="Mabon ap Gwynfor" label="Mabon ap Gwynfor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318359" start="30229" end="30247" title="Dwyfor Meirionnydd (Senedd constituency)" label="Dwyfor Meirionnydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q106814646" start="30249" end="30271" title="Peredur Owen Griffiths" label="Peredur Owen Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568768" start="30280" end="30296" title="South Wales East" label="South Wales East"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535625" start="30298" end="30311" title="Heledd Fychan" label="Heledd Fychan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568764" start="30320" end="30339" title="South Wales Central" label="South Wales Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="30370" end="30380" title="councillor" label="councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q123758171" start="30385" end="30401" title="Local government in Wales" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107424" start="30688" end="30699" title="Wales Green Party" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083878" start="31258" end="31284" title="2013 Isle of Anglesey County Council election" label="2013 elections in Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="31722" end="31745" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="31869" end="31880" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="31984" end="31988" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="31993" end="31997" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="32052" end="32065" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="Mebyon Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="32069" end="32077" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q639383" start="32098" end="32120" title="European Free Alliance" label="European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q24649" start="32134" end="32158" title="European political party" label="European political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684060" start="32163" end="32174" title="Regionalism (politics)" label="regionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398958" start="32176" end="32186" title="Autonomism (political doctrine)" label="autonomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q950179" start="32277" end="32297" title="European Green Party" label="European Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q751935" start="32306" end="32339" title="The Greens–European Free Alliance" label="The Greens–European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q779079" start="32353" end="32368" title="Political groups of the European Parliament" label="political group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="32376" end="32395" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743935" start="32473" end="32496" title="List of Plaid Cymru MSs" label="List of Plaid Cymru MSs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594212" start="32498" end="32521" title="List of Plaid Cymru MPs" label="List of Plaid Cymru MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183793" start="32523" end="32558" title="Credit unions in the United Kingdom" label="Credit unions in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075956" start="32560" end="32576" title="Culture of Wales" label="Culture of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280918" start="32578" end="32595" title="Politics of Wales" label="Politics of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059094" start="32597" end="32632" title="Republicanism in the United Kingdom" label="Republicanism in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53344" wikidata="Q14126754" url="?curid=53344" title="Puck (folklore)">
<text>In English folklore, The Puck (), also known as Goodfellows, are demons or fairies which can be domestic sprites or nature sprites.

==Origins and comparative folklore==
===Etymology===
The etymology of &quot;puck&quot; was uncertain. The modern English word is attested already in Old English as (with a diminutive form ). Similar words are attested later in Old Norse (, with related forms including Old Swedish , Icelandic , and Frisian ) but also in the Celtic languages (Welsh , Cornish and Irish ). Most commentators think that the word was borrowed from one of these neighbouring north-west European languages into the others, but it is not certain in what direction the borrowing went, and all vectors have been proposed by scholars. The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; favoured a Scandinavian origin, while the scholarly study by Erin Sebo of Flinders University argues for an Irish origin, on the basis that the word is widely distributed in Irish place-names, whereas &quot;puck&quot;-place-names in English are rare and late in the areas showing Old Norse influence, and seem rather to radiate outwards from South West England, which she argues had Irish influence during the Early Middle Ages.

===Alternative names===
Puck may also be called &quot;The Goodfellows&quot; or &quot;Hobgoblin&quot;, in which &quot;Hob&quot; may substitute for &quot;Rob&quot; or &quot;Robin&quot;. This goes back to the character &quot;Robin Goodfellow&quot; and his name. The name &quot;Robin&quot; is Middle English in origin, deriving from Old French , the pet form for the name Robert. Similar to the use of &quot;the good folk&quot; in describing fairies, it reflected a degree of wishful thinking and an attempt to appease the fairies, recognizing their fondness of flattery despite their mischievous nature.

The earliest reference to &quot;Robin Goodfellow&quot; cited by the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; is from 1531. Anthony Munday mentions Robin Goodfellow in his play &quot;The Two Italian Gentlemen&quot;, 1584, and he appears in &quot;Skialtheia, or a Shadowe of Truth&quot; in 1598. William Shakespeare may have had access to the manuscript of Lewes Lewkenor&#x27;s translation of &quot;The Spanish Mandevile of Miracles, or, The Garden of Curious Flowers&quot; (1600), a translation of Antonio de Torquemada&#x27;s . The following passage from &quot;The Spanish Mandeville&quot; discusses the mischievous spirits:

After Giacomo Meyerbeer&#x27;s successful opera &quot;Robert le Diable&quot; (1831), neo-medievalists and occultists began to apply the name &quot;Robin Goodfellow&quot; to the Devil, with appropriately extravagant imagery.

==Characteristics==
According to &quot;Brewer&#x27;s Dictionary of Phrase and Fable&quot; (1898):

Puck might do minor housework, quick fine needlework or butter-churning, which could be undone in a moment by his knavish tricks if displeased. A domestic spirit, he would assist housewives with their chores, in expectation of an offering of white bread and milk. If this were neglected he would steal that which he believed was owed.

Pucks are also known to be inherently solitary creatures. Shakespeare&#x27;s characterization of &quot;shrewd and knavish&quot; Puck in &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; may have revived flagging interest in Puck.

==Notable cultural references==

===16th–17th century===
* The character Robin Goodfellow, also referred to as &quot;The puck, Robin Goodfellow&quot; and Hobgoblin, appears as a vassal of the Fairy King Oberon in William Shakespeare&#x27;s 1595/96 play &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;, and is responsible for the mischief that occurs.
* The character also appears in &quot;Grim the Collier of Croydon&quot; (1660, but perhaps based on an earlier play). It is unknown how Shakespeare&#x27;s Puck appeared on the stage; but the figure in &quot;Grim&quot; was costumed &quot;in a suit of leather close to his body; his face and hands coloured russet-coloured, with a flail.&quot;
* A Robin Goodfellow play was performed at Hampton Court on 1 January 1604, followed by &quot;The Masque of Indian and China Knights&quot;.
* An early 17th century broadside ballad &quot;The Mad Merry Pranks of Robin Goodfellow&quot; describes the character as the of Oberon, the Fairy King of the Night, inspiring night-terrors in old women but also carding their wool while they sleep, leading travellers astray, taking the shape of animals, blowing out the candles to kiss the girls in the darkness, twitching off their bedclothes, or making them fall out of bed on the cold floor, tattling secrets, and changing babes in cradles with elflings.
* Robin Goodfellow is the main speaker in Jonson&#x27;s 1612 masque &quot;Love Restored.&quot;
* John Milton, in &quot;L&#x27;Allegro&quot; tells &quot;how the drudging Goblin swet / To earn his cream-bowle&quot; by threshing a week&#x27;s worth of grain in a night, and then, &quot;Basks at the fire his hairy strength.&quot; Milton&#x27;s Puck is not small and sprightly, but nearer to a Green Man or a hairy woodwose. An illustration of Robin Goodfellow from 1639 represents the influence of Pan imagery, giving Puck the hindquarters, cloven hooves and horns of a goat.

===19th century===

* Robin Goodfellow appears in &#x27;The Mad Pranks of Robin Goodfellow&#x27;, Gammer Gurton&#x27;s Pleasant Stories of Patient Grissel, The Princess Rosetta, &amp; Robin Goodfellow, and Ballads of the Beggar&#x27;s Daughter, The Babes in the Wood, and Fair Rosamond, 1845.
*Robin Goodfellow appears in an 1856 speech by Karl Marx: &quot;In the signs that bewilder the middle class, the aristocracy and the poor profits of regression, we recognize our brave friend Robin Goodfellow, the old mole that can work the earth so fast, that worthy pioneer – the Revolution.&quot;

===20th century===
* The character of Puck frames the tales in Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s short story cycles &quot;Puck of Pook&#x27;s Hill&quot; (1906) and &quot;Rewards and Fairies&quot; (1910).
* &quot;Dear Brutus&quot; is a 1917 fantasy play by J. M. Barrie, the host &quot;Lob&quot; is the aged Puck from &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;
* The 1976 play &quot;Robin Goodfellow&quot; by Aurand Harris retells &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; from Puck&#x27;s point of view.
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; by Neil Gaiman includes Puck as a significant character. 
* The 1989 Manga series &quot;Berserk&quot; written and illustrated by Kentaro Miura. Set in a medieval Europe-inspired dark fantasy world features a character named Puck (パック, Pakku) who resembles a small fairy or pixie like creature (though he is technically an elf).
* In the Disney cartoon &quot;Gargoyles&quot;, Puck is one of several Shakespearean characters with recurring roles. He is something of an antagonist, but his mischief can also help the heroes.

===21st century===
* Puck is also a major character in Michael Buckley&#x27;s 2005–2012 book series &quot;The Sisters Grimm&quot;.
* Puck (Robin Goodfellow) is a character in Rob Thurman&#x27;s &quot;Cal Leandros series&quot; of novels (2006–).
* Puck is a main character in Julie Kagawa&#x27;s 2010–2015 &quot;The Iron Fey Series&quot;, along with other characters from &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;. Puck is also the main protagonist in Kagawa&#x27;s The Iron Raven (2021), the first book in The Iron Fey: Evenfall series.
* Puck is a major character in Chris Adrian&#x27;s 2011 novel &quot;The Great Night&quot;.
* In the 2019 Amazon series &quot;Carnival Row&quot;, the Puck are a race of fae.
* Since 1998, a Canadian artist calling himself ElectricGecko has drawn a weekly comic strip called &quot;Puck&quot; in which the ancient fairy is incarnated as a young-appearing red-haired Canadian woman living in Hamilton, Ontario.
* Puck (also known as Robin Goodfellow) joins the series &quot;The Chilling Adventures of Sabrina&quot; in its third and fourth seasons (2019–2020).
* Puck also appears as a character in the God of War video games, synthesized with the character of Mímir from Norse Mythology. In these games, he is voiced by actor Alastair Duncan.
*Puck is a hero in the Dota 2 video game.
* &#x27;Robyn Goodfellowe&#x27; is a young English girl in the Irish animated feature Wolfwalkers (2020) 

==See also==
* Puck (&quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;)
* Puck (other uses)
* Niß Puk (also Nis Puk), a being from Danish-German folklore which also might be referred to as Puck
* Púca
* Bucca

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641031" start="3" end="19" title="English folklore" label="English folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14126754" start="21" end="29" title="Puck (folklore)" label="The Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q14126754" start="48" end="59" title="Puck (folklore)" label="Goodfellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="65" end="71" title="demon" label="demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="75" end="82" title="fairy" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761892" start="96" end="104" title="Household deity" label="domestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828805" start="105" end="112" title="sprite (creature)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="116" end="122" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="190" end="199" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="282" end="293" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="360" end="369" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417210" start="402" end="413" title="Old Swedish" label="Old Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="416" end="425" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325" start="432" end="439" title="Frisian languages" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="458" end="474" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="476" end="481" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="484" end="491" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="496" end="501" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="752" end="777" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15575" start="858" end="877" title="Flinders University" label="Flinders University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="1126" end="1144" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="1194" end="1211" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938640" start="1299" end="1308" title="Hobgoblin" label="Hobgoblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158139" start="1488" end="1493" title="Robin (name)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1503" end="1517" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1543" end="1553" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927937" start="1582" end="1588" title="Robert" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8154361" start="1686" end="1702" title="wishful thinking" label="wishful thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918702" start="1772" end="1780" title="flattery" label="flattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q332970" start="1795" end="1806" title="mischievous" label="mischievous"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1890" end="1915" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154120" start="1936" end="1950" title="Anthony Munday" label="Anthony Munday"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2107" end="2126" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978788" start="2168" end="2182" title="Lewes Lewkenor" label="Lewes Lewkenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744020" start="2311" end="2332" title="Antonio de Torquemada" label="Antonio de Torquemada"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="2446" end="2463" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071310" start="2494" end="2510" title="Robert le Diable" label="Robert le Diable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991795" start="2525" end="2541" title="Neo-medievalism" label="neo-medievalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="2546" end="2556" title="occultists" label="occultists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="2613" end="2622" title="the Devil" label="the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q925021" start="2643" end="2654" title="Tryphé" label="extravagant"/>
<link wikidata="Q117893" start="2704" end="2748" title="Brewer&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of Phrase and Fable" label="Brewer&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of Phrase and Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="3242" end="3272" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248616" start="3383" end="3413" title="Puck (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="The character Robin Goodfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139234" start="3527" end="3533" title="Oberon" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609215" start="3708" end="3735" title="Grim the Collier of Croydon" label="Grim the Collier of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="4055" end="4068" title="Hampton Court" label="Hampton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413429" start="4106" end="4144" title="The Masque of Indian and China Knights" label="The Masque of Indian and China Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139234" start="4280" end="4286" title="Oberon" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207959" start="4721" end="4727" title="masque" label="masque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691204" start="4734" end="4747" title="Love Restored" label="Love Restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="4757" end="4768" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201713" start="4779" end="4793" title="L&amp;#x27;Allegro" label="L&amp;#x27;Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q308697" start="4829" end="4835" title="Goblin" label="Goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460159" start="5050" end="5059" title="Green Man" label="Green Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071580" start="5071" end="5079" title="wild man" label="woodwose"/>
<link wikidata="Q132582" start="5155" end="5158" title="Pan (mythology)" label="Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744721" start="5198" end="5211" title="Cloven hoof" label="cloven hooves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="5574" end="5583" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="5890" end="5912" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4342308" start="5938" end="5962" title="Puck of Pook&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Puck of Pook&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319037" start="5986" end="6005" title="Rewards and Fairies" label="Rewards and Fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376095" start="6028" end="6039" title="Dear Brutus" label="Dear Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="6072" end="6084" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822102" start="6224" end="6237" title="Aurand Harris" label="Aurand Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="6329" end="6340" title="The Sandman (comic book)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="6350" end="6361" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="6416" end="6421" title="Manga" label="Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18558978" start="6435" end="6442" title="Berserk (manga)" label="Berserk"/>
<link wikidata="Q715725" start="6476" end="6489" title="Kentaro Miura" label="Kentaro Miura"/>
<link wikidata="Q794912" start="6525" end="6537" title="dark fantasy" label="dark fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q937172" start="6705" end="6714" title="Gargoyles (TV series)" label="Gargoyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q762799" start="6925" end="6940" title="Michael Buckley (author)" label="Michael Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235680" start="6976" end="6993" title="The Sisters Grimm" label="The Sisters Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563213" start="7045" end="7056" title="Rob Thurman" label="Rob Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15035532" start="7070" end="7089" title="Cal Leandros series" label="Cal Leandros series"/>
<link wikidata="Q723439" start="7145" end="7157" title="Julie Kagawa" label="Julie Kagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21934318" start="7181" end="7200" title="The Iron Fey Series" label="The Iron Fey Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076930" start="7439" end="7451" title="Chris Adrian" label="Chris Adrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737864" start="7476" end="7491" title="The Great Night (novel)" label="The Great Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="7513" end="7519" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46034734" start="7533" end="7545" title="Carnival Row" label="Carnival Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q50809037" start="7872" end="7918" title="Chilling Adventures of Sabrina (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Chilling Adventures of Sabrina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q390137" start="8006" end="8016" title="God of War (franchise)" label="God of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q336496" start="8064" end="8069" title="Mímir" label="Mímir"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="8075" end="8091" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse Mythology."/>
<link wikidata="Q4708707" start="8130" end="8145" title="Alastair Duncan (actor, born 1958)" label="Alastair Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q771541" start="8170" end="8176" title="Dota 2" label="Dota 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q68681463" start="8275" end="8286" title="Wolfwalkers" label="Wolfwalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248616" start="8311" end="8360" title="Puck (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Puck (&amp;quot;A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582399" start="8363" end="8367" title="Puck (disambiguation)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993429" start="8383" end="8390" title="Niß Puk" label="Niß Puk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120968" start="8485" end="8489" title="Púca" label="Púca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982373" start="8492" end="8497" title="Bucca_(mythological_creature)" label="Bucca"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53346" wikidata="Q1248616" url="?curid=53346" title="Puck (A Midsummer Night's Dream)">
<text>Puck, or Robin Goodfellow, is a character in William Shakespeare&#x27;s play, &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;.

Based on the Puck of English mythology and the púca of Celtic mythology, Puck is a mischievous fairy, sprite, or jester. He is the first of the main fairy characters to appear, and he significantly influences events in the play. He delights in pranks such as replacing Nick Bottom&#x27;s head with that of an ass.

==Appearances in the play==
The audience is introduced to Puck in 2.1:
&lt;poem&gt;
FAIRY:
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Call&#x27;d Robin Goodfellow: are you not he
That frights the maidens of the villagery;
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the ,
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn;⁠
And sometime make the drink to bear no ;
Mislead night wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck:⁠
Are you not he?

PUCK:
⁠Fairy, thou speak&#x27;st aright;
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile⁠
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
And sometime lurk I in a gossip&#x27;s bowl,
In very likeness of a roasted crab;⁠
And, when she drinks, against her lips I 
And on her wither&#x27;d dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;⁠
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
And &#x27;tailor&#x27; cries, and falls into a cough;
And then the whole hold their hips and laugh;
And in their mirth, and , and swear⁠
A merrier hour was never wasted there [2.1.32-57].&lt;/poem&gt;
Puck serves the fairy king Oberon. Oberon is angry with Titania, the fairy queen, because she will not let him have a particular &quot;little changeling boy&quot; (2.1.120). Oberon sends Puck to fetch a particular flower, whereof the juice &quot;on sleeping eyelids laid / Will make or man or woman madly dote / Upon the next live creature that it sees&quot; (2.1.170-72). Puck is told to apply some of it to the &quot;disdainful youth&quot; (2.1.261) in &quot;Athenian garments&quot; (2.1.264), but Puck mistakes Lysander for Demetrius and applies it to Lysander. Oberon applies some of the juice to Titania, and Titania is waked by a singing Nick Bottom, whose head Puck has changed to that of an ass. Later, Puck is ordered to rectify his mistake with Lysander and Demetrius, and he creates a black fog through which he separates the &quot;testy rivals&quot; (3.2.358), imitating their voices until they are asleep. Puck has the final lines of the play:
&lt;poem&gt;
If we shadows have offended,
Think but this, and all is mended.
That you have but slumber&#x27;d here
While these visions did appear.⁠
And this weak and idle theme,
No more yielding but a dream,
Gentles, do not reprehend:
If you pardon, we will mend.⁠
And, as I&#x27;m an honest Puck,
If we have unearned luck
Now to &#x27;scape the serpent&#x27;s tongue,
We will make amends ere long;⁠
Else the Puck a liar call:
So, good night unto you all.
Give me your hands, if we be friends,
And Robin shall restore amends [5.1.433-48].
&lt;/poem&gt;
== Name of character ==
The original texts of Shakespeare&#x27;s plays do not have cast-lists, and are not always consistent with characters&#x27; names. Puck&#x27;s case is particularly awkward. Both the Quarto and the First Folio call the character &quot;Robin Goodfellow&quot; on the first entrance, but &quot;Puck&quot; later in the same scene, and they remain inconsistent. The Arden Shakespeare calls the character &quot;Puck&quot;, and emends all stage directions (but not actual dialogue) that refer to the character as &quot;Robin&quot; or &quot;Robin Goodfellow&quot;.

==Portrayals==
===Film and TV===
* Mickey Rooney, in the Oscar-winning 1935 film.
* Ian Holm, in the 1968 film.
* Phil Daniels, in the 1981 BBC Shakespeare television production.
* Razzak Khan, in the 1988 West End production.
* Robert Sean Leonard plays Puck in a high-school production in the 1989 film &quot;Dead Poets Society&quot;.
*Brent Spiner plays a version of Puck in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Gargoyles&quot;, first appearing in the season two episode &quot;The Mirror&quot; in 1995.
* Stanley Tucci, in the 1999 film.
* Tanner Cohen, in a high-school production depicted in the 2008 film &quot;Were the World Mine&quot;.
*Hiran Abeysekera in the 2016 film.
* Avan Jogia, in the 2017 film.
*Ken Nwosu, in &quot;Upstart Crow&quot; in 2018.
*Jonathan Whitesell plays a version of Robin Goodfellow in &quot;The Chilling Adventures of Sabrina&quot; in 2020.

===Theatre===
* Gertrud Eysoldt, first on 10 April, 1893 at the Riga City Theater, and later in Max Reinhardt&#x27;s 1905 production in Berlin.
* Frederick Peisley in Donald Wolfit&#x27;s production in 1947.
* Adam Darius, with the Stora Teatern in Göteborg, Sweden in 1961.
* John Kane, with The Royal Shakespeare Company in 1970.
*Puck is renamed &quot;Dr. Wheelgood&quot; in Diane Paulus&#x27;s production &quot;The Donkey Show&quot; in 1999.
*Karenssa LeGear in Schoenberg Hall&#x27;s 2007 production.
* Matthew Tennyson, with Shakespeare&#x27;s Globe Theatre in 2013.
* Kathryn Hunter in Julie Taymor&#x27;s 2013 production for the Theatre for a New Audience.

===School productions===
* Laurence Olivier, with St Edward&#x27;s School, Oxford in 1923.
* Sebastian de Souza, with St Edward&#x27;s School, Oxford.

===Painting and sculpture===

*&quot;Puck&quot; (1789), a painting by Joshua Reynolds
*&quot;Puck&quot; (c. 1810–1820), a painting by Henry Fuseli.
*&quot;Puck&quot; (c. 1855–1856), a marble sculpture by Harriet Hosmer
* The Puck Building built in 1885–1888 in Nolita, New York City, features two naked statues of Puck by sculptor Henry Baerer. The building is named after and housed the 19th-century humor magazine &quot;Puck&quot;. The magazine was named after the character, and used a depiction and a quote of him as a logotype.
* Sculpture &quot;Puck&quot;, by Carl Andersson, bronze, 1912, in the Stockholm suburb of Midsommarkransen in Sweden.
* &quot;Puck&quot; by Brenda Putnam, marble, 1932, at the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, D.C.

===Music===
* French pianist and composer Claude Debussy dedicated a prelude to Puck, &quot; La danse de Puck&quot;.

===Literature===
* In Neil Gaiman&#x27;s comic-book &quot;The Sandman&quot; story &quot;&#x27;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; (1990), Puck and other fairies watch Shakespeare&#x27;s company of actors perform &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;. After the play, Puck decides to remain in the &quot;mortal&quot; world, and goes on to appear in later stories.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1248616" start="0" end="4" title="Puck (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248616" start="9" end="25" title="Puck (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Robin Goodfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="45" end="64" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="84" end="114" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q14126754" start="136" end="140" title="Puck (mythology)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q52699397" start="144" end="161" title="English mythology" label="English mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120968" start="170" end="174" title="púca" label="púca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="218" end="223" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828805" start="225" end="231" title="Sprite (folklore)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="236" end="242" title="jester" label="jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190927" start="392" end="403" title="Nick Bottom" label="Nick Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305786" start="432" end="435" title="Asinus" label="ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139234" start="1732" end="1738" title="Oberon" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332221" start="1761" end="1768" title="Titania (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637148" start="2219" end="2227" title="Lysander (Shakespeare)" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920050" start="2232" end="2241" title="Demetrius (Shakespeare)" label="Demetrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332221" start="2306" end="2313" title="Titania (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190927" start="2349" end="2360" title="Nick Bottom" label="Nick Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q833645" start="3435" end="3446" title="First Folio" label="First Folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="3830" end="3843" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305191" start="3852" end="3875" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1935 film)" label="Oscar-winning 1935 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q223091" start="3879" end="3887" title="Ian Holm" label="Ian Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658231" start="3892" end="3905" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1968 film)" label="the 1968 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671473" start="3909" end="3921" title="Phil Daniels" label="Phil Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631723" start="3935" end="3950" title="BBC Shakespeare" label="BBC Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15690007" start="3976" end="3987" title="Razzak Khan" label="Razzak Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="4001" end="4009" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q193160" start="4024" end="4043" title="Robert Sean Leonard" label="Robert Sean Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q106316" start="4106" end="4124" title="Dead Poets Society" label="Dead Poets Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q311453" start="4133" end="4145" title="Brent Spiner" label="Brent Spiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q937172" start="4187" end="4208" title="Gargoyles (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Gargoyles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4258" end="4268" title="List of Gargoyles episodes#Season 2 (1995–1996)" label="The Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q223117" start="4286" end="4299" title="Stanley Tucci" label="Stanley Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305200" start="4304" end="4317" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1999 film)" label="the 1999 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q514611" start="4321" end="4333" title="Tanner Cohen" label="Tanner Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814925" start="4395" end="4414" title="Were the World Mine" label="Were the World Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970382" start="4423" end="4439" title="Hiran Abeysekera" label="Hiran Abeysekera"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108409" start="4447" end="4456" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (2016 film)" label="2016 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q368424" start="4460" end="4470" title="Avan Jogia" label="Avan Jogia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603007" start="4475" end="4488" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (2017 film)" label="the 2017 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q110022259" start="4491" end="4500" title="Ken Nwosu" label="Ken Nwosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079780" start="4511" end="4523" title="Upstart Crow" label="Upstart Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q63107555" start="4540" end="4558" title="Jonathan Whitesell" label="Jonathan Whitesell"/>
<link wikidata="Q50809037" start="4598" end="4644" title="The Chilling Adventures of Sabrina (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Chilling Adventures of Sabrina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q108057" start="4671" end="4686" title="Gertrud Eysoldt" label="Gertrud Eysoldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="4751" end="4771" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19650474" start="4801" end="4818" title="Frederick Peisley" label="Frederick Peisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q530758" start="4822" end="4835" title="Donald Wolfit" label="Donald Wolfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982523" start="4865" end="4876" title="Adam Darius" label="Adam Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242466" start="4932" end="4941" title="John Kane (writer)" label="John Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="4948" end="4977" title="The Royal Shakespeare Company" label="The Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271541" start="5033" end="5045" title="Diane Paulus" label="Diane Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730645" start="5064" end="5091" title="The Donkey Show (musical)" label="&amp;quot;The Donkey Show&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761636" start="5102" end="5117" title="Karenssa LeGear" label="Karenssa LeGear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5121" end="5136" title="UCLA Herb Alpert School of Music#Schoenberg Music Building" label="Schoenberg Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205070" start="5163" end="5179" title="Matthew Tennyson" label="Matthew Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7725501" start="5186" end="5218" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe Theatre" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q459482" start="5230" end="5244" title="Kathryn Hunter" label="Kathryn Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q240490" start="5248" end="5260" title="Julie Taymor" label="Julie Taymor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26156587" start="5292" end="5318" title="Theatre for a New Audience" label="Theatre for a New Audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="5348" end="5364" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q128260" start="5371" end="5402" title="St Edward&amp;#x27;s School, Oxford" label="St Edward&amp;#x27;s School, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q523420" start="5414" end="5432" title="Sebastian de Souza" label="Sebastian de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q194402" start="5543" end="5558" title="Joshua Reynolds" label="Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q122382" start="5607" end="5619" title="Henry Fuseli" label="Henry Fuseli"/>
<link wikidata="Q448214" start="5677" end="5691" title="Harriet Hosmer" label="Harriet Hosmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760139" start="5698" end="5711" title="Puck Building" label="Puck Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q568572" start="5734" end="5740" title="Nolita" label="Nolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717688" start="5804" end="5816" title="Henry Baerer" label="Henry Baerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584058" start="5895" end="5899" title="Puck (magazine)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="6076" end="6085" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781652" start="6096" end="6112" title="Midsommarkransen" label="Midsommarkransen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560768" start="6146" end="6159" title="Brenda Putnam" label="Brenda Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q728116" start="6182" end="6208" title="Folger Shakespeare Library" label="Folger Shakespeare Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="6272" end="6286" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="6370" end="6381" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="6406" end="6417" title="The Sandman (Vertigo)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6436" end="6472" title="The Sandman: Dream Country#&amp;quot;A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream&amp;quot;" label="&amp;#x27;A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6692" end="6715" title="List of The Sandman characters#Puck" label="appear in later stories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53347" wikidata="Q508918" url="?curid=53347" title="Hockey puck">
<text>A hockey puck is either an open or closed disk used in a variety of sports and games. There are designs made for use on an ice surface, such as in ice hockey, and others for the different variants of floor hockey which includes the wheeled skate variant of inline hockey ( roller hockey). They are all designed to serve the same function a ball does in ball games.

A closed disk hockey puck having the shape of a short cylinder made of vulcanized rubber is used in the sport of ice hockey. Hockey pucks are designed for use on either an ice surface, dry floor, or underwater, though open disk designs have only been used on floors.

Open disk hockey pucks have a hole, forming the shape of a toroid, for use in a particular style of floor hockey. They should not be confused with ringette rings, which are toruses, for use in the sport of ringette. 
This article deals chiefly with the sport and game pucks which are closed disks.

==Etymology==

The origin of the word &quot;puck&quot; is vague. The Oxford English Dictionary suggests the name is related to the verb &quot;to puck&quot; (a cognate of &quot;poke&quot;) used in the games of shinty and hurling for striking or pushing the ball, from the Scottish Gaelic &quot;puc&quot; or the Irish &quot;poc&quot;, meaning &quot;to poke, punch or deliver a blow&quot;:

It is possible that settlers of Nova Scotia, many of whom were Scottish and Irish who played shinty and hurling, may have introduced the word to Canada. This is supported by the prevalent use in Canada of the word &quot;shinny&quot; for an informal or &quot;pick-up&quot; game of hockey, which is also derived from the Scottish game of shinty. The first known printed reference was in Montreal, in 1876 (&quot;Montreal Gazette&quot; of February 7, 1876), just a year after the first indoor game was played there.

A hockey puck is also referred to colloquially as a &quot;biscuit&quot;. To put the &quot;biscuit in the basket&quot; (colloquial for the goal) is to score a goal.

==In ice hockey==

Ice hockey requires a hard disk of vulcanized rubber. A standard ice hockey puck is black, thick, in diameter, and weighs between ; some pucks are heavier or lighter than standard . Pucks are often marked with silkscreened team or league logos on one or both faces. Pucks are frozen before the game to reduce bouncing during play.

===History===
====The first hockey pucks====
The first hockey pucks were made from frozen cow dung and leather liver pads. These early pucks had a lifespan of about one game before they were too soft or too hard for playability, so they were replaced with wooden ones.

====Ball games on ice====
The sport of bandy, prior to its first official organization in Britain, had its informal variants spread to North America where they and game concepts from lacrosse, shinty and hurling served as precursors in some format to ice hockey. These informal games utilized various types of balls while being played on ice until the latter half of 19th century Canada, after which the game of ice hockey and the ice hockey puck began to take their official shape and form.

====Shape and material====
By the 1870s, flat pucks were made of wood as well as rubber. Records from the first indoor ice hockey game (1875) used a wooden puck, to prevent it from leaving the area of play though new evidence has shown that cuts from large corks have also been used.

At first, pucks (of either material) were made in the shape of a square. Rubber pucks were first made by slicing a rubber ball, then trimming the disk square. The original puck used first in the first organized games in Kingston on March 10, 1886 (on display at the Original Hockey Hall of Fame), was made from a cut-down lacrosse ball. It looks like a lump of coal, is made from soft rubber, and bounces far more than a modern hockey puck.

The Victoria Hockey Club of Montreal is credited with making and using the first round pucks, in the 1880s.

===Variations===
There are several variations on the standard black, hockey puck. One of the most common is a blue, puck that is used for training younger players who are not yet able to use a standard puck. Heavier training pucks, typically reddish pink or reddish orange in colour, are also available for players looking to develop the strength of their shots or improve their stick handling skills. Players looking to increase wrist strength often practice with steel pucks that weigh ; these pucks are not used for shooting, as they could seriously harm other players. White pucks are used for technical handling and goaltender practice. These are regulation size and weight, but made from white rubber. The colour blend in with the ice and rink and requires higher focus on the puck, making handling of the black puck at later stage easier. A hollow, light-weight fluorescent orange puck is available for road or floor hockey. Other variants, some with plastic ball-bearings or glides, are available for use for road or roller hockey.

Two major developments have been devised to create better puck visibility on television broadcasts, but both were short-lived:

====Firepuck====
The use of a &quot;Firepuck&quot; in the early 1990s was the first attempt to improve the visibility of hockey pucks as seen on television. This invention incorporated coloured retro reflective materials of either embedded lens elements or prismatic reflectors laminated into recesses on the flat surfaces and the vertical edge of a standard hockey puck. Yellow was the preferred reflected colour. A spotlight was required to be positioned on the TV camera and focused at the centre of the viewing area.

A short demonstration tape of the Minnesota North Stars skating with the Firepuck was shown during the period break at the 1993 NHL All-Star Game in Montreal. The International Hockey League (IHL) pursued testing the Firepuck with its inventor, Donald Klassen. The next television viewing was the IHL All-Star Game in Fort Wayne, Indiana, January 1994, where the Firepuck was used for the entire game. The IHL tested the Firepuck in two more games, and finally the East Coast Hockey League used it January 17, 1997, for their all-star game.

The use of the Firepuck was discontinued because of these reasons:
* The slight structural change increased the tendency for the puck to bounce on the ice. This made it more difficult for the goaltender and resulted in increased scoring.
* The skaters objected to the use of camera spotlights which reflected off the ice.
* The television viewing contrast of the Firepuck was not noticeably enhanced when the camera view was of the entire rink, this being the most common camera shot.

The Firepuck name was branded during the 1990s but has since been discontinued.

====Smart puck====
The FoxTrax &quot;smart puck&quot; was developed by the Fox television network when it held National Hockey League (NHL) broadcasting rights for the United States. The puck had integrated electronics to track its position on screen; a blue streak traced the path of the puck across the ice. The streak would turn red if the puck was shot especially hard. This was an experiment in broadcasting intended to help viewers unfamiliar with hockey to better follow the game by making the puck more visible. It was ill-received by many traditional hockey fans, but appreciated by many of the more casual viewers. The system debuted with much publicity in the NHL All-Star game at the Boston Fleet Center on January 20, 1996, but the system was shelved when Fox Sports lost the NHL broadcast rights three years later.

===In game play===
During a game, pucks can reach speeds of or more when struck. The current world record is held by Denis Kulyash of KHL&#x27;s Avangard Omsk, who slapped a puck at the 2011 KHL All-Star Game skills competition in St. Petersburg, Russia on 5 February 2011 with a speed of .
Zdeno Chára, whose slapshot clocked in the 2013 NHL All-Star Game SuperSkills competition, broke his own earlier record. 

Fast-flying pucks are potentially dangerous to players and spectators. Puck-related injuries at hockey games are not uncommon. This led to the evolution of various types of protective gear for players, most notably the goaltender mask. The most notable incident involving a spectator took place on March 18, 2002, when a 13-year-old girl, Brittanie Cecil, died two days after being struck on the head by a hockey puck deflected into the crowd at an NHL game between the Calgary Flames and Columbus Blue Jackets in Columbus. This is the only known incident of this type to have occurred in the history of the league. Partly as a result of this event, the glass or plexiglass panels that sit atop the boards of hockey rinks to protect spectators have been supplemented with mesh nets that extend above the upper edge of the glass.

===Manufacture===
NHL regulation pucks were not &quot;required&quot; for professional play until the 1990–91 season, but were standardized for consistent play and ease of manufacture half a century earlier, by Art Ross, in 1940. Major manufacturers of pucks exist in Canada, Russia, the Czech Republic, the People&#x27;s Republic of China, and Slovakia.

The black rubber of the puck is made up of a mix of natural rubber, antioxidants, bonding materials and other chemicals to achieve a balance of hardness and resilience. This mixture is then turned in a machine with metal rollers, where workers add extra natural rubber, and ensure that the mixing is even. Samples are then put into a machine that analyses if the rubber will harden at the right temperature. An automated apparatus, called a pultrusion machine, extrudes the rubber into long circular logs that are in diameter and then cut into thick pieces while still soft. These pre-forms are then manually put into moulds that are the exact size of a finished puck. There are up to 200 mould cavities per moulding palette, capable of producing up to 5,000 pucks per week. The moulds are then compressed. This compression may be done cold or with the moulds heated to for 18 minutes, depending on the proprietary methods of the manufacturer. They come out hard and then are allowed to sit for 24 hours. Each puck is manually cleaned with a trimmer machine to remove excess rubber. The moulding process adds a diamond cross-hatch texture around the edge of the puck for more friction between the stick and puck for better control and puck handling.

The practice pucks are made by a similar but faster process that uses larger pre-forms, thick, puts them into moulds automatically, and applies more pressure and heat over a shorter period of time to compress the puck into the standard size. This allows approximately twice as many pucks to be manufactured in the same time period as the more exacting production of NHL regulation pucks. People sometimes freeze pucks to prevent them from sticking to the ice.

The list of former or present-day major producers includes
* Viceroy
* Inglasco - Olympics 2010.
* Pro-Flex
* Gufex - Olympics 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2018. Since 1999, all World Championships.
* Rubena - Olympics 2014.
* Vegum Dolné Vestenice
* Converse
* HockeyShot
* Spalding
* Xiamen Yin Hua Silicone Rubber Products Co., Ltd.
* Xiamen Deng Hong Silica Gel Product Co., Ltd.
* Xiamen Ijetech Industry &amp; Trade Co. Ltd

==In roller hockey==

Roller hockey pucks, in-line hockey pucks, are similar to ice-hockey pucks but are made from plastic and thus lighter. They have small ribs protruding from their tops and bottoms which limit contact with the surface, allowing better sliding motion and less friction. These pucks typically come in light, easily visible colors: mostly commonly red, but also sometimes orange, yellow, pink, or green. Roller hockey pucks were created so inline hockey and street hockey players could play with a puck instead of a ball on surfaces such as hardwood, concrete, and asphalt.

==In underwater hockey==

Underwater hockey uses a type of puck that while similar in appearance to an ice hockey puck, differs in that it has a lead core weighing approximately within a teflon, plastic or rubber coating. This makes the puck dense enough to sink in a swimming pool, though it can be lofted during passes, while affording some protection to the pool tiles.

A smaller and lighter version of the standard puck exists for junior competition and is approximately 1 lb 12 oz (0.80–0.85 kg) and of similar construction to the standard puck.

While there are numerous regional variations in colour, construction and materials all must conform to international regulations stipulating overall dimensions and weight. The regulations state that pucks should be a bright distinctive colour, for example high-visibility pink or orange, and that for World Championships these are the only acceptable colours.

==In spongee==

Spongee &quot;sponge hockey&quot;, is an organized recreational cult game that emerged in Canada around the 1950s and is played in the Canadian city of Winnipeg. It gets its name from the puck that is used: instead of the hard vulcanized rubber puck used in regular ice hockey, a softer sponge puck is used. At one point, some locals referred to it as &quot;tweeter&quot; based on the sound the original pucks made. The game is a variant of ice hockey and was influenced by Canadian road-hockey and ice-hockey players playing shinny on outdoor rinks in running shoes and winter boots. The game is played in winter strictly on outdoor rinks, does not use ice skates, and has codes involving less contact. Broomball shoes are sometimes used.

The spongee puck originated when someone took a toy red-white-and-blue handball and cut out the center, leaving a rude approximation of a standard hockey puck. Eventually manufactured types of sponge pucks came into use, some of which were developed in Slovakia and had a spring core. Spongee pucks are softer than ice hockey pucks and have more bounce.

==In other sports and games==

The term &quot;puck&quot; is sometimes also applied to similar (though often smaller) gaming discs in other sports and games, including novuss, shuffleboard, table shuffleboard, box hockey, floor hockey, and air hockey.

==Alternative uses==
Ice hockey pucks of regulation diameter and thickness may be used as mechanical vibration dampening isolators in places such as feet for light industrial air compressors, and air conditioning units because they are of regulation materials and therefore consistent manufacture, size, and shape, and are constructed of a repeatable and consistent vulcanized rubber material.

Since the material is rubber, it may be drilled out or milled easily to a fixed depth as rubber feet or used as rubber spacer or gasket material.

A very common use of a slotted hockey puck is as an adaptor between the metal foot of a trolley jack and the sill (rocker panel) of an automobile. The sill has a spot-welded lip which fits into the slot of the puck and would otherwise be bent or marked by the metal foot.

In November 2018, faculty of Oakland University in Michigan received hockey pucks and training to throw them as a possible last-ditch defense against active shooters. The American Association of University Professors distributed pucks to its 800 members, and is working with student groups to distribute an additional 1,700 pucks to students.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q508918" start="2" end="13" title="Hockey puck" label="hockey puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="147" end="157" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058877" start="200" end="212" title="floor hockey" label="floor hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q946171" start="257" end="270" title="inline hockey" label="inline hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440462" start="273" end="286" title="roller hockey" label="roller hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="340" end="344" title="ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="420" end="428" title="cylinder" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="437" end="447" title="vulcanized" label="vulcanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="448" end="454" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="479" end="489" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058877" start="551" end="560" title="Floor hockey" label="dry floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241394" start="693" end="699" title="toroid" label="toroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972786" start="781" end="794" title="ringette ring" label="ringette ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="807" end="812" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972786" start="840" end="848" title="ringette" label="ringette"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1002" end="1027" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1092" end="1099" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q850256" start="1142" end="1148" title="shinty" label="shinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="1153" end="1160" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1204" end="1219" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="1353" end="1364" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q850256" start="1414" end="1420" title="shinty" label="shinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="1425" end="1432" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497689" start="1541" end="1547" title="shinny" label="shinny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454202" start="1798" end="1815" title="First indoor hockey game" label="first indoor game"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="2019" end="2029" title="Ice hockey" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q187791" start="2229" end="2241" title="Silkscreening" label="silkscreened"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="2660" end="2665" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2711" end="2718" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="2804" end="2812" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q850256" start="2814" end="2820" title="shinty" label="shinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="2825" end="2832" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454202" start="3220" end="3248" title="first indoor ice hockey game" label="first indoor ice hockey game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288618" start="3665" end="3693" title="Original Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Original Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q340001" start="3845" end="3865" title="Montreal Victorias" label="Victoria Hockey Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="4571" end="4581" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="5068" end="5078" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012104" start="5350" end="5363" title="embedded lens" label="embedded lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="5675" end="5696" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota North Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q234349" start="5764" end="5786" title="1993 NHL All-Star Game" label="1993 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666624" start="5804" end="5831" title="International Hockey League (1945–2001)" label="International Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="5959" end="5978" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="6106" end="6130" title="East Coast Hockey League" label="East Coast Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476541" start="6773" end="6780" title="FoxTrax" label="FoxTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="6825" end="6847" title="Fox television network" label="Fox television network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="6861" end="6883" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="7453" end="7465" title="FleetCenter (Boston)" label="Fleet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q984256" start="7697" end="7710" title="Denis Kulyash" label="Denis Kulyash"/>
<link wikidata="Q190001" start="7714" end="7717" title="KHL" label="KHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q787888" start="7725" end="7738" title="Avangard Omsk" label="Avangard Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="7811" end="7825" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="7827" end="7833" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168957" start="7871" end="7882" title="Zdeno Chára" label="Zdeno Chára"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517991" start="7890" end="7898" title="slapshot" label="slapshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817934" start="7914" end="7936" title="2013 NHL All-Star Game" label="2013 NHL All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785680" start="8213" end="8228" title="goaltender mask" label="goaltender mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247406" start="8333" end="8348" title="Brittanie Cecil" label="Brittanie Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q194126" start="8464" end="8478" title="Calgary Flames" label="Calgary Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="8483" end="8504" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="8508" end="8516" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="8657" end="8667" title="plexiglass" label="plexiglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q539010" start="9034" end="9042" title="Art Ross" label="Art Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="9111" end="9125" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9131" end="9162" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="9168" end="9176" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="9323" end="9331" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="9336" end="9346" title="tensile strength" label="resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140481" start="9620" end="9630" title="pultrusion" label="pultrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q125565224" start="10962" end="10970" title="Inglasco" label="Inglasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="10973" end="10986" title="Olympics 2010" label="Olympics 2010"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10990" end="10998" title="Pro-Flex" label="Pro-Flex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11001" end="11006" title="Gufex" label="Gufex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="11009" end="11022" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="Olympics 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="11024" end="11028" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="11030" end="11034" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="11039" end="11043" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q190163" start="11061" end="11080" title="Ice Hockey World Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="11093" end="11106" title="Olympics 2014" label="Olympics 2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11110" end="11115" title="Vegum" label="Vegum"/>
<link wikidata="Q319515" start="11134" end="11142" title="Converse (shoe company)" label="Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555271" start="11158" end="11166" title="Spalding (sports equipment)" label="Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440462" start="11336" end="11349" title="Roller hockey" label="Roller hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q946171" start="11357" end="11371" title="in-line hockey" label="in-line hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="11593" end="11601" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q946171" start="11771" end="11784" title="inline hockey" label="inline hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551265" start="11789" end="11802" title="street hockey" label="street hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="11872" end="11880" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="11882" end="11890" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="11896" end="11903" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q512203" start="11932" end="11949" title="Underwater hockey" label="Underwater hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="12051" end="12055" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="12093" end="12099" title="teflon" label="teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q252266" start="12112" end="12118" title="elastomer" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570182" start="12119" end="12126" title="coating" label="coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="12148" end="12153" title="dense" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q100995" start="12384" end="12386" title="pound (mass)" label="lb"/>
<link wikidata="Q48013" start="12390" end="12392" title="ounce" label="oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579001" start="12836" end="12843" title="Spongee" label="Spongee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="12988" end="12996" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551265" start="13319" end="13330" title="road hockey" label="road-hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497689" start="13362" end="13368" title="shinny" label="shinny"/>
<link wikidata="Q990637" start="13540" end="13549" title="Broomball" label="Broomball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="13648" end="13656" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="13830" end="13838" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178505" start="14099" end="14105" title="novuss" label="novuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975513" start="14107" end="14119" title="shuffleboard" label="shuffleboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678863" start="14121" end="14139" title="table shuffleboard" label="table shuffleboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006194" start="14141" end="14151" title="box hockey" label="box hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058877" start="14153" end="14165" title="floor hockey" label="floor hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165302" start="14171" end="14181" title="air hockey" label="air hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q782116" start="15028" end="15046" title="Oakland University" label="Oakland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029371" start="15149" end="15163" title="active shooter" label="active shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743104" start="15170" end="15215" title="American Association of University Professors" label="American Association of University Professors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53348" wikidata="Q15662" url="?curid=53348" title="Puck (moon)">
<text>Puck is the sixth-largest moon of Uranus. It was discovered in December 1985 by the &quot;Voyager 2&quot; spacecraft. The name &quot;Puck&quot; follows the convention of naming Uranus&#x27;s moons after characters from Shakespeare. The orbit of Puck lies between the rings of Uranus and the first of Uranus&#x27;s large moons, Miranda. Puck is approximately spherical in shape and has diameter of about 162 km. It has a dark, heavily cratered surface, which shows spectral signs of water ice.

== Discovery and naming ==

Puck—the largest inner moon of Uranus—was discovered from the images taken by &quot;Voyager 2&quot; on 30 December 1985. It was given the temporary designation S/1985 U 1.

The moon was later named after the character Puck who appears in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;, a little sprite who travels around the globe at night with the fairies. In Celtic mythology and English folklore, a &quot;Puck&quot; is a mischievous sprite, imagined as an evil demon by Christians.

It is also designated Uranus XV.

== Physical characteristics ==

Puck is the largest inner moon of Uranus, orbiting inside the orbit of Miranda. It is intermediate in size between Portia (the second-largest inner moon) and Miranda (the smallest of the five major moons). Puck&#x27;s orbit is located between the rings of Uranus and Miranda. Little is known about Puck aside from its orbit, radius of about 81 km, and geometric albedo in visible light of approximately 0.11.

Of the moons discovered by the &quot;Voyager 2&quot; imaging team, only Puck was discovered early enough that the probe could be programmed to image it in some detail. Images showed that Puck has a shape of a slightly prolate spheroid (ratio between axes is 0.93–1). Its surface is heavily cratered and is grey in color. There are three named craters on the surface of Puck, the largest being about 45 km in diameter. Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and large terrestrial telescopes found water-ice absorption features in the spectrum of Puck.

Little is known about the internal structure of Puck. It is probably made of a mixture of water ice, and may have been collisionally disrupted and reaccreted as a rubble pile. The presence of a 3.0 deep 3.0 micron feature attributed to the O-H stretching mode suggests that water ice or hydrated minerals are a common component on Puck&#x27;s surface. Its surface is coated with a dark material similar to that found in the main rings. The dark material is probably made of rocks or radiation-processed organics; it is possible that material spiralling inwards from Uranus&#x27;s μ ring coats Puck&#x27;s leading hemisphere as well. Puck, as well as the other inner satellites of Uranus, is darker than the average inner Neptunian satellite, which could be either due to a higher level of solar irradiation at Uranus as opposed to Neptune, or a distinct composition. The absence of craters with bright rays implies that Puck is not differentiated, meaning that ice and non-ice components have not separated from each other into a core and mantle.

===Named features===
Puck has three craters named Bogle, Butz, and Lob, which are named after mischievous spirits from Scottish, German, and British folklore respectively. Details about these craters are currently unknown.

== See also ==
* Moons of Uranus
* Rings of Uranus

== Notes ==
== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Page that includes a reprocessed version of the &quot;Voyager 2&quot; Puck image</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15662" start="0" end="4" title="Puck (moon)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="34" end="40" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48475" start="90" end="99" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="219" end="230" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q171473" start="267" end="282" title="rings of Uranus" label="rings of Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352" start="327" end="334" title="Miranda (moon)" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q431281" start="539" end="549" title="inner moon" label="inner moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48475" start="606" end="615" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248616" start="740" end="744" title="Puck (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="785" end="815" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828805" start="832" end="838" title="Sprite (folklore)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="886" end="893" title="fairy" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="898" end="914" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14126754" start="945" end="949" title="Puck (mythology)" label="Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q431281" start="1109" end="1119" title="inner moon" label="inner moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15644" start="1204" end="1210" title="Portia (moon)" label="Portia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352" start="1247" end="1254" title="Miranda (moon)" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1276" end="1292" title="moons of Uranus#Large moons" label="five major moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q171473" start="1336" end="1351" title="rings of Uranus" label="rings of Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="1451" end="1457" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1461" end="1474" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="1717" end="1724" title="prolate" label="prolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="1725" end="1733" title="spheroid" label="spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="1789" end="1797" title="Impact crater" label="cratered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="1939" end="1961" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="2147" end="2156" title="ice" label="water ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q462326" start="2220" end="2231" title="rubble pile" label="rubble pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="2297" end="2300" title="Hydroxy group" label="O-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="2531" end="2535" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="2540" end="2549" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="2560" end="2567" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139" start="2778" end="2797" title="Neptunian satellites" label="Neptunian satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="2888" end="2895" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q742129" start="3087" end="3091" title="core (geology)" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="3096" end="3102" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152" start="3346" end="3361" title="Moons of Uranus" label="Moons of Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171473" start="3364" end="3379" title="Rings of Uranus" label="Rings of Uranus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53350" wikidata="Q390243" url="?curid=53350" title="Place Charles de Gaulle">
<text>The Place Charles de Gaulle (), historically known as the Place de l&#x27;Étoile (), is a large road junction in Paris, France, the meeting point of twelve straight avenues (hence its historic name, which translates as &quot;Square of the Star&quot;) including the Champs-Élysées. It was renamed in 1970, following the death of President Charles de Gaulle. It is still often referred to by its original name; the nearby Métro and RER station retains the designation Charles de Gaulle–Étoile. Paris&#x27;s &quot;Axe historique&quot; (&quot;historical axis&quot;) cuts through the Arc de Triomphe, which stands at the centre of the Place Charles de Gaulle.

== History ==
The original name of the area was the &quot;Butte Chaillot&quot; (&quot;Chaillot Mound&quot;, named after the locality). At the time, it was the point of convergence of several hunting trails. The Marquis de Marigny constructed monumental roadworks, completed in 1777, on the mound when he was establishing the plantations along the Champs-Élysées. The junction included paving of the road in the form of a star, as it still exists today and became known as the Place de l&#x27;Étoile.

In 1787, the Wall of the &quot;Ferme générale&quot; (&quot;Mur des Fermiers généraux&quot;), and the two toll houses of the &quot;Barrière de l&#x27;Étoile&quot; (also known as the &quot;Barrière de Neuilly&quot;) were built to the design of Claude Nicolas Ledoux for the collection of the octroi tax at the entrance to Paris. They were located on either side of the Place de l&#x27;Étoile until their demolition after 1859.

Between 1806 and 1836, the Arc de Triomphe de l&#x27;Étoile was built to the design of Jean Chalgrin. It was originally commissioned by Emperor Napoleon I during the First French Empire and inaugurated three decades later by King Louis Philippe I under the July Monarchy.

The avenues radiating from the Place de l&#x27;Étoile were created during the Second French Empire of Emperor Napoleon III as part of Haussmann&#x27;s renovation of Paris. The square was completely redesigned with avenues de Bezons (now Wagram), Joséphine (now Marceau), Kléber, de Saint-Cloud (now Victor-Hugo), Essling (now Carnot), Prince-Jérôme (now Mac-Mahon and Niel) forming with the Champs-Élysées and other existing avenues a star around the Arc de Triomphe.

In 1864, the circular street surrounding the Place de l&#x27;Étoile was named Rue de Presbourg (south of the &quot;Axe historique&quot;) and Rue de Tilsitt (north of the &quot;Axe historique&quot;), after the diplomatic successes of Napoleon which led to the signing of the Treaty of Presbourg in 1805 and the Treaties of Tilsit in 1807.

Since 1921, beneath the Arc de Triomphe lies the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. After the death of President Charles de Gaulle in 1970, the Place de l&#x27;Étoile was renamed the Place Charles de Gaulle.

== Description ==
=== Map ===
The Place Charles de Gaulle has a diameter of , giving it an area of approximately . It is the second largest square in Paris, after the Place de la Concorde (8.64 hectares). At the centre of the square stands the Arc de Triomphe, which is accessible via a pedestrian underpass, to avoid the confluence of vehicular traffic from the juncture of twelve radiating avenues.

=== Avenues ===
The twelve avenues, clockwise from the north, are the following:

# Avenue de Wagram (thus called since the Second Empire) and Boulevard de l&#x27;Étoile or Boulevard Bezons before
# Avenue Hoche: Avenue de la Reine-Hortense during the Second Empire and Boulevard Monceau before
# Avenue de Friedland since the Second Empire and Boulevard Beaujon before
# Avenue des Champs-Élysées
# Avenue Marceau: Avenue Joséphine during the Second Empire
# Avenue d&#x27;Iéna
# Avenue Kléber: Avenue du Roi-de-Rome during the Second Empire and Boulevard de Passy before
# Avenue Victor-Hugo: Avenue d&#x27;Eylau during the Second Empire and Avenue de Saint-Cloud before
# Avenue Foch: Avenue du Bois during the Third Republic and Avenue de l&#x27;Impératrice during the Second Empire
# Avenue de la Grande Armée during the Second Empire and Avenue de Neuilly before
# Avenue Carnot: Avenue d&#x27;Essling during the Second Empire
# Avenue Mac-Mahon: Avenue du Prince-Jérôme during the Second Empire

=== Axes ===
The Place Charles de Gaulle is symmetrical and thus has six axes:

# Axis Avenue de Wagram and Avenue Kléber
# Axis Avenue Hoche and Avenue Victor-Hugo
# Axis Avenue de Friedland and Avenue Foch
# Axis Avenue des Champs-Élysées and Avenue de la Grande Armée which is the &quot;Axe historique&quot; of Paris
# Axis Avenue Marceau and Avenue Carnot
# Axis Avenue d&#x27;Iéna and Avenue Mac-Mahon

=== Arrondissements ===
The Place Charles de Gaulle (as well as the Arc de Triomphe) is split between the 8th, 16th and 17th arrondissements of Paris. The 8th arrondissement encompasses the area between Avenue de Wagram and Avenue Marceau (to the east). The 16th arrondissement encompasses the area between Avenue Marceau and Avenue de la Grande Armée (to the south and west). The 17th arrondissement encompasses the area between Avenue de la Grande Armée and Avenue de Wagram (to the north).

== Literature ==
&quot;La Place de l&#x27;Étoile&quot; is the title of a novel by French writer Patrick Modiano.

== Transportation ==
:&quot;Located near the Métro station: Charles de Gaulle–Étoile.&quot;
The Place Charles de Gaulle is served by Métro and RER services. Line 1, as well as RER A, run under the Avenue de la Grande Armée and Champs-Élysées and stop at the station. The station is also served by Line 2 and serves as the western terminus of Line 6.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==

* Squares in Paris
* Axe historique

== References ==
== External links ==
* Satellite image from Google Maps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q390243" start="4" end="27" title="Place Charles de Gaulle" label="Place Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q390243" start="58" end="80" title="Place Charles de Gaulle" label="Place de l&amp;#x27;Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788454" start="96" end="109" title="road junction" label="road junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="113" end="118" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="120" end="126" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="165" end="172" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="265" end="279" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="338" end="355" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="420" end="425" title="Paris Métro" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q216125" start="430" end="433" title="Réseau Express Régional" label="RER"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467665" start="466" end="490" title="Charles de Gaulle–Étoile" label="Charles de Gaulle–Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q791938" start="511" end="525" title="Axe historique" label="Axe historique"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="579" end="594" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258999" start="867" end="885" title="Abel-François Poisson" label="Marquis de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="1003" end="1017" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q616697" start="1170" end="1208" title="Wall of the Ferme générale" label="Wall of the &amp;quot;Ferme générale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q552700" start="1399" end="1420" title="Claude Nicolas Ledoux" label="Claude Nicolas Ledoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270515" start="1447" end="1453" title="octroi" label="octroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="1610" end="1642" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe de l&amp;#x27;Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q525487" start="1670" end="1683" title="Jean Chalgrin" label="Jean Chalgrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1727" end="1737" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="1749" end="1768" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="1813" end="1829" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="1840" end="1853" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="1934" end="1954" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1966" end="1978" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117470" start="1990" end="2026" title="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris" label="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873974" start="2093" end="2099" title="Avenue de Wagram" label="Wagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873767" start="2117" end="2124" title="Avenue Marceau" label="Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q790578" start="2127" end="2133" title="Avenue Kléber" label="Kléber"/>
<link wikidata="Q790581" start="2155" end="2166" title="Avenue Victor-Hugo (Paris)" label="Victor-Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="2247" end="2261" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="2307" end="2322" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450986" start="2403" end="2419" title="Rue de Presbourg" label="Rue de Presbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q791938" start="2440" end="2454" title="Axe historique" label="Axe historique"/>
<link wikidata="Q681926" start="2466" end="2480" title="Rue de Tilsitt" label="Rue de Tilsitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2558" end="2566" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154102" start="2599" end="2618" title="Peace of Pressburg (1805)" label="Treaty of Presbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="2635" end="2653" title="Treaties of Tilsit" label="Treaties of Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q523312" start="2713" end="2740" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (France)" label="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="2771" end="2788" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3017" end="3022" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q189503" start="3034" end="3054" title="Place de la Concorde" label="Place de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="3111" end="3126" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="3296" end="3303" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873974" start="3353" end="3369" title="Avenue de Wagram" label="Avenue de Wagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873695" start="3468" end="3480" title="Avenue Hoche" label="Avenue Hoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q229875" start="3495" end="3509" title="Hortense de Beauharnais" label="Reine-Hortense"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="3641" end="3666" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Avenue des Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873767" start="3669" end="3683" title="Avenue Marceau" label="Avenue Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q171480" start="3692" end="3701" title="Empress Joséphine" label="Joséphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873902" start="3729" end="3747" title="Avenue d&amp;#x27;Iéna" label="Avenue d&amp;#x27;Iéna"/>
<link wikidata="Q790578" start="3750" end="3763" title="Avenue Kléber" label="Avenue Kléber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723" start="3775" end="3786" title="Napoleon II" label="Roi-de-Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241308" start="3829" end="3834" title="Passy" label="Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q790581" start="3844" end="3862" title="Avenue Victor-Hugo (Paris)" label="Avenue Victor-Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q331347" start="3878" end="3883" title="Battle of Eylau" label="Eylau"/>
<link wikidata="Q189153" start="3923" end="3934" title="Saint-Cloud" label="Saint-Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q790562" start="3944" end="3955" title="Avenue Foch" label="Avenue Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q209626" start="3967" end="3971" title="Bois de Boulogne" label="Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="3983" end="3997" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157130" start="4019" end="4030" title="Eugénie de Montijo" label="Impératrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028274" start="4058" end="4083" title="Avenue de la Grande Armée" label="Avenue de la Grande Armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="4123" end="4130" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q541626" start="4169" end="4176" title="Battle of Aspern-Essling" label="Essling"/>
<link wikidata="Q151087" start="4232" end="4245" title="Jérôme Bonaparte" label="Prince-Jérôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q467777" start="4369" end="4375" title="Battle of Wagram" label="Wagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q319302" start="4387" end="4393" title="Jean-Baptiste Kléber" label="Kléber"/>
<link wikidata="Q367042" start="4408" end="4413" title="Lazare Hoche" label="Hoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="4425" end="4436" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor-Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q241108" start="4454" end="4463" title="Battle of Friedland" label="Friedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192615" start="4475" end="4479" title="Ferdinand Foch" label="Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="4498" end="4512" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q504721" start="4530" end="4542" title="Grande Armée" label="Grande Armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q791938" start="4562" end="4576" title="Axe historique" label="Axe historique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003655" start="4606" end="4613" title="François Séverin Marceau" label="Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="4625" end="4631" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q154426" start="4653" end="4657" title="Battle of Jena–Auerstedt" label="Iéna"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="4669" end="4678" title="Patrice de MacMahon" label="Mac-Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="4748" end="4763" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q270230" start="4786" end="4789" title="8th arrondissement of Paris" label="8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q194420" start="4791" end="4795" title="16th arrondissement of Paris" label="16th"/>
<link wikidata="Q197297" start="4800" end="4804" title="17th arrondissement of Paris" label="17th"/>
<link wikidata="Q679388" start="4839" end="4853" title="Arrondissements of Paris" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211685" start="5197" end="5222" title="La Place de l&amp;#x27;Étoile (novel)" label="La Place de l&amp;#x27;Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q222944" start="5270" end="5285" title="Patrick Modiano" label="Patrick Modiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312800" start="5333" end="5346" title="List of Paris Métro stations" label="Métro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467665" start="5348" end="5372" title="Charles de Gaulle–Étoile" label="Charles de Gaulle–Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="5421" end="5426" title="Paris Métro" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q216125" start="5431" end="5434" title="Réseau Express Régional" label="RER"/>
<link wikidata="Q13224" start="5445" end="5451" title="Paris Métro Line 1" label="Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q741818" start="5464" end="5469" title="RER A" label="RER A"/>
<link wikidata="Q50718" start="5585" end="5591" title="Paris Métro Line 2" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q50746" start="5630" end="5636" title="Paris Métro Line 6" label="Line 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253214" start="5671" end="5687" title="Squares in Paris" label="Squares in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q791938" start="5690" end="5704" title="Axe historique" label="Axe historique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53351" wikidata="Q967145" url="?curid=53351" title="Satellite constellation">
<text>A satellite constellation is a group of artificial satellites working together as a system. Unlike a single satellite, a constellation can provide permanent global or near-global coverage, such that at any time everywhere on Earth at least one satellite is visible. Satellites are typically placed in sets of complementary orbital planes and connect to globally distributed ground stations. They may also use inter-satellite communication.

==Other satellite groups==
Satellite constellations should not be confused with:
* &quot;satellite clusters&quot;, which are groups of satellites moving very close together in almost identical orbits (see satellite formation flying);
* &quot;satellite series&quot; or &quot;satellite programs&quot; (such as Landsat), which are generations of satellites launched in succession;
* &quot;satellite fleets&quot;, which are groups of satellites from the same manufacturer or operator that function independently from each other (not as a system).

== Overview ==
Satellites in medium Earth orbit (MEO) and low Earth orbit (LEO) are often deployed in satellite constellations, because the coverage area provided by a single satellite only covers a small area that moves as the satellite travels at the high angular velocity needed to maintain its orbit. Many MEO or LEO satellites are needed to maintain continuous coverage over an area. This contrasts with geostationary satellites, where a single satellite, at a much higher altitude and moving at the same angular velocity as the rotation of the Earth&#x27;s surface, provides permanent coverage over a large area.

For some applications, in particular digital connectivity, the lower altitude of MEO and LEO satellite constellations provide advantages over a geostationary satellite, with lower path losses (reducing power requirements and costs) and latency. The propagation delay for a round-trip internet protocol transmission via a geostationary satellite can be over 600ms, but as low as 125ms for a MEO satellite or 30ms for a LEO system.

Examples of satellite constellations include the Global Positioning System (GPS), Galileo and GLONASS constellations for navigation and geodesy in MEO, the Iridium and Globalstar satellite telephony services and Orbcomm messaging service in LEO, the Disaster Monitoring Constellation and RapidEye for remote sensing in Sun-synchronous LEO, Russian Molniya and Tundra communications constellations in highly elliptic orbit, and satellite broadband constellations, under construction from Starlink and OneWeb in LEO, and operational from O3b in MEO.

== Design ==

=== Walker Constellation ===
There are a large number of constellations that may satisfy a particular mission. Usually constellations are designed so that the satellites have similar orbits, eccentricity and inclination so that any perturbations affect each satellite in approximately the same way. In this way, the geometry can be preserved without excessive station-keeping thereby reducing the fuel usage and hence increasing the life of the satellites. Another consideration is that the phasing of each satellite in an orbital plane maintains sufficient separation to avoid collisions or interference at orbit plane intersections. Circular orbits are popular, because then the satellite is at a constant altitude requiring a constant strength signal to communicate.

A class of circular orbit geometries that has become popular is the Walker Delta Pattern constellation.
This has an associated notation to describe it which was proposed by John Walker. His notation is:

: i: t/p/f

where:
* i is the inclination;
* t is the total number of satellites;
* p is the number of equally spaced planes; and
* f is the relative spacing between satellites in adjacent planes. The change in true anomaly (in degrees) for equivalent satellites in neighbouring planes is equal to f × 360 / t.

For example, the Galileo navigation system is a Walker Delta 56°:24/3/1 constellation. This means there are 24 satellites in 3 planes inclined at 56 degrees, spanning the 360 degrees around the equator. The &quot;1&quot; defines the phasing between the planes, and how they are spaced. The Walker Delta is also known as the Ballard rosette, after A. H. Ballard&#x27;s similar earlier work. Ballard&#x27;s notation is (t,p,m) where m is a multiple of the fractional offset between planes.

Another popular constellation type is the near-polar Walker Star, which is used by Iridium. Here, the satellites are in near-polar circular orbits across approximately 180 degrees, travelling north on one side of the Earth, and south on the other. The active satellites in the full Iridium constellation form a Walker Star of 86.4°:66/6/2, i.e. the phasing repeats every two planes. Walker uses similar notation for stars and deltas, which can be confusing.

These sets of circular orbits at constant altitude are sometimes referred to as orbital shells.

==Orbital shell==
In spaceflight, an orbital shell is a set of artificial satellites in circular orbits at a certain fixed altitude. In the design of satellite constellations, an orbital shell usually refers to a collection of circular orbits with the same altitude and, oftentimes, orbital inclination, 
distributed evenly in celestial longitude (and mean anomaly). 
For a sufficiently high inclination and altitude the orbital shell covers the entire orbited body. In other cases the coverage extends up to a certain maximum latitude.

Several existing satellite constellations typically use a single orbital shell. New large megaconstellations have been proposed that consist of multiple orbital shells.

== List of satellite constellations ==
=== Navigational satellite constellations ===

=== Communications satellite constellations ===
==== Broadcasting ====

*Sirius Satellite Radio
*XM Satellite Radio
*SES
*Othernet
*Molniya (discontinued)

==== Monitoring ====

*Spire (AIS, ADS-B)
*Iridium (AIS, ADS-B, IoT)
*Myriota (IoT)
*Swarm Technologies (IoT)
*Astrocast (IoT)
*TDRSS

==== Internet access ====
Other Internet access systems are proposed or currently being developed:

Some systems were proposed but never realized:

; Progress
* Boeing Satellite is transferring the application to OneWeb
* LeoSat shut down completely in 2019
* The OneWeb constellation had 6 pilot satellites in February 2019, 74 satellites launched as of 21 March 2020 but filed for bankruptcy on 27 March 2020
* Starlink: first mission (Starlink 0) launched on 24 May 2019; 955 satellites launched, 51 deorbited, 904 in orbit ; public beta test in limited latitude range started in November 2020
* O3b mPOWER: first 2 satellites launched December 2022; 9 more in 2023–2024, with the initial service start expected in Q3 2023.
* Telesat LEO: two prototypes: 2018 launch 
* CASIC Hongyun: prototype launched in December 2018
* CASC Hongyan prototype launched in December 2018, might be merged with Hongyun
* Project Kuiper: FCC filing in July 2019. Prototypes launched in October 2023.

=== Earth observation satellite constellations ===
* RADARSAT Constellation
* Planet Labs
* Pléiades 1A and 1B
* Satellogic
* RapidEye
* Disaster Monitoring Constellation
* A-train
* SPOT 6 and SPOT 7
* Spire
* Synspective

== See also ==

* Satellite internet constellation
* Light pollution
* Space debris
* Types of geocentric orbit
* Orbital mechanics

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==

Satellite constellation simulation tools:

*AVM Dynamics Satellite Constellation Modeler
*SaVi Satellite Constellation Visualization
*Transfinite Visualyse Professional

More information:

*Internetworking with satellite constellations - a PhD thesis (2001)
*Lloyd&#x27;s satellite constellations - last updated 20 July 2011
*Examination and analysis of polar low Earth orbit constellation-IEEE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q967145" start="2" end="25" title="Satellite constellation" label="satellite constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="40" end="60" title="artificial satellite" label="artificial satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q21501397" start="179" end="187" title="pass (spaceflight)" label="coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q800358" start="323" end="337" title="orbital plane (astronomy)" label="orbital planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="374" end="388" title="ground station" label="ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820338" start="409" end="438" title="Inter-satellite service" label="inter-satellite communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426079" start="530" end="547" title="satellite cluster" label="satellite cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426079" start="646" end="672" title="satellite formation flying" label="satellite formation flying"/>
<link wikidata="" start="683" end="699" title=":Category:Satellite series" label="satellite series"/>
<link wikidata="Q849791" start="749" end="756" title="Landsat program" label="Landsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="1014" end="1038" title="Medium Earth orbit" label="medium Earth orbit (MEO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="1043" end="1064" title="Low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit (LEO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161635" start="1243" end="1259" title="angular velocity" label="angular velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="1283" end="1288" title="Planetary orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="1394" end="1407" title="geostationary" label="geostationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478845" start="1785" end="1794" title="path loss" label="path loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144416" start="1854" end="1871" title="propagation delay" label="propagation delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="1889" end="1906" title="Internet protocol suite" label="internet protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="2085" end="2110" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q193902" start="2118" end="2125" title="Galileo positioning system" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q486250" start="2130" end="2137" title="GLONASS" label="GLONASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="2157" end="2167" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="2172" end="2179" title="geodesy" label="geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672736" start="2192" end="2199" title="Iridium (satellite)" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202533" start="2204" end="2214" title="Globalstar" label="Globalstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q402788" start="2248" end="2255" title="Orbcomm" label="Orbcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228343" start="2286" end="2319" title="Disaster Monitoring Constellation" label="Disaster Monitoring Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q697199" start="2324" end="2332" title="RapidEye" label="RapidEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="2337" end="2351" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="2355" end="2370" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q593283" start="2384" end="2391" title="Molniya (satellite)" label="Molniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="2443" end="2457" title="elliptic orbit" label="elliptic orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="2523" end="2531" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039799" start="2536" end="2542" title="OneWeb" label="OneWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072273" start="2572" end="2575" title="O3b" label="O3b"/>
<link wikidata="Q193902" start="3903" end="3928" title="Galileo (satellite navigation)" label="Galileo navigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="4080" end="4087" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672736" start="4458" end="4465" title="Iridium (satellite)" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="4952" end="4963" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="4994" end="5014" title="artificial satellite" label="artificial satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="5019" end="5027" title="circular orbit" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="5028" end="5033" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="5054" end="5062" title="orbital altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="5167" end="5172" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="5188" end="5196" title="orbital altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="5214" end="5233" title="orbital inclination" label="orbital inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q86394" start="5258" end="5277" title="celestial longitude" label="celestial longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="5283" end="5295" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q21501397" start="5366" end="5372" title="pass (spaceflight)" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="5458" end="5466" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q54806917" start="5559" end="5576" title="megaconstellation" label="megaconstellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q996079" start="5798" end="5820" title="Sirius Satellite Radio" label="Sirius Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="5822" end="5840" title="XM Satellite Radio" label="XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q333025" start="5842" end="5845" title="SES (company)" label="SES"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334610" start="5847" end="5855" title="Othernet" label="Othernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q593283" start="5857" end="5864" title="Molniya (satellite)" label="Molniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877982" start="5904" end="5909" title="Spire Global" label="Spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672736" start="5924" end="5931" title="Iridium satellite constellation" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5951" end="5958" title="Myriota" label="Myriota"/>
<link wikidata="Q103484515" start="5966" end="5984" title="Swarm Technologies" label="Swarm Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563951" start="5992" end="6001" title="Astrocast" label="Astrocast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522774" start="6009" end="6014" title="TDRSS" label="TDRSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937153" start="6177" end="6193" title="Boeing Satellite Systems" label="Boeing Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q30737494" start="6238" end="6244" title="LeoSat" label="LeoSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039799" start="6280" end="6300" title="OneWeb satellite constellation" label="OneWeb constellation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6327" end="6340" title="2019 in spaceflight#February" label="February 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="6429" end="6437" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6454" end="6464" title="Starlink#List of launches" label="Starlink 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845067" start="6615" end="6625" title="O3b mPOWER" label="O3b mPOWER"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401935" start="6745" end="6752" title="Telesat" label="Telesat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874081" start="6789" end="6794" title="CASIC" label="CASIC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6795" end="6802" title="Hongyun (satellite)" label="Hongyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777589" start="6842" end="6846" title="China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation" label="CASC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6847" end="6854" title="Hongyan (satellite)" label="Hongyan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6913" end="6920" title="Hongyun (satellite)" label="Hongyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q98140562" start="6923" end="6937" title="Kuiper Systems" label="Project Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109103" start="7055" end="7077" title="RADARSAT Constellation" label="RADARSAT Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085620" start="7080" end="7091" title="Planet Labs" label="Planet Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631757" start="7094" end="7112" title="Pleiades (satellite)" label="Pléiades 1A and 1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669551" start="7115" end="7125" title="Satellogic" label="Satellogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697199" start="7128" end="7136" title="RapidEye" label="RapidEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228343" start="7139" end="7172" title="Disaster Monitoring Constellation" label="Disaster Monitoring Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q277959" start="7175" end="7182" title="A-train (satellite constellation)" label="A-train"/>
<link wikidata="Q750900" start="7185" end="7202" title="SPOT (satellite)" label="SPOT 6 and SPOT 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877982" start="7205" end="7210" title="Spire Global" label="Spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110017262" start="7213" end="7224" title="Synspective" label="Synspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q54806917" start="7244" end="7276" title="Satellite internet constellation" label="Satellite internet constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="7279" end="7294" title="Light pollution" label="Light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="7297" end="7309" title="Space debris" label="Space debris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7312" end="7337" title="Geocentric orbit#Geocentric orbit types" label="Types of geocentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q842433" start="7340" end="7357" title="Orbital mechanics" label="Orbital mechanics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="53352" wikidata="Q167073" url="?curid=53352" title="Eero Saarinen">
<text>Eero Saarinen (, ; August 20, 1910 – September 1, 1961) was a Finnish-American architect and industrial designer who created a wide array of innovative designs for buildings and monuments, including the General Motors Technical Center in Warren, Michigan; the passenger terminal at Dulles International Airport outside Washington, D.C.; the TWA Flight Center (now TWA Hotel) at John F. Kennedy International Airport; the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center in New York City; and the Gateway Arch in St. Louis. He was the son of Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen.

==Early life and education==
Eero Saarinen was born in Hvitträsk, Finland (then an autonomous state in the Russian Empire) on August 20, 1910, to Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen and his second wife, Louise, on his father&#x27;s 37th birthday. They migrated to the United States in 1923, when Eero was thirteen. He grew up in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, where his father taught and was dean of the Cranbrook Academy of Art, and he took courses in sculpture and furniture design there. He had a close relationship with fellow students, designers Charles and Ray Eames, and became good friends with architect Florence Knoll (née Schust).

Saarinen began studies in sculpture at the Académie de la Grande Chaumière in Paris, France, in September 1929. He then went on to study at the Yale School of Architecture, completing his studies in 1934. He subsequently toured Europe and North Africa for two years, as well as working for a time in Helsinki in the office of architect Jarl Eklund, where he supervised the remodeling of the Swedish Theatre (1936). That same year, he returned to the United States to work in his father&#x27;s architectural practice.

==Career==


After his tour of Europe and North Africa, Saarinen returned to Cranbrook to work for his father and teach at the academy. His father&#x27;s firm, Saarinen, Swanson and Associates, was headed by Eliel Saarinen and Robert Swanson from the late 1930s until Eliel&#x27;s death in 1950 and headquartered in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan until 1961 when the practice was moved to Hamden, Connecticut.

While still working for his father, Saarinen first gained recognition for his design capabilities for a chair he designed together with Charles Eames, which received first place in the Organic Design in Home Furnishings competition in 1940. The Tulip chair, like all other Saarinen chairs, was taken into production by the Knoll furniture company, founded by Hans Knoll, who married Saarinen family friend Florence (Schust) Knoll. Further attention came also while Saarinen was still working for his father when he took first prize in the 1948 competition for the design of the Gateway Arch National Park (then known as the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial) in St. Louis. The memorial was not completed until the 1960s. The competition award was mistakenly addressed to his father because both he and his father had entered the competition separately. 

During his long association with Knoll he designed many important pieces of furniture, including the Grasshopper lounge chair and ottoman (1946), the Womb chair and ottoman (1948), the Womb settee (1950), side and arm chairs (1948–1950), and his most famous Tulip or Pedestal group (1956), which featured side and arm chairs, dining, coffee and side tables, as well as a stool. All of these designs were highly successful except for the Grasshopper lounge chair, which, although in production through 1965, was not a big success.

One of Saarinen&#x27;s earliest works to receive international acclaim is the Crow Island School in Winnetka, Illinois (1940). The first major work by Saarinen, in collaboration with his father, was the General Motors Technical Center in Warren, Michigan, which follows the rationalist design Miesian style, incorporating steel and glass but with the addition of accent of panels in two shades of blue. The GM Technical Center was constructed in 1956, with Saarinen using models, which allowed him to share his ideas with others and gather input from other professionals.

With the success of this project, Saarinen was then invited by other major American corporations such as John Deere, IBM/IBM Rochester, and CBS to design their new headquarters or other major corporate buildings. Despite the overall rational design philosophy, the interiors usually contained dramatic sweeping staircases as well as furniture designed by Saarinen, such as the Pedestal series. In the 1950s, he began to receive more commissions from American universities for campus designs and individual buildings. These include Birch Hall at Antioch College, the Noyes dormitory at Vassar and Hill College House at the University of Pennsylvania as well as the Ingalls ice rink, Ezra Stiles &amp; Morse Colleges at Yale University, the MIT Chapel and neighboring Kresge Auditorium at MIT and the University of Chicago Law School building and grounds.

Saarinen served on the jury for the Sydney Opera House commission in 1957 and was crucial in the selection of the now internationally known design by Jørn Utzon. A jury which did not include Saarinen had discarded Utzon&#x27;s design in the first round; Saarinen reviewed the discarded designs, recognized a quality in Utzon&#x27;s design, and ultimately assured the commission of Utzon.

After his father&#x27;s death in July 1950, Saarinen founded his own architect&#x27;s office, Eero Saarinen and Associates. He was the principal partner from 1950 until his death. The firm carried out many of its most important works, including the Bell Labs Holmdel Complex in Holmdel Township, New Jersey; the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri; the Miller House in Columbus, Indiana; the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport, which he worked on with Charles J. Parise; the main terminal of Washington Dulles International Airport; and the new East Air Terminal of the old Athens airport in Greece, which opened in 1967. Many of these projects use catenary curves in their structural designs.

In 1949 and 1950, Saarinen was hired by the then-new Brandeis University to create a master plan for the campus. Saarinen&#x27;s plan &quot;A Foundation for Learning: Planning the Campus of Brandeis University&quot; (1949; second edition 1951), developed with Matthew Nowicki, called for a central academic complex surrounded by residential quadrangles along a peripheral road. The plan was never built but was useful in attracting donors. Saarinen did build a few residential structures on the campus, including Ridgewood Quadrangle (1950), Sherman Student Center (1952) and Shapiro Dormitory at Hamilton Quadrangle (1952). These have all been either demolished or extensively remodeled.

One of his best known thin-shell concrete structures is the Kresge Auditorium at MIT. Another thin-shell structure is Ingalls Rink at Yale University, which has suspension cables connected to a single concrete backbone and is nicknamed &quot;the whale&quot;. His most famous work is the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport, which represents the culmination of his previous designs and his genius for expressing the ultimate purpose of each building, what he called the &quot;style for the job&quot;. In 2019, the terminal was transformed into the TWA Hotel and features furniture designed by Saarinen.

Saarinen designed the Kleinhans Music Hall in Buffalo, New York, together with his father, Eliel Saarinen. He also designed the former Embassy of the United States in London, which opened in 1960, and the former Embassy of the United States in Oslo.

Saarinen worked with his father, mother, and sister designing elements of the Cranbrook campus in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, including the Cranbrook School, Kingswood School, the Cranbrook Art Academy, and the Cranbrook Science Institute. Eero Saarinen&#x27;s leaded-glass designs are a prominent feature of these buildings throughout the campus.

==Non-architectural activities==

Saarinen was recruited by Donal McLaughlin, an architectural school friend from his Yale days, to join the military service in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). Saarinen was assigned to draw illustrations for bomb disassembly manuals and to provide designs for the Situation Room in the White House. Saarinen worked full-time for the OSS until 1944.

==Honors and awards==
Eero Saarinen was elected a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects in 1952. He was elected a member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters in 1954. In 1962, he was posthumously awarded a gold medal by the American Institute of Architects.

In 1940, he received two first prizes together with Charles Eames in the furniture design competition of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City. In 1948, he won the first prize in the Jefferson National Monument competition. The Boston Arts festival in 1953 gave him their Grand Architectural Award. He received the First Honor award of the American Institute of Architects twice, in 1955 and 1956, and their gold medal in 1962. In 1965 he took first prize in US Embassy competition in London.

==Personal life==
Saarinen became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1940.

In 1939, Saarinen married the sculptor Lilian Swann. They had two children, Eric and Susan Saarinen. Their marriage ended in divorce in 1954. That same year, Saarinen married Aline Bernstein Louchheim, an art critic at &quot;The New York Times.&quot; Saarinen met Louchheim when she came to Detroit to interview him for his contributions to the recently completed General Motors Technical Center. Saarinen and Louchheim had one son together, whom they named Eames after Saarinen&#x27;s collaborator Charles Eames. In addition to their respective contributions to architecture, design, and criticism, Eero and Aline Saarinen are remembered for their affectionate and detailed personal papers, held at the Archives of American Art.

==Death==
Saarinen died on September 1, 1961, at the age of 51 while undergoing an operation in Ann Arbor, Michigan for a brain tumor. He was overseeing the completion of a new music building for the University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre &amp; Dance.

==Legacy==
By the 21st century, Saarinen was considered one of the masters of American 20th-century architecture. During that time, his work was the subject of a major exhibition and several books. This is partly because Roche-Dinkeloo, the successor to Saarinen&#x27;s firm, donated its Saarinen archives to Yale University, but also because Saarinen&#x27;s oeuvre can be said to fit in with present-day concerns about pluralism of styles. He was criticized in his own time—most vociferously by Yale&#x27;s Vincent Scully—for having no identifiable style; one explanation for this is that Saarinen&#x27;s vision was adapted to each individual client and project, which were never exactly the same. Scully also criticized him for designing buildings that were &quot;packages,&quot; with &quot;no connection with human use . . . at once cruelly inhuman and trivial, as if they had been designed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.&quot;

The papers of Aline and Eero Saarinen, from 1906 to 1977, were donated in 1973 to the Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution (by Charles Alan, Aline Saarinen&#x27;s brother and executor of her estate). In 2006, the bulk of these primary source documents on the couple were digitized and posted online on the Archives&#x27; website.

The Eero Saarinen collection at the Canadian Centre for Architecture documents eight built projects, including the old Athens airport in Greece, the former US Embassy Chanceries in Oslo, Norway and London, England, corporate projects for John Deere, CBS, and IBM, and the North Christian Church in Columbus, Indiana.

An exhibition of Saarinen&#x27;s work, &quot;Eero Saarinen: Shaping the Future&quot;, was organized by the Finnish Cultural Institute in New York in collaboration with Yale School of Architecture, the National Building Museum, and the Museum of Finnish Architecture. The exhibition toured in Europe and the United States from 2006 to 2010, including a stint at the National Building Museum in Washington, DC. The exhibition was accompanied by the book &quot;Eero Saarinen: Shaping the Future&quot;.

In 2016, &quot;Eero Saarinen: The Architect Who Saw the Future&quot;, a film about Saarinen co-produced by his son Eric Saarinen, premiered on the &quot;American Masters&quot; series on PBS.

==See also==
* List of works by Eero Saarinen

==References==
==Sources==
* Episode featuring the Cranbrook House and Gardens.
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Commercial furniture sales blog mentioning the Womb chair.
* Saarinen, Eero (1910–1961). Kansallisbiografia. 
* Trans World Airlines Unit Terminal Building, New York International Airport, architectural drawings, 1958-1961 Held by the Department of Drawings &amp; Archives, Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library, Columbia University.
* Earl V. Moore Building by Eero Saarinen.
* Balthazar Korab Collection at the Library of Congress.
* The Concordia Campus Through Time.
*Digital Collections: Eero Saarinen Collection.Yale University Library. Containing images and drawings from Saarinen&#x27;s archives.
*Eero Saarinen Collection (MS 593). Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.
* Saarinen Tulip Chair.
* Eero Saarinen Exhibitions at Cranbrook Art Museum. 
* Blueprints, Winter 2007–08.
*Eero Saarinen&#x27;s church, bank, and Miller House in Columbus, Indiana
* Finding aid for the Eero Saarinen collection, Canadian Centre for Architecture (digitized items)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167073" start="0" end="13" title="Eero Saarinen" label="Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532055" start="203" end="234" title="General Motors Technical Center" label="General Motors Technical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q499401" start="238" end="254" title="Warren, Michigan" label="Warren, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="282" end="310" title="Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="319" end="335" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q29257" start="341" end="358" title="TWA Flight Center" label="TWA Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q47321188" start="364" end="373" title="TWA Hotel" label="TWA Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="378" end="415" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q176205" start="421" end="444" title="Vivian Beaumont Theater" label="Vivian Beaumont Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="448" end="462" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027162" start="489" end="501" title="Gateway Arch" label="Gateway Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="505" end="514" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312028" start="552" end="566" title="Eliel Saarinen" label="Eliel Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609412" start="624" end="633" title="Hvitträsk" label="Hvitträsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="676" end="690" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312028" start="733" end="747" title="Eliel Saarinen" label="Eliel Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="895" end="921" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075482" start="967" end="991" title="Cranbrook Academy of Art" label="Cranbrook Academy of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q170411" start="1114" end="1121" title="Charles Eames" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q380404" start="1126" end="1135" title="Ray Eames" label="Ray Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460673" start="1176" end="1203" title="Florence Knoll" label="Florence Knoll (née Schust)"/>
<link wikidata="Q337504" start="1249" end="1280" title="Académie de la Grande Chaumière" label="Académie de la Grande Chaumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1284" end="1289" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514480" start="1350" end="1377" title="Yale School of Architecture" label="Yale School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="1445" end="1457" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q926046" start="1597" end="1612" title="Swedish Theatre" label="Swedish Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="2040" end="2066" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q755271" start="2109" end="2128" title="Hamden, Connecticut" label="Hamden, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916267" start="2376" end="2387" title="Tulip chair" label="Tulip chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624295" start="2454" end="2459" title="Knoll (company)" label="Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650307" start="2490" end="2500" title="Hans Knoll" label="Hans Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460673" start="2537" end="2560" title="Florence Knoll" label="Florence (Schust) Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="2709" end="2735" title="Gateway Arch National Park" label="Gateway Arch National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2797" end="2806" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189093" start="3599" end="3617" title="Crow Island School" label="Crow Island School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016595" start="3621" end="3639" title="Winnetka, Illinois" label="Winnetka, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532055" start="3724" end="3755" title="General Motors Technical Center" label="General Motors Technical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q499401" start="3759" end="3775" title="Warren, Michigan" label="Warren, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="3814" end="3827" title="Ludwig Mies van der Rohe" label="Miesian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="4199" end="4209" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q476208" start="4211" end="4214" title="Thomas J. Watson Research Center" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969004" start="4215" end="4228" title="IBM Rochester" label="IBM Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="4234" end="4237" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775012" start="4639" end="4654" title="Antioch College" label="Antioch College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="4679" end="4685" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896075" start="4690" end="4708" title="Hill College House" label="Hill College House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="4716" end="4742" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638055" start="4758" end="4765" title="Ingalls Rink" label="Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423410" start="4776" end="4787" title="Ezra Stiles College" label="Ezra Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914241" start="4794" end="4799" title="Morse College" label="Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4812" end="4827" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716291" start="4833" end="4843" title="MIT Chapel" label="MIT Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436787" start="4860" end="4877" title="Kresge Auditorium" label="Kresge Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4881" end="4884" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="4893" end="4925" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="4985" end="5003" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q180398" start="5099" end="5109" title="Jørn Utzon" label="Jørn Utzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883199" start="5587" end="5612" title="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex" label="Bell Labs Holmdel Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="5616" end="5644" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027162" start="5650" end="5662" title="Gateway Arch" label="Gateway Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5666" end="5685" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859159" start="5691" end="5703" title="Miller House (Columbus, Indiana)" label="Miller House"/>
<link wikidata="Q941870" start="5707" end="5724" title="Columbus, Indiana" label="Columbus, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q29257" start="5730" end="5747" title="TWA Flight Center" label="TWA Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="5751" end="5788" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="5854" end="5893" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Washington Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430898" start="5936" end="5950" title="Ellinikon International Airport" label="Athens airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q214561" start="6011" end="6019" title="catenary" label="catenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="6110" end="6129" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q366543" start="6317" end="6332" title="Maciej Nowicki (architect)" label="Matthew Nowicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230313" start="6769" end="6799" title="Thin-shell structure" label="thin-shell concrete structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436787" start="6807" end="6824" title="Kresge Auditorium" label="Kresge Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="6828" end="6831" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638055" start="6865" end="6877" title="Ingalls Rink" label="Ingalls Rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="6881" end="6896" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q29257" start="7034" end="7051" title="TWA Flight Center" label="TWA Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="7055" end="7092" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q47321188" start="7317" end="7326" title="TWA Hotel" label="TWA Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420299" start="7395" end="7415" title="Kleinhans Music Hall" label="Kleinhans Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="7419" end="7436" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369960" start="7508" end="7546" title="Embassy of the United States, London" label="Embassy of the United States in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369962" start="7585" end="7621" title="Embassy of the United States, Oslo" label="Embassy of the United States in Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="7722" end="7748" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239655" start="8033" end="8049" title="Donal McLaughlin" label="Donal McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="8138" end="8166" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186905" start="8278" end="8292" title="White House Situation Room" label="Situation Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442488" start="8414" end="8420" title="FAIA" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="8428" end="8460" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="8501" end="8539" title="National Institute of Arts and Letters" label="National Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170411" start="8693" end="8706" title="Charles Eames" label="Charles Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="8750" end="8770" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="8985" end="9017" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="9175" end="9194" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547710" start="9265" end="9277" title="Lilian Swann Saarinen" label="Lilian Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351601" start="9302" end="9306" title="Eric Saarinen" label="Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726750" start="9401" end="9426" title="Aline Bernstein Louchheim" label="Aline Bernstein Louchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9451" end="9469" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="9517" end="9524" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532055" start="9590" end="9621" title="General Motors Technical Center" label="General Motors Technical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q170411" start="9725" end="9738" title="Charles Eames" label="Charles Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860568" start="9930" end="9954" title="Archives of American Art" label="Archives of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="10053" end="10072" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="10079" end="10090" title="brain tumor" label="brain tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895775" start="10157" end="10216" title="University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre &amp;amp; Dance" label="University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre &amp;amp; Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353829" start="10440" end="10454" title="Roche-Dinkeloo" label="Roche-Dinkeloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135502" start="10727" end="10741" title="Vincent Scully" label="Vincent Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860568" start="11236" end="11260" title="Archives of American Art" label="Archives of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726750" start="11304" end="11318" title="Aline B. Saarinen" label="Aline Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944913" start="11530" end="11562" title="Canadian Centre for Architecture" label="Canadian Centre for Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430898" start="11613" end="11627" title="Ellinikon International Airport" label="Athens airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369962" start="11675" end="11687" title="Embassy of the United States, Oslo" label="Oslo, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369960" start="11692" end="11707" title="Embassy of the United States, London" label="London, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054816" start="11766" end="11788" title="North Christian Church" label="North Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514480" start="11980" end="12007" title="Yale School of Architecture" label="Yale School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="12013" end="12037" title="National Building Museum" label="National Building Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418116" start="12047" end="12077" title="Museum of Finnish Architecture" label="Museum of Finnish Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351601" start="12427" end="12440" title="Eric Saarinen" label="Eric Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="12465" end="12481" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="12498" end="12501" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034130" start="12519" end="12549" title="List of works by Eero Saarinen" label="List of works by Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q790646" start="12937" end="12978" title="Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library" label="Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="12980" end="12999" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944913" start="13589" end="13621" title="Canadian Centre for Architecture" label="Canadian Centre for Architecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
